Good sonne go forward in this gentle humor, obserue this picture, it presents a maide of noble birth and excellent of parts, whom for our house and honor sake, I wish thou wouldst confesse to marrie.
To marrie father? why we shall haue children.
Why that's the ende of marriage, and the ioye of men.
O how you are deceiued, you haue but me, & what a trouble am I to your ioy? but father, if you long to haue some fruite of me, see father I will creepe into this stuborne earth and mixe my flesh with it, and they shall breede grasse, to fat oxen, asses and such like, and when they in the grasse the spring conuerts into beasts nourishment, then comes the fruite of this my body forth; then may you well say, seeing my race is so profitably increased, that good fat oxe, and that same large eard asse are my sonne sonnes, that caulfe with a white face is his faire daughter, with which, when your fields are richly filled, then will my race content you, but for the ioyes of children, tush tis gone, children will not deserue, nor parents take it: wealth is the onely father & the child, and but in wealth no man hath any ioy.
Some course deare sonne take for thy honor sake.
Then father heres a most excellent course.
This is some comfort yet.
If you will strait be gone and leaue me here, Ile stand as quietlye as anye lambe, and trouble none of you
An haplesse man.
How like you this humour yet my liege?
As of a holy fury, not a frensie.
See see my liege, he hath seene vs sure.
Nay looke how he viewesand makes him fine.
Yea my liege, and she as I hope wel obserued, hath vttered many kind conceits of hers.
Well Ile be gone, and when shee comes to Verones ordinarie, Ile haue her taken to my custodie.
Ile stay my liege, and see the euent of this.
Do so.
What haue I seene? howe am I burnt to dust with a new Sun, and made a nouell Phoenix, is she a woman that obiects this sight, able to worke the chaos of the world into gestion? O diuine aspect, the excellent disposer of the mind shines in thy beautie, and thou hast not chaunged my soule to sense but sense vnto my soule, and I desire thy pure societie, but euen as angels do, to angels flie.
Flie soule and follow him.
I maruaile much at my sonnes sodaine straunge behauiour.
Beare with him yet my Lord, tis but his humour: come, what shall we go to Verones ordinarie?
Yea for Gods sake, for I am passing hungry.
Yea, come Monsieur, will you walke?
What, will you go?
Yea sweet bird, I haue promised so.
Go to, you shall not go and leaue me alone.
For one meale gentle bird: Veron inuites vs to buy some iewels he hath brought of late from: Ile buy the best, and bring it thee, so thou wilt let me go.
Well said flattering, but tel me then what ladies will be there?
Ladies? why none.
No ladies vse to come to ordinaries, Madam.
Go to bird, tell me now the very truth.
None of mine honour bird, you neuer heard that ladies came to ordinaries.
O thats because I should not go with you.
Why tis not fit you should.
Well heark you bird, of my word you shall not go,vnlesse you will sweare to me, you will neither court nor kisse a dame in any sort, till you come home againe.
Whysweare I will not.
Go to, by this kisse.
Yea, by this kisse.
, learne by this when you are a wife.
I like the kissing well.
My lord Ile leaue you, your sonnehath made me melancholy with his humour, and Ile go locke my selfe in my close walke till supper time.
What, and not dine to day?
No my good head: come, you andwill fast togither.
With all my heart Madam.
Well Gentlemen Ile go see my sonne.
Birlady Gentlemen Ile go home to dinner.
Home to dinner? birlord but you shall not, you shall go with vs to the ordinarie, where you shall meete Gentlemen of so good carriage, and passing co~plements, it will do your hart good to see them, why you neuer saw the best sort of Gentlemen if not at ordinaries.
I promise you thats rare, my lord, and Monsieur, Ile meet you there presently.
Weele expect your comming.
Come on my maisters, shadow these tables with their white vailes, accomplish the court Cupboord, waite diligently to day for my credite and your owne, that if the meate should chance to be raw, yet your behauiors being neither rude nor raw, may excuse it, or if the meate should chaunce to be tough, be you tender ouer them in your attendance, that the one may beare with the other.
Faith some of them bee so hard to please, finding fault with your cheere, and discommending your wine, saying, they fare better at Verones for halfe the mony.
Besides, if there be any cheboules in your napkins, they say your nose or ours haue dropt on them, and then they throw them about the house.
But these bee small faultes, you may beare with them, young Gentlemen and wilde heades will be doing.
Come, whose wit was it to couer in this roome, name in the of God I trowee.
Why I hope this roome is as faire as the other.
In your foolish opinion: you might haue tolde a wise body so, and kept your selfe a foole still.
I cry you mercie, how bitter you are in your prouerbs.
So bitter I am sir.
O sweetI dare not say I loue thee.
Must you controule vs you proud baggage you?
Baggage? you are a knaue to call me baggage.
A knaue? my maister shall know that.
I will not see them.
Maister, here is your Maid vses her selfe so sawsily, that one house shall not holde vs two long, God willing.
Come hither huswife. Pardon mee sweete, I must make an angry face outwardly, though I smile inwardly.
Say what you will to me sir.
O you are a fine Gossip, can I not keepe honest seruants in my house, but you must controule them? you must be their mistres.
Why I did but take vp the cloth, because my mistresse would haue the dinner in an other roome, and hee called me baggage.
You called me knaue and foole, I thanke you small bones.
Go to, go to, she were wise enough would talke with you.
Go thy waies for the prowdest harlotrie that euer came in our house.
Let her alone boy, I haue scoold her I warant thee, she shall not be my maide long, if I can helpe it.
No, I thinke so sir, but what, shal I take vppe the cloath?
No, let the cloth lie, hither theile com first, I am sure of it, then If they will dine in the other roome, they shal.
Good morrow my host, is no body come yet?
Your worship is the first sir.
I was inuited by my cosen, to see your iewells.
I thanke his worship and yours.
Heres a prettie place for an ordinarie, I am very sory I haue not vsed to come to ordinaries.
I hope we shall haue your company hereafter.
You are very like so.
Good morrow my host, good morrow good Monsieur.
Good morrow to you sir,
What are we two the first? giue's the cardes, here come, this gentleman and I wil go to cardes while dinner be ready.
No truly I cannot play at cardes.
How! not play, O for shame say not so, how can a yong gentleman spend his time but in play, and in courting his Mistris: come vse this, least youth take too much of the other.
Faith I cannot play, and yet I care not so muchto venture two or three crownes with you.
O I thought what I shuld find of you, I pray God I haue not met with my match.
No trust me sir, I cannot play.
Hearke you my host, haue you a pipe of good Tabacco?
The best in the towne: boy drie a leafe.
Theres none in the house sir.
Drie a docke leafe.
My host, do you know Monsieur?
Yea passing well sir.
Why, he was taken learning trickes at oldhouse the muster mistris of all the smocktearers in Paris, and both the bawde and the pander were carried to the dungeon.
There was dungeon vpon dungeon, but call you her the muster-mistris of al the smocktearers in Paris?
Yea, for she hath them all trained vp afore her.
Good morow my host, good morow gentlemen al.
Good morow Monsieur, I am glad of your quicke deliuery.
Deliuery, what didst thou thinke I was with child?
Yea of a dungeon.
Why, how knew you that?
Whytold vs.
who told you of it?
One that I heard, by the lord.
O excellent, you are still playing the wagge.
Good morrow Gentlemen all, good morrow good Monsieur.
At your seruice.
I pray my lord look what a prety falling band he hath, tis pretty fantasticall, as I haue seen made, with good iudgement, great shew, and but tittle cost.
And so it ispromise you, who made itpray?
know not yfaith, I bought it by chance.
It is a very pretty one, make much of it.
Boy, I prethee call for a course napkin. Good morrow Gentlemen,would you had bin at the tenniscourt, you should haue seene me a beat Monsieur, and I gaue him fifteene and all his faults.
Thou didst more for him, then euer God wil do for thee.
Iaques,prethee fill me a cup of canary, three parts water
You shall haue all water and if it please you.
Who cald for a course napkin?
Marry, sweete heart, do you take the paines to bring it your selfe, haue at you by my hosts leaue.
Away sir, fie for shame.
Hearke you my host, you must marry this young wench, you do her mighty wrong els.
O sir, you are a merry man.
Good morrow gentlemen, you seeam as good as my word.
You are sir, andam very glad of it.
You are welcome Monsieur: but you are not, no not you.
No, welcome that Gentleman, tis no matter for me.
How sir? no matter to you, by this rusham angry with you, as if al our loues protested vnto you were dissembled, no matter for you?
Nay sweetbe not angry, I did but iest, as I am a Gentleman.
Yea but theres a difference of iesting, you wrong all our affections in so doing.
Faith and troth I did not, and I hope sirs you take it not so.
No matter for me, twas very vnkindly sayd, I must needs say so.
You see how they loue me.
I do sir, and I am very glad of it.
And I hope, you are not angry with me stil.
No faith, I am not so very a foole to be angry with one that cares not for me.
Do not I care for you? nay then.
What, dost thou cry?
Nay I do not cry, but my stomacke waters to thinke that you should take it so heauily, if I do not wish that I were cut into three peeces, and that these peeces were turned into three blacke puddings, and that these three blacke puddings were turned into three of the fairest Ladies in the land for your sake, I would I were hanged, what a diuel can you haue more then my poore heart?
Well harke you, in good faith you are too blame to put him to this vnkindnes, I prethee be friends with him.
Well, I am content to put vp this vnkindnesse for this once, but while you liue take heede of: no matter for me.
Why is it such a hainous word?
O the hainousest word in the world.
Wel, Ile neuer speake it more, as I am a gentleman.
No I pray do not.
My lord, will your lordship go to cards?
Yea with you Monsieur.
, will you play?
Pardon good Monsieur, if I had any disposition to gaming your company should draw me before any mans here.
, what will you play?
Play, yea with all my heart,pray lend me three pence.
Ile play no more.
Why, haue you wonne or lost?
Faith I haue lost two or three crownes.
Well to him againe, Ile be your halfe.
Sirrah,, while they are playing at cardes, thou and I will haue some excellent sport: sirrah, dost thou know that same Gentleman there?
No yfaith, what is he?
A very fine gull, and a neat reueller, one thats heire to a great liuing, yet his father keepes him so short, that his shirts will scant couer the bottom of his belly, for all his gay outside, but the linings be very foule and sweatie, yea and perhappes lowsie, with dispising the vaine shiftes of the world.
But he hath gotten good store of money now me thinks.
Yea, and I wonder of it, some ancient seruing man of his fathers, that hath gotten fortie shillings in fiftie years vpon his great good husbandrie, he swearing monstrous othes to pay him againe, and besides to doe him a good turne (when God shall heare his prayer for his father) hath lent it him I warrant you, but howsoeuer, we must speake him faire.
O what else!
God saue sweete Monsieur, what loose or win, loose or win?
Faith sir saue my selfe, and loose my money.
Theres a prouerbe hit dead in the necke like a Cony, why hearke thee, I could haue told thee before what he would haue said.
I do not thinke so.
No, thou seest heers a fine plumpe of gallants, such as thinke their wits singular, and their selues rarelyaccomplished, yet to shew thee how brittle their wittes be, I will speake to them seuerally, and I will tell thee before what they shall answer me.
Thats excellent, lets see that yfaith.
Whatsoeuer I say to Monsieur, he shall say, O sir, you may see an ill weed growes apace.
Come, lets see.
Now Monsieur, me thinks you are exceedingly growne since your comming to Paris.
O sir, you may see an ill weed growes a pace.
This is excellent, forward sir I pray.
What soere I say to, he shall answer me, blacke will beare no other hue, and that same olde Iustice, as greedie of a stale prouerbe, he shall come in the necke of that and say, Blacke is a pearle in a womans eye.
Yea, much yfayth.
Looke thee, here comes hither,, and I haue beene talking of thy complexion, andsay, that all the faire ladies in France would haue beene in loue with thee, but that thou art so blacke.
O sir blacke will beare no other hue.
O sir blacke is a pearle in a womans eye.
You say true sir, you say true sir, sirrah, whatsoeresay tothat is so busie at Cardes, he shall answer me, sblood, I do not meane to die as long as I can see one aliue.
Come let vs see you.
Why, I thought thou hadst beene dead,haue not heard thee chide all this while.
Sblood, I do not meane to die, as long as I can see one aliue.
Why but hearke you, I hope you cannot make this lord answer so roundly.
O, as right as any of them all, and he shall aunswere mee with an olde Latine Prouerbe, that is,.
Once more lets see.
My lord, your lordship could not play at this game verie latelie, and nowe me thinkes you are growne exceeding perfite.
O sir, you may see,.
Monsieur, here is a Gentleman and two Gentlewomen do desire to speake with you.
What are they come?, conuey them into the inwarde Parlour by the inwarde roome, and there is a brace of Crownes for thy labour, but let no bodie know of their being here.
warrant you sir.
See where they come: welcome my good lord and ladies, Ile come to you presently: so, now the sport begins, I shall starte the disguised King plaguilie, nay I shall put the ladie that loues me in a monstrous fright, when her husband comes and finds her here.
The Gentleman, and the two Gentlewomen desires your companie.
Ile come to them presently.
Gentlemen, Ile go speake with one, and come to you presently.
My lord, I would speake a worde with your lordship, if it were not for interrupting your game.
No, I haue done.
My lord there must a couple of ladies dine with vs to day.
Ladies? Gods my life I must be gone.
Why, hearke you my Lorde, I knewe not of their comming I protest to your Lordship, and woulde you haue mee turne such faire Ladies as these are away?
Yea but hearke you, did not you heare mee sweare to my Wife, that I woulde not tarie, if therewere any women, I wonder you would suffer any to come there.
Why you swore but by a kisse, and kisses are no holie things, you know that.
Why but hearke you, indeed I would be very loath to do any thing, that if my wife should know it, should displease her.
Nay then you are to obsequious, hearke you, let me intreate you, and Ile tell you in secrete, you shall haue no worse company then the Kings.
Why will the King be there?
Yea, though disguised.
Who are the ladies?
The flowers of Paris, I can tell you, faire countesse, and the ladie.
Monsieur, the gentleman and the two Gentlewomen desire your companie.
Ile come to them straight: butcome hither I prethee, go to, and tell him that the Countesse, and the ladiebe here at thy maisters house: and if it come in question hereafter, denie that thou tolde him any such thing.
What, is this all? Sblood Ile denie it, and forsweare it too.
My Lorde, Ile goe and see the roome be neate and fine, and come to you presently.
Yea but hearke you, I prethee take such order that they be not knowne of any women in the house.
O how shuld they now to his wife go yfaith!
Hearke you, Monsieur, I pray let me speak a worde with you.
With all my heart, I pray looke to my stake, theres three pence vnder the Candlesticke.
I pray see, do you know the Countesse, and the ladie?
Do I know the ladie? I knew her before she was borne, why do you aske me?
Why, they are both here at my masters house.
What, is Mistrisat an ordinarie?
Yea that she is.
By skies and stones Ile go and tel her father.
What you are out of breath me thinks Monsieur?
It is no matter Madam, it is spent in your seruice, that beare your age with your honesty, better then an hundred of these nise gallants, and indeed it is a shame for your husband, that contrary to his oath made to you before dinner, he shoud be now at the ordinary with that light huswife, which I could not chuse but come and tell you; for indeede it is a shame that your motherly care should be so slightly regarded.
Out on thee strumpet and accurst, and miserable dame.
Well, there they are: nothing els now, to her husband go I.
Nothing els quoth you, can there be more? O wicked man, would he play false, that would so simply vow, and sweare his faith, and would not let me be displeased a minute, but he would sigh, and weepe til I were pleased, I haue a knife within thats rasor sharp, and I wil lay an yron in the fire, making it burning hot to mark the strumpet, but t'will bee colde too ere I can come thither, doe something wretched woman, staies thou here?
My lorde, the roome is neate and fine, wilt please you go in?
Gentlemen, your dinner is ready.
And we are ready for it.
, shut the doores let no body come in.
Where be these puritanes, these murderers, let me come in here?
Where is the strumpet?
where is this harlot, let vs come in here.
What shall we do? the streets do wonder at vs, and we do make our shame knowne to the world, let vs go, and complaine vs to the King.
Come, will you go?
No no I scorne to go; no King shal heare my plaint, I will in silent liue a man forlorne, mad, and melancholy, as a cat, and neuer more weare hat band on my hat.
What dost thou meane? thou must not hang on me.
O good lord, haue me home with you, you may excuse all to my father for me.
O my lord, be not so rude to leaue her now.
Alas man, and if my wife should see it, I were vndone.
Pursue them sirs, and takingfrom him, conuay her presently tohouse. What vilain was it that hath vttered this?
Why twas euen I, I thanke you for your gentle tearmes, you giue me vilain at the first, I wonder wheres this old doter, what doth he thinke we feare him.
O monstrous man, what, wouldst thou haue him take vs?
Would I quoth you, yea by my troth would I, I know he is but gone to cal the constable, or to raise the streets.
What meanes the man trow? is he mad?
No, no, I know what I do, I doe it of purpose, I long to see him come and raile at you, to call you harlot, and to spurne you too, O you'l loue me a great deale the better, and yet let him come, and if he touch but one thread of you, Ile make that thread his poyson.
I know not what to say.
Speake, do you loue me?
Yea surely do I.
Why then haue not I reason that loue you so dearely as I do, to make you hatefull in his sight, that I might more freely enioy you.
Why let vs be gon my kind, and not be wondered at in the open streets.
Ile go with you through fire, through death, throgh hell, come giue me your owne hand, my owne deare heart, this hand that I adore and reuerence, and loath to haue it, touch an olde mans bosome, O let me sweetely kisse it;
Out on thee wretch, he hath bit me to the bone, O barbarous Canibal, now I perceiue thou wilt make me a mocking stocke to all the world.
Come, come, leaue your passions, they cannot mooue mee, my father and my mother died both in a day, and I rung mee a peale for them, and they were no sooner brought to the church and laide in their graues, but I fetcht me two or three fine capers aloft, and took my leaue of them, as men do of their mistresses at the ending of a galiard;.
O brutish nature, how accurst was I euer to indure the sound of this damned voice?
Well, and you do not like my humor, I can be but sory for it, I bit you for good will, and if you accept it, so, if no, go.
Vilain, thou didst it in contempt of me.
Well, and you take it so, so be it: harke you Madam, your wisest course is, euen to become puritane againe, put off this vaine attire, and say, I haue despised all: thanks my God, good husband, I do loue thee in the Lord, and he (good man) will thinke all this you haue done, was but to shew thou couldest gouerne the world, and hide thee as a rainebow doth a storme: my dainty wench, go go, what shall the flattering words of a vaine man make you forget your dutie to your husband? away, repent, amend your life, you haue discredited your religion for euer.
Well wench, for this foule shame thou puttest on me, the curse of all affection light on thee.
Go, go, why this is excellent, I shal shortly become a schoolemaster, to whom men will put their wiues, to practise; well now wilgo set the Queene vpo~ the King, and tell her where he is close with his wench: and he that mends my humor, take the spurres: sit fast, for by heauen, ile iurke the horse you ride on.
Well Gentlemen,am vtterly vndone without your good helpes, it is reported thatreceiued certaine ladies or gentlewomen into my house: no heres my man, my maid, and my boy, now if you saw any, speak boldly before these Gentlemen.
saw none sir.
Nor I, by my maidenhead.
Nor I, as I am a man.
Wel my host, weele go answere for your house at this time, but if at other times you haue had wenches, and would not let vs know it, we are the lesse beholding to you.
Peraduenture the more beholding to him, but I laye my lifehath deuised some ieast, he gauevs the slip before dinner.
Well Gentlemen, since we are so fitly mette, Ile tell you an excellent subiect for a fit of myrth, and if it bee well handled.
Why, what is it?
Why man,is grown maruelous malecontent, vpon some amorous disposition of his mistres, and you know he loues a mease of cream, and a spice-cake with his heart, andam sure he hath not dined to day, and he hath taken on him the humour of the yong lord, and we will set a mease of creame, a spice-cake, and a spoone, as the armour, picture, and apparell was set in the way of, which I doubt not but will woorke a rare cure vpon his melancholie.
Why, this is excellent, Ile go fetch the creame.
Andthe cake.
Andthe spoone.
See where hee comes as like the lordas may be, nowe you shall heare him begin with some Latin sentence that hee hath remembred euer since hee read his Accidence.
O sillie state of things, for things they be that cause this sillie state: and what is a thing, a bable, a toy, that stands men in small stead:
but what haue we here? what vanities haue we here?
He is strongly tempted, the lord strengthen him, see what a vaine he hath.
O cruell fortune, and dost thou spit thy spite at my poore life: but O sowre creame what thinkest thou that I loue thee still? no, no, faire and sweete is my mistries, if thou haddest strawberries and sugar in thee: but it may bee thou art set with stale cake to choke me: well taste it, and trie it, spoonefull by spoonefull: bitterer and bitterer still, but O sowre creame, wert thou an Onion, since Fortune set theefor mee, I will eate thee, and I will deuour thee in spite of Fortunes spite, choake I, or burst I, mistres for thy sake, to end my life eate I this creame and cake.
So he hath done, his Melancholy is well eased I warrant you.
Gods my life Gentlemen, who hath beene at this creame?
Creame, had you creame? where is your creame? Ile spend my penny at your creame.
Why, did not you eate this creame?
Talke not to me of creame, for such vaine meate I do despise as food, my stomack dies drowned in the cream boules of my mistres eyes.
Nay stay.
No not I, not I.
O he is ashamed yfayth: but I will tell thee howe thou shalt make him mad indeed, say his mistres for loue of him hath drowned her selfe.
Sblood, that will make him hang himselfe.
haue at them yfayth with a lame counterfeite humor: ake on rude arme, I care not for thy paine, I got it nobly in the kings defence, and in the gardiance of my faire Queenes right.
O tell me sweet, how fares the king? or what his right was that thou didst defend?
That you shall know when other things are told.
Keepe not the Queene too long without her longing.
No, for I tell you it is a daungerous thing.
Little care cruell men how women long.
What would you haue me then put poyson in my breath, and burne the eares of my attentiue Queene.
Tell me what ere it be, Ile beare it all.
beare with my rudenesse then in telling it, for alas you seecan but act it with the left hande, this is my gesture now.
Tis well enough.
Yea well enough you say, this recompence haue I for all my woundes: then thus the King inamoured of an other ladie compares your face to hers, and saies that yours is fat and flat, and that your neather lip was passing big.
O wicked man, doth he so sodainlie condemne my beautie, that when he married me he thought diuine: for euer blasted be that strumpets face, as all my hopes are blasted, that did change them.
Nay Madam, though he saide your face was fat, and flat, and so forth, yet he liked it best, and said, a perfect beautie should be so.
O did he so! why that was right euen as it should be.
You see now Madam, howe much too hastie you were in your griefes.
If he did so esteeme of me indeed, happie am I.
So may your highnesse be that hath so good a husband, but hell hath no plague to such an one as I.
Indeed Madam, you haue a bad husband: truly then did the king growe mightily in loue with the other ladie, and swore, no king could more inriched be, then to inioy so faire a dame as shee.
O monstrous man, and acurst most miserable dame!
But saies the king I do inioy as faire, & though I loue in al honored sort, yet Ile not wro~g my wife for al the world
This proues his constancie as firme as brasse.
It doth, it doth: O pardon me my lord, that I mistake thy royall meaning so.
In heauen your highnesse liues, but I in hell.
But when he vewd her radient eyes againe, blinde was hee strooken with her feruent beames: and now goodKing he gropes about in corners voide of the chearefull light should guide vs all.
O dismall newes, what is my soueraigne blind?
Blind as a Beetle madam, that a while houering aloft, at last in cowsheds fall.
Could her eyes blind him?
Eyes or what it was I know not, but blind I am sure he is as any stone.
Come bring me to my Prince my lord that I may leade him, none aliue but I may haue the honour to direct his feete.
How lead him madam? why hee can go as right as you, or any here, and is not blind of eyesight.
Of what then?
Of reason.
Why thou saidest he wanted his cheerfull light.
Of reason stillmeant, whose light you knowe should cheerefully guide a worthie King, for he doth loue her, and hath forced her into a priuate roome where now they are.
What mocking chaunges is there in thy wordes fond man, thou murtherest me with these exclaimes.
Why madam tis your fault, you cut mee off before my words be halfe done.
Forth and vnlade the poyson of thy tongue.
Another lord did loue this curious ladie, who hearing that the King had forced her, as she was walking with another Earle, ran straightwaies mad for her, and with a friend of his, and two or three blacke ruffians more, brake desperately vpon the person of the King, swearing to take from him, in traiterous fashion, the instrument of procreation: with them I fought a while,and got this wound, but being vnable to resist so many, came straight to you to fetch you to his ayde.
Why raised you not the streetes?
That I forbore, because I would not haue theworld, to see what a disgrace my liege was subiect to, being with a woman in so meane a house.
Whose daughter was it that he forst I pray?
Your daughter sir.
Whose sonne was that ranne so mad for her?
Your sonne my lord.
O Gods, and fiends forbid.
I pray sir, from whom did he take the Ladie?
From your good Lord.
O Lord I beseech thee no.
Tis all too true, come follow the Queen and I, where I shall leade you.
O wretched Queene, what would they take from him?
The instrument of procreation.
Now was there euer man so much accurst, that when his minde misgaue him, such a man was haplesse, to keep him company? yet who would keep him company but I, O vilde, my wife and I are bound to curse thee while we liue, but chiefely I, well: seeke her, or seek her not; find her, or find her not, I were as good see how hell opens, as looke vpon her.
We haue yfaith, stop thou him there, and I wil meet him here.
Well, I will venture once to seek her.
Gods Lord, my Lord, come you this way, why your wife runnes ranging like as if she were mad, swearing to slit your nose if she can catch you.
What shal I do at the sight of her and hern.
Gods precious my Lord, come you this way, your wife comes ranging with a troope of dames, likedrunken foes, iust as you go, shift for your selfe my Lord.
Stay good.
No not I my Lord.
How now Iaques, whats the newes?
None but good my Lord.
Why hast not seene my wife run round about the streets.
Not I my Lorde, I come to you from my maister, who would pray you to speake to, thatmight speake to the King, that my masters lottery for his iewells may go forward, he hath made the rarest deuice that euer you heard, we haue fortune in it, and she our maide plaies, and I, and my fellow carrie two torches, and our boy goes before and speakes a speech, tis very fine yfaith sir.
Sirra in this thou maiest highly pleasure me, let me haue thy place to beare a torch, that I may look on my wife, and she not see me, for if I come into her sight abruptly, I were better be hanged.
O sir you shall, or any thing that I can do, Ile send for your wife to.
I prethee do.
This is the house where the mad Lord did vow to do the deed, draw all your swoords couragious gentlemen, Ile bring you there where you shall honor win, but I can tell you, you must breake your shinne.
Who will not breake his necke to saue his King: set forward.
Yea, much good can I do with a wounded arme, Ile go and call more helpe.
Others shall go, nay we will raise the streets, better dishonor, then destroy the King.
Sbloud I know not how to excuse my villany, I would faine be gone.
Ile geld the adulterous goate, and take from him the instrument, that plaies him such sweete musicke.
O rare, this makes my fiction true: now ile stay.
Arrest these faithlesse traitrous gentlemen.
What is the reason that you call vs traitours?
Nay, why do you attempt such violence against the person of the King?
Against the King, why this is strange to me.
How now my masters, what? weapons drawne, come you to murder me.
How fares my Lord?
How fare I? well, but you yfaith shall get me speak for you another time; he got me here to wooe a curious Lady, and she temptes him, say what I can, ouer what state I will in your behalfe, she will not yeeld.
Yfaith my liege, what a hard heart hath she, well hearke you, I am content your wit shall saue your honesty for this once.
Peace, a plague on you, peace; but wherefore asked you how I did?
Because I feared that you were hurte my Lord.
Hurt, how I pray?
Why, hurt Madam, I am well againe.
Do you aske? why he told meand this his friend, threatned to take away.
To take away, what should they take away.
Name it Madam.
Nay, I pray name it you.
Why then, thus it was my liege, I told her, and this his friende threatned to take away, and if they could the instrumentof procreation, and what was that now, butbeeing a fayre woman, is not shee the instrument of procreation, as all women are.
O wicked man.
Go to, go to, you are one of those fiddles too yfaith.
Well pardon my minion, that hath frayd you thus, twas but to make you mery in the end.
I ioy it endes so well, my gracious Lord.
But say my gracious Lord, is no harme done, betweene my louing daughter, and your grace?
No, of my honor and my soule.
The fire of loue which she hath kindled in me being greater then my heate of vanity, hath quite expelled.
Come, receiue with your lost wittes your loue, though lost; I know youle yeeld, my lord and you her father.
Most ioyfully my Lord.
And for her part I know her dispositio~ well enough.
What, will you haue her?
Yea mary will I.
Ile go and tellpresently.
Monsieur, I pray let me speake with you, I come to you from the Lord, who would desire you to speake to the King for my masters lottery, and he hath my place to beare a torch, for bare faced hee dares not look vpon his wife, for his life.
O excellent, Ile further thy masters lottery and it be but for this iest only, harke you my liege, heres the poore man hath bin at great charges for the preparation of a lottery, and he hath made the rarest deuice, that I know you wil take great pleasure in it, I pray let him present it before you athouse.
Whith all my heart, can you be ready so soone?
Presently and if it like your grace.
But hearke you, how shall we do for euery mans posie.
Will you all trust me with the making of them?
With all our hearts.
Why then Ile go to make the poses and bringto the lottery presently.
Surely the world is full of vanitie, a woman must take heed she do not heare a lewd man speake, for euery woman cannot when shee is tempted, when the wicked fiend gets her into his snares escape like me, for graces measure is not so filled vp, nor so prest downe in euery one as me, but yetpromise you a little more: well, Ile go seeke my head, who shal take me in the gates of his kind armes vntoucht of any.
What Madam are you so pure now?
Yea, would not you be pure?
No puritane.
You must be then a diuell, I can tell you.
O wife where hast thou beene?
where did I tell you I would bepray.
In thy close walke thou saidst.
And wasnot?
Trulyknow not, I neither looked nor knocked, fortold me that you, and fairewere at Verones ordinarie.
? my lord you are a wise man to beleeue a fool.
Well my good head, for my part I forgiue you: but surely you do much offend to be suspicious: where there is no trust, there is no loue, and where there is no loue twixt man and wife, theres no good dealing surely: for as men should euer loue their wiues, so should they euer trust the~, for what loue is there where there is no trust?
She tels you true, my lord.
Shee doth my liege; and deare wife pardon this andwill neuer be suspicious more.
Whysay,do.
Looke you my liege,haue done simple seruice amongest you, here is one had hanged himselfe for loue, thinking his Mistresse had done so for him: well, see your Mistresse liues.
And doth my Mistresse liue?
Shee doth, O noble knight, but not your Mistresse now.
Sblood, but she shall for me, or for no body else.
How now, what a traitor, draw vpon the King.
Yea, or vpon any woman here in a good cause.
Well sweetelet her marry, Ile get thee a wife worth fifteene of her, wilt thou haue one that cares not for thee?
Not I by the Lord, I scorne her, Ile haue her better if I can get her.
Why thats well said.
What Madam, are you turned puritan againe?
When was I other, pray?
Marie Ile tell you when, when you went to the Ordinarie, and when you made false signes to your husband, which I could tell him all.
Cursed be he that maketh debate twixt man & wife.
O rare scripturian! you haue sealed vp my lips, a hall, a hall, the pageant of the Butterie.
What is he?
This is Verones sonne, my liege.
What shall he do?
Speak some speach that his father hath made for him
Why is he good at speeches?
O he is rare at speaches.
Faire ladies most tender, and nobles most slender, and gentles whose wits be scarce.
My host, why do you call vs nobles most slender?
And it shall please your Grace, to be slender is to be proper, and therfore where my boy saies nobles most slender, it is as much to say, fine and proper nobles.
Yea, but why do you call vs gentles whose wits are scarce.
To be scarce, is to be rare: and therefore where as he sayes Gentles whose wits be scarce, is as much as to say, Gentles whose wits be rare.
Well, forwards trunchman.
Faire ladies most tender, and nobles most slender, and gentles whose wittes bee scarce, Queene Fortune doth come with her trumpe, and her drumme, as it may appeare by my voice.
Come hither, are you a schoolemaister, where was Fortune Queene, of what countrey or kingdome?
Wy sir, Fortune was Queene ouer all the world.
Thats a lie, theres none that euer conquered all the world, but maister, I am sure of that.
O rare Monsieur, who would haue thought hee could haue found so rare a fault in the speach.
Ile alter it if it please your grace.
No, tis very well.
Father I must begin againe they interrupt me so.
I beseech your grace giue the boy leaue to begin again.
With all my heart, tis so good we cannot heare it too oft.
Faire ladies most tender, and nobles most slender, and gentles whose wittes are scarce, Queene Fortune doth come with her Fife, and her Drum, as it doth appeare by my voice, here is Fortune good, but il by the rood, and this naught but good shall do you, dealing the lots out of our pots, and so good Fortune to you sir.
Looke you my liege, how hee that caries the torch trembles extreamly.
I warrant tis with care to carie his torch well.
Nay there is something else in the wind: why my host, what meanes thy manto tremble so?
Hold still thou knaue, what art thou afraid to looke vpon the goodly presence of a king: hold vp for shame.
Alas poore man, he thinks tishis man: poore lord, how much is he bound to suffer for his wife?
Hearke you mine host, what goodly person is that? is it Fortune her selfe?
Ile tell your Maiestie in secrete who it is, it is my maide.
I promise you she becomes her state rarely.
Well my liege, you were all content that I should make your poses: well here they be euery one: giue Master Verone his fiue crownes.
Theres mine andthe Queenes.
Theirs ours.
And there is mine and.
Comethy money.
You must lend me some, for my boy is runne away with my purse.
Thy boy?neuer knew any that thou hadst.
Had not I a boy three or foure yeares ago, and he ran away.
And neuer since he went thou hadst not a peny, but stand by, Ile excuse you. But sirrah, thou shalt stand on one side and reade the prises, and I will stand on the other and read the Poses.
Content.
Come on Queene Fortune, tell euery man his posie, this is orderly, the King and Queene are first.
Come let vs see what goodly poses you haue giuen vs.
This is your Maiesties, At the fairest, so it bee not.
A plague vpon you, you are still playing the villaines with me.
This is the Queenes, Obey the Queene: and she speakes it to her husband, or to Fortune, which she will.
A prise: your Maiesties is the summe of foure shillings in gold.
Why how can that be, there is no such coyne.
Here is the worth of it, if it please your grace.
Well, whats for me?
A heart of gold.
A goodly iewell,
Countand.
Whats my posie sir I pray?
Mary this my Lord, Of all fortunes friends, that hath ioy in this life, He is most happy that puts a sure trust in his wife.
A very good one sir, I thanke you for it.
Whats mine I pray?
Mary this Madam, Good fortune, be thou my good fortune bringer, And make me amends for my poore bitten finger.
Who bit your finger wife?
No body; tis vaine posie.
Blanke for my lord, for his wife a posie, a apaire of holy beades with a crucifix.
O bommination Idole, Ile none of them.
Keepe them thy selfe Veron, she will not haue them.
and, I haue fitted your lordship for a posie.
Why what is it?
And what is mine sir?
A serious one I warrant you, change for the better.
Thats not amisse.
A prize:hath a cats eyes, orrod of gold, set with Iacinths and Emeraldes.
What is for?
hath the two serpents heads set with diamonds.
What my host?
What? is he in for his owne iewells?
O what els my liege, tis our bountie, and his posie is to tel you the truth in words plaine and mild,loues his maide, and she is great with child.
What Queene fortune with child, shall we haue yongfortunes my host?
I am abused, and if it please your Maiestie.
Ile play no more.
No faith you need not now, you haue plaid your bellie full alreadie.
Stand still good, they do but ieast.
Yea, but I like no such ieasting.
Come great Queene Fortune, let see your posies, what madam, alas, your ladiship is one of the last.
What is my posie sir I pray?
Marie Madame your posie is made in manner and forme of an Eccho, as if you were seeking your husbande, and fortune should be the Eccho, and this you say: where is my husbande hid so long vnmaskt? maskt, sayes the Eccho: but in what place sweet Fortune? let me heare: heare, sayes the Eccho.
There you lie Eccho, for if he were here we must needes see him.
Indeed sweete King, there me thinkes the Eccho must needes lie, if hee were here, wee must needes see him, tis one of them that caries the torches: no that cannot be neither, and yet by the Masse heres: why my host, did not you tell me thatshould be a torchbearer? who is this? Gods my life, my lord!
And you be Gentlemen, let me go.
Nay come your way, you may be well enough ashamed to shew your face that is a periured wretch, did not you sweare, if there were any wenches at the ordinarie, you would straight come home?
Why, who tolde you Madam, there were any there?
He that will stand to it,my liege.
Who I stand to it! alas, I tolde you in kindnesse, and good will, because I would not haue you companie long from your husband.
Why loe, you bird, how much you are deceiued.
Why wherefore were you afraid to be seene?
Who I afraid? alas I bore a torch to grace thishonorable presence: for nothing els sweete bird.
Thankes good, see lady with what wrong
you haue pursued your most inamored lord: but come, now
all are friends, now is this day spent with vnhurtfull motiues of
delight, and ouer ioyes more my senses at the night: and now
for, if all will follow my deuise, his beauteous loue
and he shall married be, and here I solemnly inuite you all
home to my court, where with feastes wee will crowne this
myrthfull day, and vow it to renowne.<|endoftext|>The night drawes on, &is declining towards the West. Now shepheards bear their flocks vnto the folds, And wintred Oxen fodered in their stalles Now leaue to feede, and gin to take their rest, Blacke duskie cloudes inuyron round the globe, And heauen is couered with a Sable robe, Now am I come to doe the kings command. To court a Wench & win her for the King. But if I lyke her well, I say no more, Tis good to haue a hatch before the dore: But first I will moue her Father to prefer The earnest suit I haue in canuasing, So may I see the Maid, woo, wed, I and bed her to: Who is here? what ho.
Earl, welcome, how fares our friends at court What cause constrains your Honor, that thus late You visite vs, that dreame not of your comming?
My Lord, I am come vnlooked for, very true, So is my cumming yet conceald from you.
Your Honor shall repose you here to night, And earlie as you please, begin your taske, Tyme serues not now, come, As welcome as the King himselfe to me.
Now, if Fortune fauour thee, Thou maist prooue happie loue to.
This is the place, and this the appointed tyme, I know heel keep his word, for he thinks me his friend,
But tell me, am I not well disguised.Can any man discerne me by my lookes to be the King, Take heed of that, for then our game is mard: And hast thou promised him what reward he shall haue.
Tush fear not you, for you neuer knew honest man dissemble with his friend, Though many friends dissemble with honest men: But, my Lord, the cards be shufled, and here comes a knaue.
Tis strange to see how men of our knowledge liue, And how we are hated of the baser sort, Because (forsooth) we liue vpon our wit: But let the baser sort thinke as they will, For he may best be termed a Gentleman, That when all fayles, can liue vpon his wit. And if all fayles, then haue I got a wench, That cuts and deales, to maintaine my expence, Now I vse her, as men vse sweetest flowers, That while they are sweet and pleasant to the eie, I doe regard them for their pleasant smell: But when their cullour fades, and sent decaies, I cast them off for men to trample on: But to the purpose, here is the Gentleman My honest friend did lately tell me of. Sir, though I had another businesse of import, That might haue hindred me for comming here, Yet in regard I am loth to breake my word, I haue set my other businesse cleane apart, Because you should not iudge amisse of me,
I find you kind Sir, and your self shal see How I will labour to requiteyour curtesie. This is the honest man I told you of, One that will doe you pleasurein the cause, So be it you will content him for his paines.
Els God forbid, and good sir, thus it is, I bought a farme of one that dwels here by, And for an earnest gaue an hundred pound,The rest was to be paid as sixe weekes past, Now sir, I would haue you as witnesse, That at my house you saw me pay three hundred pound, And for your paines I will giue you a hundred pound: Besides, I will stand your friend in what I may, You heare the cause, what will your conscience serue you to do it?
How say you sir, my conscience, then you touch me, I tell you sir, my conscience wil serue me to doe more than this: Why, I haue bene a poste knight inthis xii. year, And sworne to that which no one els would venture on. Why, I haue sworne against mine owne father for mony: I haue sworne right or wrong any wayes for money, whe~ I haue receiuedmony before witnes, I swore to the co~trary And do you misdoubt me in so sleight a matter as this, When I haue sworne against father, mother, and all my kin?
I told you sir how resolute you should find him, He doeth it without feare, I warrant you: I think that inyou could not haue found a man so fit for your purpose, I knew his father (sir) a man of honest reputation, And one whose lyfe was witnesse to the lyfe he led, He was a Bailiefe (sir) though I say't, but no Bayliefe that vsde deceit, He had too good a conscience for that.
Al the better for that, for it should seem by his behaueor That he hath had good bringing vp.
Indeed my father in his lyfe time was a man, Giuen to the feare of God, and to vse much deuotion.
I, but he gaue nothing for Gods sake, except it were hard words or blowes, and they had bene better kept then giuen: But husht, here comes the Iudge.
Heare you sir, if you be in readines, here is the Iudge.
I sir, fear not, I warrant you, is that your aduersary? What an old crust it is?
I think the villaine hath a face hardened with steel, He could neuer be so impudent els.
If it please your Worship, this is the man,That wrongfully would haue my farme from me, Facing me downe that he hath paid me that, Which he neuer offred, not I neuer receiued: And this day he hath promised to make proofe, That he hath paid me ful foure hundred pound.
And so I can, and heres my witnes to it, That saw me when I paid the money.
Why, I am sure he wil not say it, I neuer saw the man in all my lyfe.
No sir? but I saw you, and was a witnes, When this Gentlema~ paid you three hundred pound As the last paiment for the farme he bought.
But where was the money tendered?
At the Gentlemans house.
You see father, this marchant wil be witnes That he saw so much money tendred, And you receiued it, being full satisfyed, As the last payment for the farme he bought, And if this marchant take his oath against you, That seuen daies past he saw the mony tendered, I must passe sentence then against you needs. But wil you sweare on the bible this is true?
I sir, and to that intent I came hether, For I wil neuer refuse to swear a truth while I liue
Yet ere thou speake, vouchsafe to heare me speake, Full three score Winters Gentle sir I haue past, And age hath brought gray haires vpon my head. Looke but vpon my face, and thou shalt see, The perfect patterne of humilitie. Thou man of worth, or citizen, what ere thou be, Weigh but my charge, and then thou wilt not swear I haue fiue sonnes, al pretie tender babes, That liue vpon the farme that he would haue, Twelue hundred sheep do feed vpon the plaines, That yearlie bring a great increase to me, Besides a hundred Oxen fatly fed:That euerie Winter feed within my stalles, And twentie poore men liuing neere my house, I daylie feed, and all vpon my Farme: Go but among my neighbours, where I dwell, And heare what good report they giue of me. The poore man neuer yet went from my dore, But to my power I did releeue his want: I was no Farmer that inricht my selfe: By raysing markets and oppressing poore, But I haue sold my corne full manie tymes At better rate, than I could wel affoord, And all to help my needie brethren: Then ere thou swearst, cal al these things to mind, And thou wilt weep, and leaue to sweare vntrueths, Confusion to thy bodie and thy soule.
Wel, if thou be wel aduised, take thy oath, But yet remember before whome thou swearest, The God of trueth and perfect equitie, Which will reuenge wrong to the innocent, with thousand plagues and tortors worse than death.
By the holy contents of this Byble, And by that iust God, before whome I stand, I saw this man,
Peace, shamelesse villain, execrable wretch, Monster of nature, degenerate miscreant, Who euer knew or heard so vile an oath, Vildly pronounc'd by such a damned slaue, Haue I such monstrous vipers in my land, That with their verie breaths infect the aire, Say, hast thou euer heard the lyke.
My Liege, such lothsome weeds must needs infect the corne, Such Cankers perish both the root and branch, Vnlesse they be soone spied and weeded out:
Ile be the husbandman to mowe such Tares, Here, let him be manacled: And scar his forehead, that he may be knowne, Asfor murder, he for periurie.
I beseech your Grace be good to me.
I, you shal haue a cold yron clapt in your forehead, A hot one I would say, you are a slaue indeede.
Good.
Good villaine, theres no help for you.
My fancies thoughts, lyke the labouring Spyder, That spreads her nets, to entrap the sillie Flie: Or lyke the restlesse billowes of the seas, That euer alter by the fleeting ayre, Still houering past their woonted passions, Makes me amazed in these extremities, The King commands me on his embassage, Todaughter, beauteous, The height and pride of all this bounding ill, To poste amaine, plead loue in his behalfe, To court for him, and woo, and wed the mayd, But haue you neuer heard that theame, Deceit in loue is but a merriment, To such as seeke a riuall to preuent, Whether (distraught) romes my vnruly thoughts, It is the King I cosen of his choise, And he nil brook Earlshould prooue False to his Prince, especially in loue. The~ thus it shal be, Ile tel the king the maid is fair, Of nut browne cullour, comelie and fair spoken, Worthie companion to an Earle or so: But not a Bride forKing, This will alay the strong effects in loue. Fame wrought inmind of. Well, Ile to court, and dallie with the King, And worke some means to draw his mynde from loue.
NeighbourI cannot but admire to see How housekeeping is decayed within this thirtie yare,But where the fault is God knowes, I knowe not: My father in his lyfe time gaue hospitality to all strangers, and Distressed traueillers, his table was neuer emptie of bread, beefe And beere, he was woont to keep a hundred tall men in his hall. He was a feaster of all commers in generall, And yet was he neuer in want of money: I thinke God did blesse him with increase, for his bountiful mind
Truly sir, I am sorrie, you ar fallen into decay, In that you want to maintaine houshould charge, And whereof comes this want, I will tell you sir, Tis only throw your great housekeeping: Be ruled by me, and doe as I aduise you: You must learne to leaue so great a traine of men, And keepe no more than needs of force you must, And those you keepe, let them be simple men, For they will be content with simple fare, Keepe but a boy or two within your house, To run of errants, and to wait on you, And for your kitchin, keep a woman cooke, One that will serue for thirtie shillings a yeare: And by that means you saue two liueries, And if ye will keep retainers towards you, Let them be Farmers, or rich husbandmen, For you shal find great profit (sir) in keeping them: For if you stand in need of corne or hay, Send but to them, and you may haue it strait: And if you kill a Beefe, let it be so leane The Butcher nor the Grasyer will not buy it, Your drinke is too strong, and tastes too much of malt, Tush, single beere is better far, both for your profit, and your seruants health And at a Christmasse time feast none at al, But such as yeeld you some commoditie: I meane such as will send you now and then, Fat Geese and Capons to keep house withall, To these and none els would I haue you liberall.
Why neighbor, my goods are lent me to no other endBut to releeue my needie brethren, but God I hope hath in store for me.
I, trust you to that, & you may hap die a begger:
Why sir, if he should not trust in God, in whom should he trust, for God is the giuer of all good whatsoeuer.
True, and yet tis good for a man to trust to himselfe now and then: for if you be downe, and bid God help you vp, and do not help your self, you may fortune lie and perish: and therefore, serue God on Sundaies, as you are appointed, and thereby hope to be saued, for by your almes deeds you cannot, for if you giue to the poore, there be manie wil say, he thinks to bee saued by his almes deedes: and thus you shal be ill thought on for your good wil, and therfore learn to prouide for your self, let God prouide for the pore
I tel you neighbor, my great grandfather, & all my predecessors haue bene held in good regard for their good housekeeping, and (God willing) their good names shal neuer take an exigent in me, for I wil (God willing) keepe such hospitalitie to my death, as my state can maintaine, and I will rather sell my land, to maintain hous-keeping, then keeping my land make sale of my good name for housekeeping, but stay, who comes here.
God saue you sir, I pray be good to me for cham a poore man, and I cannot tell what you will doe, for you say my horse hath broken into your corn, or your corne into my horse, But indeed my neighbor saw your boy driue my horse into a field But Ile stand to nothing, nowe I am warnd with a peece of paper, and a litle ware, to prepare or proceed to London, And there I am inuented, I cannot tell for what: The Bailiefe here hath arested me ere I was weary against my will: he said it was vpon your suit, & yet he laid his hands on me, Nay more, on my shoulder.
And sir, and it may please you, I borrowed certen corn, and I brought you your corne again, and yet you rest me.
True sir, but then was corne sold for foure shillings a bushell, and now tis sold for two.
I sir, but he borrowed corne, and promised to pay you corn againe, and you can haue but so much as you lent:For if he should pay you at the rate you demande, You wold haue for the twentie bushels you lent, fourtie, Which were neither right nor conscience.
O sir, I pray let me alone with my conscience, You would haue me giue al I haue away to the poore, & want as you do, I pray let me alone to deale for my selfe: heare you, haue you rested them?
I haue sir as you commanded me.
Then to prison with them, til they haue paid such dammages as the law shal award them.
Hear you sir, if you shuld bid your boy break downe a gap, and driue in my horse, twere litle better than plaine knauerie, for my horse is as honest a horse, as any is in this towne.
Wel neighbor, we wil haue the horse examined before an officer, and my boy Jack shal write what the horse speaks and if the horse say a was driuen in against his wil, Then you may haue the law of him, neighbor, For all the horses in the parish wil be sworne for his horse. But Ile stand to nothing.
Wel, to prison with the~ til they haue paid your due, away with them.
Nay, I pray, be more miserable to me, and I wil giue you fourtie shillings when I haue it.
By the Mas the knaue hath a pretie cottage, Ile see and I can get that: sirra, you haue an old cottage, If you will make me that ouer by deed of gift, I am content to draw my action.
My house? why tis my goods, my wyfe, my land, My horse my asse, or any thing that is his: no you Caterpiller, I will neuer make away my house, I wil die first.
But tel me sir, howe much wold you haue of them for their trespasse?
Mary, for fourtie shillings, and yet I befriend them, Why sir, I hope you will not pay it for them?
But I wil: sirra Bailie, I will answere the poore mens debts, andcome home to me for thy fee anon, go old men. Get you home and praise God.
Mary Jesus blesse you: naibor, how many such good Knightes haue you now a dayes?
Too few, neighbor, the more is the pitie.
But come lets away.
But who comes her?
God saue you gentlemen, the king greets you, and at this time, Hauing some occasion, to vse mony, hath sent to know What you that be Knightes and Squires wil lend his Grace, And you maister Farmer, be brief (sir) for I cannot stay.
Sir, though hous-keeping be some hindrance to my willing mind by reason it robs me of that, which shuld bewray my louing mind both to my prince & country, money I meane which at this time I stand in some want of, yet of that smal store that I haue, am willing to impart the lending of the king xx. pound, and more I assure you I am not able.
Very wel, and what say you maister Squire.
I say that my reuenewes are but small, yet I will lend his Maiestie ten pound:
Very wel, but what saith the Farmer? What can he spare the King?
Marry sir, I am a poore Farmer, & yet I can affoord To lend the King a hundred or two of pounds, And heare you sir, if you prefer a suit I haue to the King, I will giue you fourtie Angels for your paines: Besides, I will giue you the keeping of a dozen iades: And now and then meat for you and your horse. If you come to my house and lie a whole yeare.
Why thats well said, and I commend thy honest mind, Would all men wer of thy mind: I warrant thee, thou art an honest man, & one that loues the king But tel me, what wouldst thou haue me doe?
Nothing but procure me the Kings letter to conuey corn beyond seas, for in England it is so good cheap, that a man can make no liuing by selling thereof: therfore if the King wil grant me his letter, I will at any time, lend him fiue or sixe hundred pound,and perhaps neuer ask it again, and I wil not forget your paines.
Sir, feare not, I wil do it for you, I warrant you, For I tel you I can do much with the King.
I beleeue you wil do more than you wil be commended for, The Courtier resembleth the Iay, that decketh her self with the feathers of other birds, to make her self glorious: So the Courtier must be braue, tho he be hangd at the gallous.
Wel sir, wil it please you to come and dine with me.
I thanke you sir hartily.
But whats he there in your company.
A plaine fellow, and his name is.
O let him go where he will, for he shal not dine with me.
See how the Farmer feares my name, What wold he doe if he knew my nature? But hear you (maister Courtier) shall I dine with you? I promise you sir, I am very hungrie,
Trulie, if I were furnisht with money, I would not stick to giue thee thy dinner, But now thou seest I am but a guest my selfe.
Truly honest fellow, if I were certaine of my cheere, I wold bid thee to dinner, but know not my prouisio~ I promise thee
Heare you sir, will it please you to take part of a peece of beefe with me, you shal be welcome.
I thank you sir, but I must dine with my honest friend here, els I would not refuse your gentle offer.
See how he can vse my name and not me, But I perceiue I may goe dine with Duke Humfrie, God bwy Gentlemen, for none here hath occasion to vse Honesty
Yes, thou shalt be my brothers guest and mine.
Mary and I thank you to, for now the world may say, Thatdines with Hospitality to day,
Daughter, see that you entertaine the Earle, As best beseemes his state and thy degree: He comes to see whether Fame haue worthily Bene niggard, in commending thee or no, So shall thy vertues be admired at the court.And thou be praised for kind and debonair, For curtesie contents a Courtier oft: When nothing els seemes pleasant in his eies.
Father, you shall perceiue thatWill doe her best in honouring of your age, To entertaine the Earle of Cornwell so, That he shall think him highlie fauoured, Throw louing speech and curteous entertain.
How fares my L. of, what displeased Or troubled with a mood thats male content?
Not male content, and yet I am not well, For I am troubled with a painfull rume, That when I would be mery, troubles me, And commonlie it holds me in my eies. With such extreames, that I can scantly see.
How long haue you bene troubled with the pain, Or is it a pain that you haue vsuall? Or is it some water, that by taking cold, Is falne into your eies, and troubles you?
I cannot tel, but sure it paines me much, Nor did it euer trouble me till nowe, For till I came to lodge within your house, My eies were cleare, and I neuer felt the paine.
I am sory that my house shuld cause your grief Daughter, if you haue any skil at all, I pray you vse your cunning with the Earle, And see if you can ease him of his paine.
Father, such skill as I receiued of late, By reading many pretie pend receites, Both for the ache of head, and paine of eyes. I wil, if so it please the Earle to accept it, Indeuour what I may to comfort him. My Lord, I haue waters of approoued worth, And such as are not common to be found: Any of which, if it please your honour, vse them, I am in hope, will help you to your sight,
No (matchlesse) they will doe me no good.For I am troubled only when I looke.
On what (my Lord) or whome?
I cannot tell.
Why let me see your eies (my Lord) looke vpon me.
Then twil be worse.
What, if you looke on me? then Ile be gone.
Nay stay, sweet loue, stay beauteous, And giue the Earle ofleaue to speake: Know, thy beautie hath subdued, And captiuate the Earle ofheart Briefly, I loue thee, seeme I neere so bold, So rude and rashlie to prefer my sute, And if your father giue but his consent, Eased be that paine that troubles. And this considered,shall prooue, My father, and his daughter be my loue, Speake, shall I haue her I or no?
My Lord with al my hart, you haue my consent If so my daughter please to condiscend.
But what saith?
I say (my Lord) that seing my father grants, I will not gainsay, what his age thinks meet, I do appoint my selfe (my Lord) at your dispose,
Wel, nowe you see your daughter's mine, But tel me when shall be the wedding day,
On Monday next, till then you are my guest.
Well, when our nuptiall rites are past, I must to Court, of businesse to the King.
Let that be as you please my Lord, But stay not long, for I shall hardlie brooke your absence then.
Feare not, I will not stay there long, But come, let vs in Father, pray lead the way.
Tel me, what thinkest thou of the fauors of Kings
I think of Kings fauors as of a Marigold flower, That as long as the Sun shineth openeth her leaues,And with the least cloud closeth againe: Or lyke the Violets in, that in sommer yeeld an odifferous smell, And in winter a most infectious sauour: For at euery ful sea they flourish, or at euery dead ope they vade: The fishbeing perfect white in the calme, Yet turneth blacke with euery storme: Or lyke the trees in the deserts of, That flourish but while the southwest wind bloweth: Euen so (my Lord) is the fauours of kings to them they fauour, For as their fauours giue lyfe, so their frownes yeeld death.
Wel said,, but what merits he that dissembles with his Soueraigne?
In my opinion (my Lord) he merits death.
Then assure thy selfe, ifdissemble, he shall die: but who comes here?, what newes, that thou commest in such hast? and what is he that beares thee company?
It is my gratious Lord an honest man, And one it seemes that loues you Maiestie: For as your Grace gaue me in charge, I went about into the countrey, to see what summes of money I could make, Among the cheefest of the communaltie: And mongst the richest Knights that I could fynd, They would lend your Grace at most but twenty pound, And euery Squire would lend you Grace but ten: Then came I mongst the rest to this plaine man, And asked him what he would lend the king, He aunswered sir, you see I am but poore, Not halfe so wealthy as a Knight or Squire, And yet in signe of dutie to his Grace, I wil lende his Maiestie two hundred pound.
Thanks honest fellow, for thy loue to vs, And if I may but pleasure thee in ought, Command me to the vttermost I may:hath too few men of thy good mind.
, what newes? where hast thou bene so long?
A my Lord, I haue bene searching for a priuie knaue One (my Lord) that feeds vpon the poore commons, And makes pooreweare a thread bare coate, It is a farmer (my Lord) which buyes vp all the corn in the market, and sends it away beyond seas, & thereby feeds the enemie.
Alas, poore, what ailest thou? why doest thou weep, peace man, if any haue offended thee, Thou shalt be made amends vnto the most.
I beseech your Grace to pitie my distresse, There is an vnknowne theefe that robs the common wealth, And makes me and my poore wife and children beg for maintenance, The tyme hath bene (my Lord), That the Plowmans coat was of good homespun russet cloth, Whereof neither I nor my seruants had no want, Though now both they and I want, And all by this vnknown Farmer: For there cannot be an aker of ground to be sold, But he will find money to buy it: nay my Lord, he hath money to buy whole Lordships, and yet but a Farmer, I haue kept a poore house where I dwel this four score yeare, Yet was I neuer driuen to want till now: I beseech your Grace, as you haue still bene iust, To seek redresse for this oppression I beseech your Grace reade my humble petition.
Let me see the humble petition, of poor, Alasse poore, I haue heard my father say, Thatwas one of the best members in a commo~ wealth, For his table was neuer emptie of bread, beefe, and beere, As a help to all distressed traueilers: but where thou tellest mee, I harbour him, and he is dailie vnder my elbow, I assure thee tis more than I know, for I harbour none but this which is my honest friend.
Is this your honest friend? the deuill a is (my Lord) This is he: if you doubt my word to be true, call in Clarke of the Assyses, now shall your Grace see, Howcan shake out a knaue in this company:
Sirra, tell me who hath most poore men in suit at this Syses?
That hath: He hath one poore man in suit for certaine Barlie, And another for that his horse was taken in his corne.
But what inditemennts are against him, read them
First, he hath conueyed corne out of the land to feede the Enemie. Next, hee hath turned poore Piers Plowman out of dores by his great raising of rents. Next, he is knowne to bee a common disturber of men of their quiet, by seruing Writs on them, and bringing them to London, to their vtter vndoing. Also, he keeps corne in his barne, and suffers his brethren and neighbours to lie and want, and thereby makes the market so deare, that the poore can buy no corne.
Ynough: now fie vpon thee, thou monster of nature, To seeke the vtter vndoing of manie, to inrich thy selfe:, take him, and vse him as thou wilt.
Come sir, I thinke I found out your knauerie, Away sir, and beare your fellow companie.
Health and good hap befall your Maiestie,
welcome, how fares our beautious loue, Be breefe man, what, will she loue or no?
Then as your Grace did giue to me in charge, I haue dischargde my dutie euery way, And communed with the maid you so commend: For when the Sun, rich Father of the day, Eie of the world, King of the spangled vale, Had run the circuit of the Horizon, And that, the nights bright star, Had brought fairfrom the purpled mayne, Where she was dallying with her wanton loue, To lend her light to wearie traueilers.Then twas my chance to arriue athouse: But being late I could not then vnfolde The message that your Grace had giuen in charge: But in the mornedid appeare, At sight of whom thestraight did cleare. Then was the spangled vale of heauen drawne in, Androse lyke heauens imperiall King: And ere the Sun was mounted fiue degrees The maid came downe and gaue me the good day,
But being come, what said she then? How lykest thou her, what is she fair or no?
My Lord, she is colloured lyke theMaide, That challengedat thegames, Well bodied, but herface was something blacke, Lyke those that follow houshold businesse: Her eies wer hollow sunke into her head, Which makes her haue a clowdie countenance, She hath a pretie tongue, I must confesse, And yet (my Lord) she is nothing eloquent.
Why then (my Lord,) theres nothing good in her.
Yes my Lord, she is fit to serue an Earle or so, But far vnfit forKing.
So then she is fit forour Cornish Earle, But far vnfit forking: Well, I sound your policie: But tell me ifaith, doest thou loue the maide. Speake truelie man, dissemble not.
I doe (my gratious Lord) and therewithall, Intreate your Maiestie to pardon me.
, I am content to pardon thee, And will be with thee my selfe ere long, To doe thee honour in thy mariage, And thereforethou maist depart, And leaue vs til we visite thee at home.
My gratious Lord I humbly take my leaue.
If it please your Grace pardon me, and giue me leaueI would gladlie bring my Nephew on the way.
With all my heart, but stay not long.
I humbly take my leaue of your Maiesty.
Farewel, buttell me now, What doest thou thinke of, Is she so foule asreports her, Beleeue me then she had bene vnfit for me.
My gratious Lord,hath dissembled with your Maiesty, Foris fair and vertuous: For last night, being in priuate conference, He tould me he had deuised a mean To collour with the King by forged excuse, No, no, (quoth he) myis faire, As is the radiant North star Christaline, That guides the wet and wearie Traueller, Soust with the surge ofwatery main, And thus my Lord, he fell to praising her, And from his pocket straight he drew this counterfeit, And said twas made by beauteous.
A face more faire than is the Suns bright beames, Or snow white Alpes beneath faire, Who would refuse withto spin, When such faire faces bears vs companie. Faireneuer was so faire: Nor she that was proud loue to. Greatloue, Queen of Amazons, Was not so faire as is faire. But, be thou secrete to the King, And I will sound these subtill practizes, And, be sure I will quittance thee, And teach thee how to dallie with thy King, Butlets to Court vntill to morne, And then weele take horse and away.
Now let vs constult among our selues, How to misbehaue our selues to the Kings worship, Jesus blesse him: and when he comes, to deliuer him this petition I think the Smith were best to do it, for hees a wise man.
Naighbor, he shall not doe it, as long as Jefferay the Translater is Maior of the towne.
And why, I pray, because I would haue put you from the Mace?
No, not for that, but because he is no good fellow, Nor he will not spend his pot for companie.
Why (sir) there was a god of our occupation, and I charge you by vertue of his godhed, to let me deliuer the petitio~.
But soft you, your God was a Cuckold, and his Godhead was the horne, and thats the Armes of the Godhead you call vpon. Go, your are put down with your occupation, and now I wil not grace you so much as to deliuer the petition, for you.
What, dispraise our trade?
Nay, neighbour, be not angrie, for Ile stand to nothing onlie but this.
But what? beare witnesse a giues me the But, and I am not willing to shoot: Cobler, I will talke with you: nay, my bellowes, my coletrough, and my water shall enter armes with you for our trade: O neighbour, I can not beare it, nor I wil not beare it.
Heare you, neighbour, I pray conswade your self and be not wilful, & let the Cobler deliuer it, you shal see him mar all,
At your request I will commit my selfe to you, And lay my selfe open to you, lyke an Oyster.
Ile tell him what you say: Heare you naighbor, we haue constulted to let you deliuer the petition, doe it wisely for the credite of the towne.
Let me alone, for the Kings Carminger was here, He sayes the King will be here anon.
But heark, by the Mas he comes.
How now, who haue we here?
We the townes men of,Hearing your Grace would come this way, Did thinke it good for you to stay, But hear you, neighbours, bid somebody ring the bels, And we are come to you alone to deliuer our petition,
What is it, I pray thee reade.
Nothing but to haue a license to brew strong Ale thrise a week, and he that comes to Goteham, and will not spende a penie on a pot of Ale, if he be a drie, that he may fast.
Well sirs, we grant your petition.
We humblie thanke your royall Maiesty.
Come, lets away.
, be aduised, the King hath sent to thee, Nay, more, he means to come and visite thee, But why, I theres the question? Why tis for this, to see if he can fynd, A front whereon to graft a paire of hornes: But in plain tearms, he comes to Cuckold me, And for he means to doe it without suspect, He sends me word he means to visite me: The King is amorous, and my wyfe is kinde, So kind (I feare) that she wil quickly yeeld To any motionthat the King shal make: Especially if the motion be of loue: For Pliny writes, women are made lyke waxe, Apt to receiue any impression: Whose mindes are lyke the Ianamyst, That eates, yet cries, and neuer is satisfied: Well, be as it is, for Ile be sure of this, It shall be no waies preiudice to me: For I will set a skreene before the fyre, And so preuent what otherwyse would ensue: Twere good I questionedwith my father first, To heare how he affected towards the King. What ho.
, my sonne, what newes?
Why aske you? I am sure you haue heard the newes.
Not yet, I promyse you my Lord.
Why then tis thus, the King doth meane to come and visit you.
And welcome shal his Maiesty be to me, That in the wane of my decreasing yeares, Vouchsafes this honour to Earlehouse.
So then, you meane to entertaine him well?
What els my Sonne?
Nay, as you will, but heare you wyfe, what do you think in this, thatmeans to come and be your guest?
I thinke my Lord he shall be welcom then, And I hope that you will entertaine him so: That he may know howhonours him: And I will be attyred in cloth of Bis, Beset with Orient pearle, fetcht from rich Indian And all my chamber shall be richly, With Aras hanging, fetcht from Alexandria, Then will I haue rich Counterpoints and muske, Calamon, and Casia, sweet smelling Amber Greece, That he may say,is come from heauen. And left the Gods to marie.
Zwouns, they are both agreed to cuckold me, But heare you wyfe, while I am master of the Bark, I meane to keepe the helmster in my hand: My meaning is, you shall be rulde by me, In being disguised till the King be gone, And thus it shall be, for I will haue it so. The King hath neuer seene thee I am sure, Nor shall he see thee now, if I can chuse: For thou shalt be attyrde in some base weedes, And Kate the kitchin maid shall put on thine: For being richly tyred, as she shall be, She will serue the turne to keep him companie.
Why, men that heare of this will make a scorne of you.
And he that lies with this wil make a horne for me. It is ynough, it must be so.
Me thinks twere better otherwaies.
I think not so, will you be gone? Father, let me alone, Ile breake her of her will, We that are maried to yong wiues, you see, Must haue a speciall care vnto their honestie: For should we suffer them to haue their will: They are apt (you know) to fall to any ill. But here comes the King.
Earle, you must needs hold vs excused, Though boldly thus vnbid we visite you: But knowe the cause that mooued vs leaue our Court, Was to doe honour to Earle: And see his louelie Bride, faire.
My gratious Lord, as welcome shall you be, To me, my Daughter, and my sonne in Law, Aswas vnto the Roman Senators, When he had made a conquest on the Goths: That in requitall of his seruice done, Did offer him the imperiall Diademe: As they in, we in your Grace still fynd, The perfect figure of a Princelie mind.
Thankes, but I thinke I am not welcome, Because I cannot see faire:, I will not stay, nor eat with thee, Till I haue seene the Earle of Cornwels wife.
If it please your Maiestie to stay with vs, My wyfe shal wayt as handmaid on your Maiestie: And in her dutie shew her husbands loue: And in good tyme, my Lord, see where she comes:
, you must leaue your kitchin tricks, And vse no words but princelie Maiestie.
Now Jesus blesse your honourable Grace, Come I pray, sit down, you are welcome by my troth, As God saue me heres neuer a napkin, fie, fie.Come on, I pray eat some plums, they be sugar, Heres good drinke by Ladie, why do you not eate?
Nay, pray thee eat, it is ynough for me to see thee eat.
I thank you hartily: by my troth heres neuer a cushen By my troth Ile knockyou anon, go to.
My Lord, this is not, this is the kitchin maid.
Peace, I haue found their subtiltie,, I pray thee let me see thy kitchin Maid, Me thinks it is a pretie homely Wench: I promise thee,, I like her well.
My Lord, she is a homelie kitchin maid, And one whose bringing vp hath bene but rude: And far vnfit forcompanie: But if your Grace want merrie companie, I will send for Ladies wise and curteous. To be associates with your Maiestie. Or if your Grace will haue Musitians sent for, I will fetch your Grace the best in all this land.
, no, I will haue the kitchin maid, And therefore, if you loue me, send for her. For till she come I cannot be content.
Father, I wil not fetch her: zwouns, see where she comes
Succesful fortune and his hearts content, Daily attend the person of the King. Andknow that I am, daughter to, And lately made the Earle of Cornwals wyfe.
Why, is not this?
No, my good Lord, it is the kitchin maid, Whomin too much loue to me, Hath thus attyrde to dallie with the King.
By my troth (my Lord) she lies, go to, Ile course you by and by.
Away (base strumpet) get the from my sight.
Go your waies, you are a cogging knaue I warrant you.
Base, dissembler thatthou art, So to dissemble with thy Soueraigne,And afterward vnder a shewe of loue, Thou camst to sooth thy leasing to the King, Meaning by that to make me to conceiue, That thy intent was iust and honourable: But see, at last thou hast deceiued thy selfe, Andhath found out thy subtiltie, Which to requite, thinkeis thy enemie, And vowes to be reuenged for this ill. Go to thy husband beauteous, Forcan subdew affects in loue.
Thanks, gratious King, myrrour of curtesie, Whose vertuous thoughts bewray thy princely mind And makes thee famous mongst thy enemies: For what is he that heares ofname, And will not yeeld him praise as he deserues. Nor hath your Grace euer bene praised more, Or tearm'd more iust in any action, Than you shall be in conquering your desires, And yeelding pardon to Earle.
Will you be gone?
My gratious Lord, I humbly take my leaue.
How am I wronged, and yet without redresse?
Haue patience good my Lord, and call to mind How you haue liued praised for vertuous gouernment, You haue subduedlust vnto this day, And bene reputed wyse in gouernment, And will you blemish all your honours got, In being tearmed a foule Adulterer.
, forbeare for I will haue it so, It bootes thee not to counsaile me in this, For I haue sworne the death of. And he shall die, orwill not liue., it is ynough, I am resolued.
Nay, if it be so, thenshall not die, And since intreaties can not serue the turne: I will makeproofe for once what Arte will doe,
What wilt thou?
Tel me what means the King?
I wil not tell thee.
I charge thee by the eternall liuing God, That keeps the Prince of darknes bound in chaines, Andby that Sun, that thou wouldst gladly see, By heauen and earth, and euery liuing thing, Tel me that which I did demand of thee.
Then thus, the king doth mean to murther
But where is the King?
Seeking for.
But Ile preuent him, follow me inuisible.
I wil.
I haue bene this morning with a friend of mine, That would borrow a small summe of money of me, But I haue learned the best assurance a man can haue, In such a matter is a good pawn of twise the valew, Or bonds sufficient for fiue times the quantitie. He is my neere kinsman, I confesse, and a Clergie man, But fiftie shillings is money, & though I think I might trust him simply with it for a tweluemoneth, where hee craues it but for a moneth, yet simply I will not be so simple: For I will borrow his gelding to ride to the Terme, And keep away a iust fortnight: If then he pay me my money, I will deliuer him his horse, I wold be loth to lose my mony, or craue assurance of my kinsma~, But this may be done to trie me, & I meane lykewise to try him. This is plain, though trulie (brethren) somthing subtill. But here comes one would faine take my house of me.
Sir, I am a poore man, and I wil giue you thirty shillings a yere, if I may haue it you shal be sure of your money.
Trulie brother in Christ, I cannot affoord it of the price, I must let my house to liue, I ask no gains, but who comes here?
I beseech you (good maister) for Gods sake, giue one penie to the poore, lame, and blind, good maister giue something.
Fy vpon thee lazy fellow, art thou not ashamed to beg? Read the blessed saying of S. Paul, which is, thou shalt get thy liuing with the sweat of thy browes, and he that will not labour is not worthie to eat.
I, but he remembers not where Christ saith, hee that giueth a cup of cold water in my name shall be blessed.
Alas sir, you see I am old.
But thats no reason you should beg.
Alas sir, age comming on me, and my sight being gone, I hope sir, you will pardon mee though I beg, and therefore for Gods sake one peny, good master.
Why I tel thee no, for the Spirit doth not mooue me thereunto: and in good time, looke in the blessed Prouerb of Salomon, which is, good deeds do not iustify a man, therfore I count it sinne to giue thee any thing.
See how he can turne and wind the Scripture to his owne vse, but he remembers not where Christ saith, He that giueth to the poore lendeth vnto the Lord, And he shal be repaid seuen fold: but the Priest forgets that, or at least wyse he will not remember it.
Now fie vpon thee, is this the purenes of your religion? God will reward you no doubt for your hard dealing.
Care not thou for that, wel neighbor, if thou wilt haue my house, friend, and brother in Christ, it wil cost you fourtie shillings, tis wel woorth it truely, prouided this, I may not stay for my rent, I might haue a great deale more, but I am loth to exact on my brother.
And yet he wil sell all a poore man hath to his shirt, for one quarters rent.
Gods blessing on your heart sir, you made a godly exhortation on Sunday.
I brother, the Spirite did mooue me thereunto: Fie vpon vsurie, when a man wil cut his brothers throate for a litleLucre, fie vpon it, fie, we are borne one to liue by another, and for a man to let his owne as he may liue, tis allowed by the word of God, but for vsurie and oppression, fie on it, tis vngodlie, but tell me will you haue it?
I will giue you, as I haue profered you.
Trulie I cannot affoord it, I would I could, but I must goe to our exercise of prayer, & after I must goe see a Farm that I should haue.
Most gratious Prince, vouchsafe to heare me speake, In that the lawe of kindred prickes me on, And though I speake contrarie to your mind, Yet doe I build on hope you will pardon me. Were I as eloquent as, Or lykewere giuen to Oratorie. Your Grace no doubt wil think the time well spent, And I should gaine me commendations: But for my note is tuned contrary, I must intreat your Grace to pardon me, if I do iar in my deliuerie.
Why, thou hast found vs gratious still, Nor will we pull our setled loue from thee, Vntill we find thy dealings contrarie: But if thy parlie be for, That base dissembler with his soueraigne. Twere better leaue to speake in his excuse, Than by excusing him gaine our ill will: For I am minded like the Salamander stone, That fir'd with anger, wil not in hast be quencht: Though wax be soft, & apt to receiue any impression. Yet will hard mettell take no forme, except you melt the same. So meane mens minds may moue as they think good, But Kings iust doomes are irreuocable.
Tis not ynough, where lust doth moue the offence.
Why, Counsellers may not with Kings dispence.
A Counseller may speake if he see his prince offend.
And for his Counsell rue it in the end.But, leaue, you vrge vs ouer far, We pardon what is past, but speake no more
Nay pardon me, for I wil speak my mind, Your Grace may call to mind proudfall, That through his wilfull mind, lost lyfe and empire, And, that built huge Babylon, And thought to make a toure to check the cloudes, Was soone dismaid by vnknowne languages: For no one knew what any other spake, Which made him to confesse, though twere too late, Hee had made offence in tempting of the Lord. Remember,and the rest, Nor had proudlost his head, Had he not bene a foule Adulterer.
, forbeare, and let this answer thee Thou art too presumptuous in reproouing me, For I haue sworne as trulie as I liue, That I will neuer pardon.
Did you but see the man, I am assurde, You would not choose but pardon.
Why, you haue seene as wel as I, Thathath dissembled with the King, My gratious Lord, first cut that Traitor downe. And then will others feare the lyke amysse.
I tell thee, were the Earle in place, Thou wouldst eat these words vttred in his disgrace., & in good time see where he comes.
But tel me, is this?
It is my gratious Lord, & this isThat layes his breast wide opento your Grace, If so it please your Grace to pardon him.
Yes,, I am well content to pardon him,stand vp, and rise vp, Fornow giues pardon to you both.
away, My gratious Lord,wil not forgetThis vnknowne fauour showne Earle, For which account my Nephew and my self, Do yeeld both lyfes and goods at your dispose.
Thanksfor thy honorable loue, And thou deseru'st to be a Counsellour, For he deserues not other to commaund, That hath no power to maister his desire, Forbeing the eldest sonne of, Did dote so far vpon an Almaine maid, And was so rauisht with her pleasing sight, That full seuen yeares he kept her vnder earth, Euen in the lyfe time of faire: Which made the Cornish men to rise in Armes, And neuer left tillwas slaine: And now though late, at last I call to minde, What wretched ends fell to Adulterers.
And if your Grace caltale to mind, When that Egyptiancraued his wife, You will no doubt forgiue my Nephewes guilt, Who by the mery iest he shewed your Grace, Did saue your Honour and her chastitie.
We take it so, and for amends, giue me thy hande and we are friends, And loue thy wyfe and liue together long, Forhath forgot all former wrong.
Thanks gratious King, and here vpon my knee, I rest to be disposed as you please:
Ynough, but who comes here.
Why, I think I haue taken in hand an endles taske, To smell a Knaue, tis more than a Dog can doe: I haue disguised my self of purpose to finde A couple of Knaues, which are yet behind, The next Knaue is a Priest, calde John the precise, That with counterfeit holinesse blinds the peoples eyes,This is one of them that wil say it is a shame, For men to swear and blaspheme Gods holie name: Yet if a make a good Sermon but once in a yeare, A will be fourtie tymes in a Tauerne making good cheere, Yet in the Church he will read with such sobrietie, That you would thinke him verie precise, and of great honesty.
What, hast thou dispatcht and found these priuie knaues?
I shal doe anon, I haue them in sent, but I wil be gone.
Good Lord, I praise God I am come from our mornings exercise, Where I haue profited my selfe, and eisied my brethren, In shewing the way to saluation by my doctrine: And now I am going to the Court to prefer my petition. I would giue a hundred pound it were graunted: Tis a thing of nothing, but here comes one of the Court,
God saue you, brother in Christ, are you towards the King.
I mary am I, what then, why doest thou aske?
Nothing sir, but I would desire you to stand my friend To get me the Kings hand and seale to this letter: I would not vse it (sir) to hinder any man for a thousand pound: For indeed I am a Cleargie man by my profession: Tis nothing sir, but as you see, to haue the Kings seale, Tocarie Tin, Lead, Wool and broad Clothes beyond seas, For you know (sir) euery man wil mak the most he can of his own And for my part, I vse it but for a present necessitie, If you will vndertake to doe it, Ile giue you a hundred pound.
I thanke you sir, but I am affraide the King will hardlie grant it: why, tis an vndoing to the common wealth, But trulie I will mooue the King to hang you Priest yfaith. May it please you Grace to grant me my petition, For I offer it your Grace in pure deuotion.
O monstrous:, didst thou euer heare the like, Now fie vpon thee base villaine, lay hands on him.
On me? nay on him: Priest, I gaue your petition to the King,And I wil speake to him you may be but hanged, For if you should liue till the King granted your petition, The verie Rauens would picke out thine eies liuing: And therefore twere better you were hanged to saue the birds a labour.
Now, hast thou done, is here all?
O no, my Lord, for there are so many behind, That I am affraide my worke will neuer haue an end: But I see by the Priests lookes, he lackes company, Stay a while, my Lord, Ile fetch another presently.
Fie, Gracelesse man, hast thou no feare of God, To withold thee from these lawlesse motions, Why, thou shouldst be as Messenger of God, And hate deceit and wicked auarice: But thou art one of those whome God doth hate, And thy vilde deedes will witnesse gainst thy soule: And make the most abominable in his sight, That made thee (wretch) but to a better end, Then thus to wrong his sacred Deitie. Now fie vpon thee monster of a man, That for to gaine thy selfe a priuate gaine, Wouldst seeke the vndooing of a common wealth. And though thou bid ten thousand torments here They cannot quit thee where thou shalt appeare.
A Prize, though it be long, I haue found him at last, But I could not bring him with me, And therefore I pind a paper on his shoulder, Meaning thereby to marke him for the gallous: But husht, here he comes.
What? I cannot think thatwil be false to me
Why no, for he is false to himself, look in his pocket & see, This is but a false writ that he hath vsed, Vnknowne to your Maiestie, and leuied great summes of money, And bribed vpon your poore Commons extreamlie, How say you my Lord, is this true or no?
, thou sayest true, why, impious wretch,Ingratefull wretch that thou art to iniure him that alwaies held thee deere, Beleeue me, I durst wel haue sworn, Thathad not hatcht so base a thought,
I, but your Grace sees you are deceiued. But will your Grace grant me one boone?
Whats that?
That I may haue the punishing of them, Whom I haue so laboured to fynde.
With all my hart, vse them as thou wilt.
I thank your Grace: go fetch the other two: Now to you Cutbert Cutpurse the, Thy iudgment is to stand at the Market crosse, And haue thy cursed tongue pind to thy breast, And there to standfor men to woonder at: Til Owles and night-Rauens picke out thy cursed eies.
Good Honestie be more mercifull.
You know my mind: Othat wold haue more, And you shall haue iudgement I meane, which is, To be caried into a corne field, and therhaue your legs and hands cut off, because you loued corn so wel, and there rest til the crowes pick out thine eies. But now to you that wil do nothing except the spirit mooue you thereunto, You shall for abusing the blessed word of God, And mocking the diuine order of Ministery, Whereby you haue led the ignorant into errours, You (I say) as you were shamlesse in your shamefull dealing, Shal to your shame, & the vtter shame of al bad minded men, That liue as thou hast done, Stand in Finsburie fields, neere London, And there (as a dissembling Hypocrit) be shot to death.
Good, be more fauourable than so.
Trulie no, the spirit doth not mooue me therunto, But who is next, what, a Courtier, and a Cosoner to, I haue a iudgment yet in store for thee, And for because I will vse thee fauourablie, Yfaith thy iudgment is to be but hanged,But where? euen at Tyborne in a good two-peny halter, And though you could neuer abide the seas, Yet now against your wil, you must bear your saile, namely your sheet, And in a cart be towde vp Holburne hill, Would all men liuing lyke these in this land, Might be iudged so athand.
Wellcome follow vs to Court, Wherethou shalt be rewarded for thy paine.
I thank your Grace: you that wil damne your selues 
for lucres sake
And make no conscience to deceiue the poore:
You that be enemies of the common wealth:
To send corne ouer to inrich the enemie:
And you that doe abuse the word of God,
And send ouer woolle and Tin, broad cloath and lead,
And you that counterfeyt Kings priuie seales,
And thereby rob the willing minded Communaltie,
I warne you all that vse such subtill villanie,
Beware least you lyke these be found by Honestie,
Take heed I say, for if I catch you once,
Your bodies shall be meat for Crowes,
And the Deuill shall haue your bones,
And thus though long at last we make an end,
Desiring you to pardon whats amisse,
And way the worke, though it be grosly pend,
Laugh at the faults, and weigh it as it is,
And Honestie wil pray vpon his knee,
God cut then off that wrong the Prince or Communaltie.
And may her dayes of blesse neuer haue end,
Vpon whose lyfe so many lyues depend.<|endoftext|>Here commeth.
I see, that these Philosophers are here attending for vs.
They were not Philosophers, if they knewe not their dueties.
But I much meruaileshoulde bee so dogged.
I do not think but his excuse wilbe better thenmessage.
I wil go see him, because I long to see him that would commaundeto come, to whom all the world is like to come.& the reste sithence my comming fromto, from a place of conqueste to a pallace of quiet, I haue resolued with my self in my court to haue as many Philosophers as I had in my camp soldiers. My court shalbe a schoole, wherein I wil haue vsed as great doctrine in peace, as I did in warre discipline.
We are al here ready to be commanded, & glad we are that we are commanded, for that nothing better becommeth kinges then literature, which maketh them come as neere to the Gods in wisdome, as they doe in dignitie.
It is so, but yet there is among you, yea & of your bringing vp, that sought to destroy,,, whose treasons againste his prince shall not bee borne out with the reasons of his Phylosophy.
If euer mischiefe entred into the hearte of, letsuffer for it, but thateuer imagined any such thing of,doth denie.
Well, kindred may blind thee, and affection mee, but in kinges causes I will not stande to schollers arguments. This meeting shalbe for a co~mandement, that you all frequente my courte, instructe the young with rules, confirme the olde with reasons: lette your liues be answerable to your learninges, leaste my proceedinges be contrary to my promises.
You sayde you woulde aske euerye one of them a question, which yester night none of vs could aunswere.
I will., of all beastes, which is the subtillest?
That which man hetherto neuer knew.
, how should a man bee thought a God?
In doing a thing vnpossible for a man.
, which was first, the day or the night?
The day by a day.
In deede straunge questions must haue straung answers., what say you, is life or death the stronger?
Life, that suffereth so many troubles.
, how long should a man liue?
Till he think it better to die then liue.
, whether doth the sea or the earth bring forth most creatures?
The earth, for the sea is but a parte of the earth.
, me thinkes they haue answered all well, and in such questions I meane often to trye them.
It is better to haue in your court a wise manne, then in your ground a golden mine. Therefore would I leaue war, to studie wisdome, were I.
So would I, were I. But come let vs go and giue release, as I promised to ourthralles.
Thou art fortunate, thatis thy scholler.
And all you happy that he is your souereigne.
I could like the man well, if he could be conte~ted to be but a man.
He seeketh to draw neere to the Gods in knowledge, not to be a God.
Let vs questio~ a litle with, why he went not with vs to., thou didst forget thy duetie, that thou wentst not with vs to the king.
And you your profession, that you went to the king.
Thou takest as great pride to be peeuish, as others do glory to be vertuous.
And thou as great honor being a Philosopher to be thought courtlike, as others shame that be courtiers, to be accounted Philosophers.
These austere maners set aside, it is wel known that thou didst counterfeit money.
And thou thy manners, in that thou didst not counterfeit money.
Thou hast reason to contemn the court, being both in bodye and minde too crooked for a courtier.
As good bee crooked, and endeuour to make my selfe straight from the court, as to bee straighte, and learne to be crooked at the court.
Thou thinkest it a grace to be opposite against.
And thou to be iumpe with.
Let vs goe: for in co~temning him, we shal better please him, then in wondring at him.
, what doest thou thinke of?
To befurious, let vs goe.
Beholdwhere thy maister is, seeking either for bones for his dinner, or pinnes for his sleeues. I will goe salute him.
Doe so, but mum not a word that you sawe.
Then staye thou behinde, and I will goe with.
All hayleto your proper person.
All hate to thy peeuish conditions.
O Dogge.
What dost thou seeke for here?
For a man and a beast.
That is easie without thy light to be founde, be not all these men?
Called men.
What beast is it thou lookest for?
The beast my man.
He is a beast in deede that wil serue thee.
So is he that begat thee.
What wouldest thou do, if thou shuldest finde?
Giue him leaue to doe as hee hath done beefore.
Whats that?
To runne away.
Why, hast thou no neede of?
It were a shame forto haue neede of, and forto haue no neede of.
But put the case he were gone, wouldst thou entertaine any of vs two?
Vppon condition.
What?
That you should tell mee wherefore anye of you both were good.
Why, I am a scholler, and well seene in Philosophy.
And I a prentice, and well seene in paynting.
Well then, be thou a painter to amende thine ill face, and thoua Philosopher to correct thine euil manners. But who is that?
I care not whoe I were so I were not.
You are taken tardie.
Let vs slip aside, to see the salutation betweeneand his maister.
, thou knowest the last daye I threw away my dish, to drink in my hand, because it was superfluous, now I am determined to put away my man, and serue my selfe:.
Maister, you know a while agoe I ran away, so doe I meane to doe againe,.
I know I haue no money, neither will I haue euer a man: for I was resolued long sithe~ce to put away both my slaues, money and.
So was I determined to shake off both my dogges, hunger and
O sweete concent betweene a crowde and a Iewes harpe.
Come, let vs reconcile them
It shal not neede: for this is their vse, now do they dine one vpon an other.
How nowe, art thou gone from thy mayster.
No, I didde but nowe binde my selfe to him.
Why, you were at mortall iars.
In faith no, we brake a bitter iest one vppon another.
Why, thou art as dogged as he.
My father knew them both litle whelpes.
Well, I wil hie me after my maister.
Why, is it supper time with?
I, with him at al times when he hath meate.
Why then euerye man to his home, and let vs steale out againe anon.
Where shall we meete.
Why, at.
O,, thou blessest me.
Stand aside sir boy, till you bee called., how doe yee like the sweete face of?
I cannot but commend the stout courage of.
Without doubthad som great man to her father.
You knowhadto her brother.
stil in thy mouth, art thou not in loue?
Not I.
Not withyou meane, wherein you resemble the Lapwing, who crieth most where her neast is not. And so you lead me from espying your loue with, you cry.
Coulde I aswell subdue kingdomes, as I can my thoughtes, or were I as farre from ambition, as I am from loue, all the world would account me as valiaunt in armes as I know my self moderate in affection.
Is loue a vice?
It is no vertue.
Well, nowe shalt thou see what small difference I make betweeneand. And sith thou hast beene alwaies partaker of my triumphes, thou shalt be partaker of my tormentes. I loue, I loue I loue, a thing farre vnfit for a Macedonian, for a king, for. Whye hangest thou downe thy head? blushing to hear that whichI am not ashamed to tell.
Might my wordes craue pardon and my counsell credit, I woulde both discharge the duetie of a subiect, for so I am, and the office of a friend, for so I wil.
Speake, for whatsoeuer is spoken,speaketh to.
I cannot tell, whether the reporte be more shamefull to be heard, or the cause sorowfull to be beleeued? What, is the sonne of, king of Macedon become the subiect of, the captiue of? Is that minde, whose greatnes the world coulde not containe, drawn within the compasse of an idle alluring eie? Wil you handle the spindle with, when you shuld shake the speare with? Is the warlike sound of drumme and trumpe turned to the softe noyse of lire and lute, the neighing of barbed steedes, whose loudnes filled the ayre with terrour, and whose breathes dimmed the sunne with smoake, conuerted to delicate tunes and amorous glaunces? O, that soft and yeelding minde should not bee in him, whose hard and vnconquered heart hath made so many yeelde. But you loue, ah griefe, but whom?, ah shame, a maide forsooth vnknowne, vnnoble, and who can tell whether immodest? whose eies are framed by arte to inamour, and whose heart was made by nature to enchaunt. I, but she is bewtiful, yea, but not therefore chaste: I, but she is comly in al partes of the body: yea, but she may be crooked in some parte of the mind: I, but she is wise, yea, but she is a woman: Bewtie is like the blackberry, which seemeth red, when it is not ripe, resembling pretious stones that are polished with honney, which the smother they look, the sooner they breake. It is thought wonderful among the sea men, thatof all fishes the swifteste is found in the belly of theof all the slowest; And shal it not seeme monstrous to wise men, that the hearte of the greatest conquerour of the worlde, should be foundin the handes of the weakest creature of nature? of a woman? of a captiue?haue faire skinnes, but fowle liuers, Sepulchers fresh colours, but rotten bones, women faire faces, but false heartes. Rememberthou haste a campe to gouerne, not a chamber, fall not from the armour ofto the armes of, fro~ the fiery assaults of warre, to the maidenly skirmishes of loue from displaying the Eagle in thine ensigne, to sette downe the sparrow. I sighthat where fortune could not counquer, folly should ouercome. But behold al the perfection that may be in, a haire curling by nature, not arte: sweete alluring eies, a faire face made in despite of, and a stately porte in disdaine of, a witte apt to conceaue, and quick to aunswere, a skin as softe as silke, and as smooth as iet, a long white hand, a fine little foote, to conclude, all partes aunswerable to the best part, what of this? Though she haue heauenlye gifts, vertue and bewtie, is she not of earthly mettal flesh and bloud? Youthat would be a God, shewe your self in this worse then a man, so soone to bee both ouerseene and ouertaken in a woman, whose false teares know their true times, whose smooth wordes wounde deeper then sharpe swordes. There is no surfeit so dangerous, as that of honeye, nor any poyson so deadly, as that of loue, in the one phisicke cannot preuaile, nor in the other counsel.
My case were light, and not worthy to be called loue, if reason were a remedie, or sente~ses could salue, that sense cannot conceaue. Litle do you know, and therefore sleightly doe you regard the dead embers in a priuate perso~, or liue coles in a great prince, whose passions and thoughts do as farre exceede others in extremitie, as their callinges doe in Maiestie. An Eclipse in the Sunne is more then the fallinge of a starre, none can conceiue the tormentes of a king, vnlesse hee be a king, whose desires are not inferiour to theirdignities. And then iudgeif the agonies of loue be dangerous in a subiect, whether they be not more then deadly vnto, whose deep and not to be conceiuedsighes, cleaue the heart in shiuers, whose wounded thoughtes can neither be expressed nor endured. Cease thenwith argumentes to seeke to refel that, which with their deitie the Gods cannot resist, and let this suffice to aunswere thee, that it is a king that loueth and, whose affections are not to be measured by reason, being immortall, nor I feare me to bee borne being intollerable.
I must needes yeeld, when neither reason nor counsel can be heard.
Yeelde, fordoth loue, & therefore must obtaine.
Suppose she loues not you, affection co~meth not by appointmente or birth, and then as good hated as enforced.
I am a king, and wil commaund.
You may, to yeelde to luste by force, but to consent to loue by feare you cannot.
Why, what is that, whichmaye not conquer as he list?
Why, that which you say the Gods cannot resiste, Loue.
I am a conquerour, shee a captiue, I as fortunate, as she faire: my greatnes may answere her wants, and the giftes of my minde, the modestie of hers: Is it not likely then that shee should loue? Is it not reasonable?
You say that in loue there is no reason, and therefore there can be no likelyhood.
No more: in this case I wil vse mine owne counsell, and in all other thine aduice, thou mayst be a good soldier, but neuer good louer. Call my page. Sirha, goe presentlye to, and will him to come tome without either delay or excuse.
I goe.
In the meane season to recreate my spirits, being so neere, we will goe see. And see where his tub is..
Who calleth?
: how happened it that you woulde not come out of your tub to my pallace?
Because it was as far from my tub to your pallace, as from your pallace to my tub.
Why then doest thou ow no reuere~ce to kings?
No.
Why so?
Because they be no Gods.
They be Gods of the earth.
Yea, Gods of earth.
is not of thy mind.
I am glad of it.
Why?
Because I would haue none ofminde, but
Ifhaue any thing that may pleasure, let me know, and take it.
Then take not from me, that you cannot giue me, the light of the world.
What dost thou want?
Nothing that you haue.
I haue the world at commaund.
And I in contempt.
Thou shalt liue no longer then I will.
But I shall die whether you wil or no.
How should one learne to be content?
Vnlearne to couet.
, were I not, I would wishe to be.
He is dogged, but discrete, I cannot tell howsharpe with a kinde of sweetenes, full of wit, yet too to wayward.
, when I come this way again, I wil both see thee, and confer with thee.
Doe.
But here commeth, how now, isface yet finished?
Not yet: Bewtie is not so soone shadowed, whose perfection commeth not within the compasse either of cunning or of colour.
Wel let it rest vnperfect, & come you with mee, where I will shewe you that finished by nature, that you haue beene trifling about by arte.
Lady, I doubt whether there bee any colour so fresh, that may shadow a countenance so faire.
Sir, I had thought you had beene commaunded to paint with your hand, not to glose with your tongue, but as I haue heard, it is the hardest thing in painting to set down a hard fauour, which maketh you to dispair of my face, and then shal you haue as great thanks to spare your labour, as to discredit your arte.
Mistresse, you neither differ from your selfe nor your sex: for knowing your own perfectio~, you seeme to dispraise that which men moste commend, drawing the~ by that meane into an admiration, where feedinge themselues they fal into an extasie, your modestie being the cause of the one, and of the other, your affections.
I am too young to vnderstande your speache, thogh old enough to withsta~d your deuise: you haue bin so long vsed to colours, you can do nothing but colour.
Indeed the colours I see, I feare, wil altar the colour I haue: but come Madam, wil you draw neere: forwill be here anon., stay you heere at the window, if anye enquire for me, aunswere,.
It is alwaies my maisters fashion, when any fair gentlewoman is to be drawne within, to make mee to stay without. But if he shuld paintlike a Bul, like a Swanne, like an Eagle, then mustwith one hand grinde colours, and with the other hold the candle. But let him alone, the better he shadowes her face, the more will he burne his own heart. And now if a manne coulde meete with, who I dare say, lookes as leane, as ifdropped out of his nose.
And heere come, whoe hath as muche meate in his maw, as thou hast honestie in thy head.
Then I hope thou art very hungry.
They that know thee, know that.
But doest thou not remember that wee haue certeine licour to conferre withal.
I, but I haue busines, I must go cry a thing.
Why, what hast thou lost?
That which I neuer had, my dinner?
Foule lubber wilt thou crie for thy dinner?
I meane, I must cry, not as one wold saye cry, but cry, that is, make a noyse.
Why foole, that is all one, for if thou cry, thou must needes make a noise.
Boy, thou art deceiued Cry hath diuerse significations, and may bee alluded to manye thinges, knaue but one, and can be applyed but to thee.
Profound.
Weeare madde fellowes, didste thounot finde I did quip thee?
No verely, why, whats a quip?
We great girders call it a short saying of a sharp witte, with a bitter sense in a sweete word.
How canst thou thus diuine, deuide, define, dispute, and all on the sodaine?
Wit wil haue his swing, I am bewitcht, inspirde, inflamed, infected.
Well, then will not I tempt thy gybing spirite.
Do not, for thy dull head will bee but a grindstone for my quick wit, which if thou whet with ouertwhartes,. I haue drawne bloud at ones braines with a bitter bob.
Let me crosse my self: for I die, if I crosse thee.
Let me do my busines, I my self am afraid, least my wit should waxe warm, and then must it needes consume some hard head with fine & prety iests. I am sometimes in such a vaine, that for want of some dull pate to worke on, I begin to gird my selfe.
The Gods shield mee from such a fine fellowe, whose words melt wits like waxe.
Well then, let vs to the matter. In fayth my maister meaneth to morow to flye.
It is a iest.
Is it a iest to flye? shouldest thou flye so soone, thou shouldest repent it in earnest.
Well, I will be the cryer.
O ys, o ys, o ys, All manner of men, women, or children, that wil come to morow into the market place, betweene the houres of nine and ten, shall seethe Cynick fly.
I do not think he wil flye.
Tush, say fly.
Fly.
Now let vs goe: for I wil not see him againe, till midnight, I haue a back way into his tub.
Which way callest thou the backwaye, when euery way is open.
I meane to come in at his back.
Well, let vs goe away, that we may returne speedely.
I shall neuer drawe your eies well, because they blind mine.
Why the~, paint me without eies, for I am blind?
Were you euer shadowed before of any?
No. And would you could so nowe shadow me, that I might not be perceiued of any.
It were pittie, but that so absolute a face should furnishtemple amongst these pictures.
What are these pictures?
This is, whomdeceiued in likenes of a swan.
A faire woman, but a foule deceit.
This is, vnto who~came in shape ofher husband, and begate.
A famous sonne, but an infamous fact.
He might do it, because he was a God.
Nay, therefore it was euil done, because he was a God.
This is, into whose prisondrisled a golden shewre, and obtained his desire.
What gold can make one yeelde to desire?
This is, whomrauished, this.
Were al the Gods like this?
There were many Gods in this like.
I thinke in those daies loue was well ratifiedamong men on earth, when lust was so full autorised by the Gods in heauen.
Nay, you may imagine there were wome~ passing amiable, whe~ ther were Gods exceding amorous.
Were women neuer so faire, men would be false.
Were woman neuer so false, men wold be fond.
What counterfeit is this?
This is, the Goddesse of loue.
What, be there also louing Goddesses?
This is she that hath power to commaunde the very affections of the heart.
How is she hired, by praier, by sacrifice, or bribs?
By praier, sacrifice and bribes.
What praier?
Vowes irreuocable.
What sacrifice?
Hearts euer sighing, neuer dissembling.
What bribes?
Roses and kisses? but were you neuer in loue?
No, nor loue in me.
Then haue you iniuried many.
How so?
Because you haue beene loued of many.
Flattered perchance of some.
It is not possible that a face so faire, and a wit so sharp, both without comparison, shulde not bee apte to loue.
If you begin to tip your tong with cunninge, I pray dip your pensil in colours, and fall to that you must doe, not that you would doe.
I cannot tell howe it co~meth to passe, that innow a daies there groweth an vnpacie~t kinde of life, in the morning he is mela~cholye, at noonesolomne, at all times either more sower or seuere, then he was accustomed.
In kinges causes I rather loue to doubte then coniecture, and thinke it better to be ignoraunt then inquisitiue: they haue long eares and stretched armes, in whose heades suspition is a proofe, and to bee accused is to be condemned.
Yet betweene vs there canne be no daunger to finde out the cause: for that there is no malice to withstand it. It may be an vnquenchable thirste of conquering maketh him vnquiet: it is not vnlikely his long ease hath altred his humour: that hee shoulde be in loue, it is not impossible.
In loue, no, no, it is as farre from his thought, as treason in ours: hee, whose euer waking eye, whose neuer tired heart, whose body pacient of labour, whose mind vnsatiable of victorie hath alwaies bin noted, cannot so soone be melted into the weake conceites of loue:told him there were many worlds, and that he hath not conquered one that gapeth for all, galleth. But here he commeth.
, and, I would haue you both redy to goe into Persia about an ambassage no lesse profitable to me, then to your selues honourable.
We are ready at all commaundes, wishing nothing els, but continually to be commaunded.
Well, then withdraw your selues, till I haue further considered of this matter.
Now we will see howgoeth forward: I doubt me that nature hath ouercom arte, and her countena~ce his cunning.
You loue, and therefore think any thing.
But not so farre in loue with, as with, if occasion serue either of conflicte or of conquest.
Occasion cannot want, if wil doe not. Behold all Persia swelling in the pride of their owne power, the Scithians carelesse what courage or fortune canne doe: the Egyptians dreaminge in the southsayinges of theyr Augures, and gaping ouer the smoak of their beastes intralles. All theseare to bee subdued, if that world be not slipped out of your head, which you haue sworne to conquer with that hand.
I confesse the labours fit for, and yet recreation necessary among so manye assaultes, bloudie woundes, intollerable troubles: giue mee leaue a litle, if not to sitte, yet to breath. And doubt not butcan when he wil throw affections as farre from him, as he can cowardise. But beholdtalking with one at his tub.
One pennie, I am a Cynick.
He made thee a begger, that first gaue thee any thing.
Why, if thou wilte giue nothinge, no bodye wil giue thee.
I want nothing, till the springs dry, & the earth perish.
I gather for the Gods.
And I care not for those gods, which want money.
Thou art a right Cynicke, that wyll gyue nothing.
Thou art not, that wil beg any thing.
, kinge, giue a poore Cynick a groat.
It is not for a king to giue a groat.
Then giue me a talent.
It is not for a begger to aske a talent. Awaye.?
Here.
Now Gentlewomanne, doth not your bewtieput the painter to his trump?
Yes my lord, seeing so disordered a countena~ce, he feareth he shall shadow a deformed counterfeit.
Would he could colour the life with the feature. And me thinketh, were you as cunning as report faith you are, you may paint flowers aswell with sweete smels, as fresh colours, obseruing in your mixture suche things as should draw neere to their fauours.
Your maiestie must know, it is no lesse harde to paint fauours then vertues, colours can neither speake nor think.
Where do you first begin, when you draw anye picture?
The proportion of the face in iust compasse, as I can.
I would begin with the eie, as a light to all the rest.
If you wil paint, as you are a king, your Maiesty, maye beginne wher you please, but as you wold be a painter, you must begin with the face.
would in one houre colour foure faces.
I meruaile in half an houre he did not foure.
Why, is it so easie?
No, but he doth it so homely.
When wil you finish?
Neuer finishe: for alwaies in absolute bewtie there is somwhat aboue arte.
Why shoulde not I by labour bee as cunning as?
God shield you should haue cause to be so cunning as.
Me thinketh four colours are sufficie~t to shadow any countenance, & so it was in the time of.
Then had men fewer fancies, & wome~ not so many fauors. For now, if the haire of her eie browes be black,yet must the heare of her head be yellowe: the attire of her head must be different from the habite of her body, els would the picture seeme like the blason of auncient Armorie, not like the sweete delight of new found amiablenes. For as in garden knottes diuersitie of odours make a more sweete sauour, or as in musicke diuers stringes cause a more delicate consent, so in painting, the more colours, the better counterfeit, obseruing blacke for a ground, and the rest for grace.
Lend me thy pensil, I wil paint, and thou shalt iudge.
Here.
The coale breakes.
You leane too hard.
Now it blackes not.
You leane too soft.
This is awry.
Your eie goeth not with yourhand.
Now it is worse.
Your hand goeth not with your minde.
Nay, if all be too hard or soft, so many rules and regardes, that ones hand ones eie, ones mind muste all draw together, I had rather be setting of a battell, then blotting of a bourd. But how haue I done here?
Like a king.
I think so: but nothing more vnlike a Paynter. Wel,is finished as I wish, dismisse her, & bring presently her counterfeit after me.
I wil.
Now, doth not this matter cotton as I would,looketh pleasantly, liberty wil encrease her bewtie, and my loue shal aduaunce her honour.
I wil not contrary your maiestie, for time must weare out that loue hath wroughte, and reason weane what appetite noursed.
How stately she passeth bye, yet howe soberlie, asweete consent in her countenance with a chast disdain, desire mingled with coynesse, and I cannot tell howe to tearme it, a curst yeelding modestie.
Let her passe.
So shee shall for the fairest on the earth.
I shalbe hanged for tarying so long.
I pray God my maister bee not flowne before I come.
Away, my maister doth come.
Where haue you bin all this while?
No where but heere.
Who was here sithence my comming?
No body.
Vngratious wag, I perceiue you haue beene a loytering, wasno body?
He was a king, I meant no meane body.
I wyll cogell your bodye for it, and then wyll I saye it was no bodye, because it was no honest body. Away in.
This is the place, the day, the time, thathath appointed to flye.
I wil not loose the flight of so fair a foule asis, though my maister cogel my no bodye, as he threatned.
What, will the beaste wag his winges to day?
We shal heare: for here commeth:will it be?
Be, he were best be as cunning as a Bee, or else shortly he will not be at all.
How is he furnished to flye, hath he feathers?
Thou art an asse, Capons, Geese and Owles haue feathers. He hath foundold waxen wings, and hath beene peecing them this moneth, he is so broad in the shoulders. O you shal see him cut the aire euen like a Tortoys.
Methinks so wise a man should not be so mad, his body must needes be too heauy.
Why, he hath eate~ nothing this seuennight but corke and feathers.
Tutch him.
He is so light that he can scarse keepe him from flying at midnight.
See they beginne to flocke, and behold my maister bustels himself to flye.
Yee wicked and bewitched Athenians, whose bodies make the earth to groane, and whose breathes infect the aire with stench. Come ye to seeflye?commeth to see you sinke: yee call me dog, so I am, for I long to gnawe the boanes in your skins. Yee tearme me an hater of menne: no, I am a hater of your ma~ers. Your liues dissolute, not fearing death, wil proue your deaths desperate, not hoping for life. What do you els in Athens but sleepe in the daye, and surfeite in the night: backGods in the morning with pride, in the euening bellyGods with gluttony. You flatter kings, & call them Gods, speak trueth of your selues, and co~fesse you are deuils. From the Bee you haue take~ not the honey, but the wax to make your religion, framing it to the time, not to the trueth. Your filthy lust you colour vnder a courtly colour of loue, iniuries abroad vnder the title of pollicies at home, & secrete malice creepeth vnder the name of publike iustice. You haue causedto dry vp springs and plant vines, to sow roket and weede endiffe, to sheare sheepe, and shrine foxes. All conscience is sealed at Athens. Swearing commeth of a hot mettle: lying of a quick wit: flattery of a flowing tong, vndecent talk of a mery disposition. Al things are lawful at Athe~s. Either you think there are no Gods, or I must think yee are no men. You build as though you shoulde liue for euer, and surfeit as though you should die to morow.None teacheth true Phylosophy but, beecause he was the kinges schoolemaister. O times, O menne, O corruption in manners. Remember that greene grasse must turne to dry hay. When you sleep, you are not sure to wake, and when you rise not certeine to lye downe. Looke you neuer so hye, your heads must lye leuel with your feet. Thus haue I flown ouer your disordered liues, and if you will not amende your manners, I will studie to flye further from you, that I may be neerer to honestie.
Thou rauest, for thy life is different fro~ thy woordes. Did not, I see thee come out of a brothel house? was it not a shame?
It was no shame to goe out, but a shame to goe in.
It were a good deede, to beate thy maister.
You were as good eate my maister.
Hast thou made vs all fooles, and wilt thou not flye?
I tell thee, vnlesse thou be honest, I wil fly.
Dog, dog, take a boane.
Thy father neede fear no dogs, but dogs thy father.
We wil tel, that thou reproouest him behind his back.
And I wil tell him, that you flatter him beefore his face.
We wil cause all the boies in the streete to hisse at thee.
In deede I think the Athenians haue their childre~ redy for any vice, because they be Athenia~s.
Why maister, meane you not to flye?
No, not without wings.
Euery body wil account you a lyar.
No, I warrant you: for I will alwayes say the Athenians are mischieuous.
I care not, it was sport ynogh for me to see these old huddles hit home.
Nor I.
Come, let vs goe, and hereafter when I meane to raile vpon any body openly, it shall be giuen out, I will flye.
Gentlewoman, the misfortune I had with your picture, will put you to some paines, to sitte againe to be painted
It is small paines for me to sit still, but infinit for you to draw still.
No Madame, to paintewas a pleasure, but to shadowe the sweet face ofit is a heauen.
If your tongue were made of the same flesh that your heart is, your wordes woulde be as your thoughts are: but such a common thing it is amongst you to commend, that oftentimes for fashion sake you call the~ bewtifull, whom you know blacke.
What might men doe to be beleeued?
Whet their tongues on their hearts.
So they doe, and speake as they think.
I would they did.
I would they did not.
Why, would you haue them dissemble?
Not in loue, but theyr loue. But will you giue me leaue to ask you a question without offe~ce?
So that you will aunswere me an other without excuse.
Whom do you loue best in the world?
He that made me last in the world.
That was a God.
I had thought it had beene a man: but whome do you honour most?
The thing that is likest you.
My picture?
I dare not venture vpon your person. But come, let vs go in: forwill thinke it longe till we returne.
We heare nothing of our Embassage, a colourbelike to bleare our eies, or ticle our eares, or inflame our heartes. But what dothin the meane season, but vse forfor his harde couch, downe beddes, for his handfull of water, his standinge Cup of wine?
, I mislike this new delicacie and pleasing peace: for what els do we see now then a kind of softnes in euery mans minde, Bees to make their hiues in soldiers helmets, our steedes furnished with foote clothes of golde, insteede of saddles of steele: More time to bee required to scowre the rust of our weapons, the~ there was woont to be in subdewing the countries of our enemies. Sithencefell from his harde armour to his softe robes, beholde the face of his court, youthes that were woont to carry deuises of victory in their shieldes, engraue now posies of loue in their ringes: they that were accustomed on trotting horses to charge the enemie with a launce, now in easie coches ride vp & downe to court Ladies: in steede of sworde and target to hazard their liues, vse penne and paper to paint their loues. Yea, such a feare and faintnes is growne in courte, that they wish rather to heare the blowing of a horne to hunt, the~ the sound of a trumpet to fight? O Phillip, wert thou aliue to see this alteration, thy men turned to women, thy soldiers to louers, gloues worne in veluet, caps in steede of plumes in grauen helmets, thou wouldest either dye among them for sorow, or confound them for anger.
Cease, least in speaking what becommeth thee not, thou feele what liketh thee not: trueth is neuer without a scratcht face, whose tongue although it cannot be cut out, yet must it be tied vp.
It greeueth me not a litle for, whoe thristeth for honour, not ease, but such is his fortune & neerenesse in friendship to, that he must lay a pillowe vnder his head, when he would put a targette in his hand.But let vs draw in, to see how well it beecomes them to tread the measures in a daunce, that were wont to set the order for a march.
I haue nowalmost made an end.
You told me, you would neuer end.
Neuer end my loue: for it shalbe eternal.
That is, neither to haue beginning nor ending.
You are disposed to mistake, I hope you do not mistrust.
What will you saye, ifperceiue your loue?
I will say, it is no treason to loue.
But how if he will not suffer thee to see my person?
Then will I gase continually on thy picture.
That will not feede thy heart.
Yet shall it fill mine eie: beesides the sweete thoughtes, the sure hopes, thy protested faith, will cause me to embrace thy shadow continuallye in mine armes, of the which by stronge imagination I will make a substaunce.
Wel, I must be gon: but this assure your self, that I had rather be in thy shop grinding colours, then incourt, following higher fortunes.
Now, gather thy wittes together:is no lesse wise then faire, thy selfe must be no lesse cunning then faithfull. It is no small matter to be riuall with.
, you must come away quicklye with the picture, the king thinketh that nowe you haue painted it, you play with it.
If I would playe with pictures, I haue enough at home.
None perhaps you like so well.
It may be I haue painted none so well.
I haue knowne many fairer faces.
And I many better boies.
I haue brought my sons, to bee taught of thee.
What can thy sonnes doe?
You shall see their qualities: Daunce sirha.
How like you this? doth he well?
The better, the worser.
The musicke very good.
The Musitions very badde, who onelye studie to haue their stringes in tune, neuer framing their manners to order.
Now shall you see the other: tumble sirha.
How like you this? why do you laugh?
To see a wagge, that was born to break his neck by destinie, to practise it by arte.
This dogge will bite me, I wil not be with him.
Feare not boy, dogges eate no thistles.
I meruaile what dog thou art, if thou be a dog.
When I am hungry, a mastiue, and when my belly is full, a spaniell.
Doest thou beleeue that there are any gods, that thou art so dogged?
I must needs beleeue there are Gods: for I think thee an enemie of them.
Why so?
Beecause thou hast taught one of thy sonnes to rule his legges, and not to follow learning, the other to bend his body euery way, and his minde no way.
Thou doest nothing but snarle, and barke like a dogge.
It is the next way to driue away a theefe.
Now shall you heare the third, who signes like a Nightingall.
I care not: for I haue heard a Nightingall sing her self.
Sing sirha.
Loe, I am sure thou canst not doe so much.
But there is neuer a Thrush but can.
What hast thou taughtthy man?
To be as vnlike as may be thy sonnes.
He hath taught me to fast, lye hard, and runne away.
Howe saiest thou, wilte thou bee with him?
I, so he will teach me first to runne away.
Thou needest not be taught, thy legs are so nimble.
Howe sayest thou, wilte thou be with him?
Nay, hold your peace, he shall not.
Why?
There is not roome enough for him and mee both to tumble in one tub.
Well, I perceiue my sonnes brook not thy manners.
I thought no lesse, when they knewe my vertues.
Farewel, thou neededst not haue scraped rootes, if thou woldest haue followed.
Nor thou haue followed, if thou hadst scraped rootes.
It shal go hard, but this peace shal bring vs some pleasure.
Downe with armes, and vp with legges, this is a world for the nonce.
Sweete youthes, if you knew what it were to saue your sweete bloud, you would not so foolishly go about to spend it. What delight can there be in gasshinge, to make foule scarres in faire faces, & crooked maimes in streight legges? as though men being borne goodlye by nature, would of purpose become deformed by follye, and all forsooth for a new found tearme, called valiant, a worde which breedeth more quarrelles then the sense can commendation.
It is true, a featherbed hath no fellow, good drinke makes good bloud, and shal pelting wordes spill it?
I meane to enioy the world, and to draw out my life at the wiredrawers, not to curtall it off at the cuttelers.
You may talke of warre, speake bigge, conquer worldes with great wordes: but stay at home, where in steede of Alarums you shall haue daunces, for hot battelles with fierce menne, gentle skirmishes with faire womenne. These pewter coates canne neuer sitte so well as satten dublets. Beleeue mee, you cannot conceiue the pleasure of peace, vnlesse you despise the rudenes of warre.
It is so. But seeprying ouer his tubbe:, what saiest thou to such a morsel?
I say, I would spit it out of my mouth, because it should not poyson my stomacke.
Thou speakest as thou arte, it is no meate for dogges.
I am a dogge, and Phylosophy rates mee from carion.
Vnciuill wretch, whose manners are aunswerable to thy callynge, the tyme was thou wouldest haue hadde my companie, had it not beene, as thou saidst too deare.
I remember there was a thing, that I repentedme of, and now thou haste told it, indeede it was too deare of nothing, and thou deare to no bodye.
Downe villaine, or I wil haue thy head broken?
Will you couch?
Auaunt curre: Come sweete, let vs goe to some place, and possesse peace. But first let vs sing, there is more pleasure in tuning of a voyce, then in a vollye of shotte.
Now let vs make haste, leastfinde vs here.
Mee thinkethyou are more melancholy then you were accustomed, but I perceiue it is all for. You can neither brooke this peace, nor my pleasure, be of good cheare, though I winke, I sleepe not.
Melancholy I am not, nor well content: for I know not how there is such a ruste crept into my bones with this long ease, that I feare I shall not scowre it out with infinite labours.
Yes, yes, if all the trauailes of conquering the world will set either thy body or mine in tune, wee will vndertake them. But what think you of? Did yee euer see any so perplexed? Hee neither aunswered directly to any question, nor looked stedfastly vppon anye thing. I hold my life the painter is in loue.
It may be: for commonly we see it incident in artificers to be inamoured of their own workes, asof his woodden doue,, of his iuorieImage,of his wodde~ swan, especially painters, who playing with their own conceites, now coueting to draw a glauncing eie, then a rolling, now a wincking, stil mending it, neuer ending it, till they bee caught with it, and then poore soules they kisse the colours with their lippes, with which before they were loth to tainte theyr fingers.
I wil finde it out. Page, goe speedelye for, will him to come hether, and when you see vs earnestly in talke, sodenly cry out,shoppe is on fire.
It shalbe done.
Forget not your lesson
I meruaile what your deuice shalbe.
The euent shall proue.
I pittie the poore painter, if he be in loue.
Pittie him not, I pray thee, that seuere grauity set aside, what do you think of loue?
As the Macedonians doe of their hearbe Beet, which looking yellow in the ground, and blacke in the hand, thinke it better seene then toucht.
But what do you imagine it to be?
A word by superstition thought a God, by vse turned to an humour, by self will made a flattering madnesse.
You are too hard harted to think so of loue. Let vs go to., thou maist think it somwhat, thatcommeth to thee againe so soone
If you come to learn, you could not come soone enough, if to laugh, you be come too soone.
It would better become thee to be more curteous, and frame thy self to please.
And you better to be lesse, if you durst displease.
What dost thou think of the time we haue here?
That we haue litle, and lose much.
If one be sick, what wouldest thou haue him do?
Be sure that he make not his Phisition his hiere.
If thou mightest haue thy wil, how much grou~d would content thee?
As much as you in the ende must bee contented withall.
What, a world?
No, the length of my body.
, shal I be a litle pleasaunt with him?
You may: but he wil be very peruerse with you.
It skilleth not, I cannot be angry with him., I pray thee, what dost thou think of loue?
A litle worser then I can of hate.
And why?
Because it is better to hate the thinges, which make to loue, the~ to loue the things, which giue occasion of hate.
Why, be not women the best creatures in the world?
Next men and Bees.
What dost thou dislike chiefly in a woman?
One thing.
What?
That she is a woman.
In mine opinion thou wert neuer born of a woman, that thou thinkest so hardly of wome~. But now co~meth, who I am sure is as far from thy thoghts, as thou art fro~ his cunning., I wil haue thy cabin remoued nerer to my court, because I wilbe a philosopher
And when you haue done so, I pray you remoue your court further from my cabinne, because I wil not be a courtier.
But here commeth., what peece of work haue you now in hand?
None in hand, if it like your maiestie: but I am deuising a platforme in my head.
I think your hand put it in your head. Is it nothing about?
No, but some thing about.
,, looke about you, your shope is on fire.
Ay me, if the picture ofbe burnt, I am vndone.
Stay, no haste, it is your hart is on fire, not your shop, & ifhang there, I wold she were burnt. But haue you the picture of? Beelike you loue her wel, that you care not thogh al be lost, so she be safe.
Not loue her: but your Maiestie knowes that painters in their last works are said to excell themselues, and in this I haue so much pleased my self, that the shadow as much delighteth mee beeing an artificer, as the substaunce doth others that are amorous.
You lay your colours grosely, though I could not paint in your shop, I ca~ spy into your excuse. Be not ashamed, it is a Gentlemans sport to be in loue. Call hither. Me thinks I might haue bin made priuie to your affection, though my counsel had not beene necessary, yet my countenance might haue bin thought requisite. Butforsooth loueth vnder hand, yea & vndernose, and, but I say no more.
loueth not so: but he liueth to do aswill.
, here is newes,is in loue with you.
It pleaseth your maiesty to say so.
, I wil try her to., for the good qualities I know inand the vertue I see in you, I am determined you shal enioy one the other. Howe saye you, would you say, I?
Your handmaid must obey, if you commaund.
Think you notthat shee would faine be commaunded?
I am no thought catcher, but I gesse vnhappily.
I will not enforce mariage, where I cannot co~pel loue.
But your maiestie may moue a question, whereyou be willing to haue a match.
Beleeue me, these parties are agreed, they would haue me both priest and witnesse., take, why moue ye not?, take, wil it not be? If you be ashamed one of the other, by my consent you shal neuer come togeather. But dissemble not, do you loue?
Pardon my Lord, I loue.
, it were a shame for you, being loued so openly of so faire a virgin, to say the contrary. Doe you loue?
Onely.
Two louing wormes,, I perceiuecannot subdue the affections of menne, though he co~quer their countries. Loue falleth like dew aswel vpo~ the low grasse, as vppon the high Caedar. Sparkes haue their heate, Antes their gall, Flyes their splene. Well, enioy one an other, I giue her thee fra~ckly. Thou shalt see thatmaketh but a toye of loue, and leadeth affection in fetters, vsing fa~cie as a foole to make him sport, or as a minstrell to make him merry. It is not the amorous glaunce of an eie can settle an idle thought in the heart, no no, it is childrens game, a life for seamesters and schollers, the one pricking in cloutes haue nothing els to thinke on, the other picking fancies out of books, haue litle els to meruaile at. Go, take with you your,is cloied with looking on that, which thou wondredst at.
Thankes to your maiestie on bended knee, you haue honoured.
Thankes with bowed hearte, you haue blessed.
Page, go warneandand the other Lordes to be in a readines, let the trumpet sounde, strike vp the drumme, and I will presently into Persia.How now, isable to resiste loue as he list?
The conquering ofwas not so honourable, as the subdueing of these thoughts.
It were a shameshould desire to commaund the world, if he could not commaund himselfe. But come, let vs goe, I willtry whether I can better beare my hand with my heart, then I could with mine eie. And good, when al the world is woone, and euery countrey is thine and mine, either find me out an other to subdue, or of my word I will fall in loue.<|endoftext|>How nowe fellowe, what all amort? Doth this sadnes become thy madnes? What though wee haue lost our way in the woodes, yet neuer hang the head, as though thou hadst no hope to liue till to morrow: forand I will warrant thy life to night for twenty in the hundred.
and, as I am frollicke franion, neuer in all my life was I so dead slaine. What? to loose our way in the woode, without either fire or candle so vncomfortable?
Why makes thou it so strange, seeing Cupid hath led our yong master to the faire Lady and she is the only Saint that he hath sworne to serue.
What resteth then but wee commit him to his wench, and each of vs take his stand vp in a Tree, and sing out our ill fortune to the tune of O man in desperation.
Desperately spoken fellow Frollicke in the darke: but seeing it falles out thus, let vs rehearse the old prouerb.
Hush a dogge in the wood, or a wooden dogge, O comfortable hearing! I had euen as liue the Chamberlaine of the white Horse had called me vp to bed.
Eyther hath his trotting Cur gone out of his cyrcuit, or els are we nere some village,
which should not be farre off, for I perceiue the glymring of a Gloworme, a Candle, or a Cats eye, my life for a halfe pennie. In the name of my own father, be thou Oxe or Alfe that appearest, tell vs what thou art.
What am I? Why I am Clunch the Smith, what are you, what make you in myterritories at this time of the night?
What doe we make dost thou aske? why we make faces for feare: such as if thy mortall eyes could behold, would make thee water the long seames of thy side slops, Smith.
And in faith Sir vnlesse your hospitalitie doe releeue vs, wee are like to wander with a sorrowfull hey ho, among the owlets, & Hobgoblins of the Forrest: good, for Cupids sake that hath cousned vs all: befriend vs as thou maiest, and commaund vs howsoeuer, wheresoeuer, whensoeuer, in whatsoeuer, for euer and euer.
Well Masters it seemes to mee you haue lost your waie in the wood: in consideration whereof, if you will goe with Clunch to his Cottage, you shall haue house roome, and a good fire to sit by, althogh we haue no bedding to put you in.
O blessed Smith, O bountifull Clunch.
For your further intertainment, it shall be as it may be, so and so,
Hearke this is Ball my Dogge that bids you all welcome in his own language, come take heed for stumbling on the threshold, open dore Madge take in guests.
Welcome Clunch & good fellowes al that come with my good ma~ for my good mans sakecome on sit downe here is a peece of cheese & a pudding of my owne making.
Thanks Gammer a good example for the wiues of our towne.
Gammer thou and thy good man sit louingly together, we come to chat and not to eate.
Well Masters if you will eate nothing take away: Come, what doo we to passe away the time? Lay a crab in the fire to rost for Lambes-wooll; what shall wee haue a game at Trumpe or Ruffe to driue away the time, how say you?
This Smith leades a life as merrie as a King withhis wife; Syrrha, I am sure thou art not without some round or other, no doubt but Clunch can beare his part.
Els thinke you mee ill brought vp, so set to it when you will.
This sport dooes well: but me thinkes Gammer, a merry winters tale would driue away the time trimly, come I am sure you are not without a score.
I saith Gammer a tale of an howre long were as good as an howres sleepe.
Looke you Gammer, of the Gyant and the Kings Daughter, and I know not what, I haue seene the day when I was a litle one, you might haue drawne mee a mile after you with such a discourse.
Well, since you be so importunate, my good man shall fill the pot and get him to bed, they that ply their worke must keepe good howres, one of you goe lye with him, he is a cleane skind man I tell you, without either spauin or windgall, so I am content to driue away the time with an old wiues winters tale.
No better hay in Deuonshire, a my word Gammer, Ile be one of your audience.
And I another thats flat.
Then must I to bed with the good man,Gammer, God night.
Come on my Lad, thou shalt take thy vnnaturall rest with me.
Yet this vantage shall we haue of them in the morning, to bee ready at the sight thereof extempore.
Nowe this bargaine my Masters must I make with you, that you will say hum & ha to my tale, so shall I know you are awake.
Content Gammer that will we doo.
Once vppon a time there was a King or a Lord, or a Duke that had a faire daughter, the fairest that euer was; as white as snowe, and as redd as bloud: and once vppon a time his daughter was stollen away, and hee sent all his men to seeke out his daughter, and hee sent so long, that he sent all his men out of his Land.
Who drest his dinner then?
Nay either heare my tale, or kisse my taile.
Well sed, on with your tale Gammer.
O Lord I quite forgot, there was a Coniurer, and this Coniurer could doo any thing, and hee turned himselfe into a great Dragon, and carried the Kinges Daughter away in his mouth to a Castle that hee made of stone, and there he kept hir I know not how long, till at last all the Kinges men went out so long, that hir two Brothers went to seeke hir. O I forget: she (he I would say) turned a proper yong man to a Beare in the night, and a man in the day, and keeps by a crosse that parts three seuerall waies, & he made this Lady run mad: gods me bones who comes here?
Soft Gammer, here some come to tellyour tale for you.
Let them alone, let vs heare what they will say.
Vpon these chalkie Cliffs ofWe are ariued now with tedious toile, And compassing the wide world round about To seeke our sister, to seeke faireforth, Yet cannot we so much as heare of hir.
O fortune cruell, cruell & vnkind, Vnkind in that we cannot find our sister; Our sister haples in hir cruell chance: Soft who haue we here.
Now father God be your speed, What doo you gather there?
Hips and Hawes, and stickes and strawes, and thinges that I gather on the ground my sonne.
Hips and Hawes, and stickes and strawes, why is that all your foode father?
Yea sonne.
Father, here is an Almes pennie for mee, and if I speede in that I goe for, I will giue thee as good a Gowne of gray as euer thou diddest weare.
And Father here is another almes pennie for me, and if I speede in my iourney, I will giue thee a Palmers staffe of yuorie, and a scallop shell of beaten gold.
Was shee fayre?
I the fairest for white, and the purest for redd, as the blood of the Deare, or the driuen snow:
Then harke well and marke well, my old spell: Be not afraid of euery stranger, Start not aside at euery danger: Things that seeme are not the same, Blow a blast at euery flame: For when one flame of fire goes out, Then comes your wishes well about: If any aske who told you this good, Say the white Beare of Englands wood.
Brother heard you not what the old man said:
Well if this doo vs any good, Wel fare the white Bear of Englands wood.
Now sit thee here & tel a heauy tale. Sad in thy moode, and sober in thy cheere, Here sit thee now and to thy selfe relate, The hard mishap of thy most wretched state. InI liu'd in sweete content, Vntill that Fortune wrought my ouerthrow;For there I wedded was vnto a dame, That liu'd in honor, vertue, loue, and fame: Butthat cursed sorcerer, Being besotted with my beauteous loue: My deerest loue, my true betrothed wife, Did seeke the meanes to rid me of my life, But worse than this, he with his chanting spels, Did turne me straight vnto an vgly Beare; And when the sunne doth settle in the west, Then I begin to don my vgly hide: And all the day I sit, as now you see, And speake in riddles all inspirde with rage, Seeming an olde and miserable man: And yet I am in April of my age.
See wheremy betrothed loue, Runs madding all inrag'd about the woods; All by his curssed and inchanting spels.
But here comesmy discontented neighbour. How now neighbour, you looke towarde the ground aswell as I, you muse on something.
Neighbour on nothing, but on the matter I so often mooued to you: if you do any thing for charity, helpe me; if for neighborhood or brotherhood, helpe me: neuer was one so combered as is poore: and to begin, I pray receiue this potte of Honny to mendyour fare.
Thankes neighbor, set it downe, Honny is alwaies welcome to the Beare. And now neighbour let me heere the cause of your comming.
I am (as you knowe neighbour) a man vnmaried, and liued so vnquietly with my two wiues, that I keepe euery yeare holy the day wherin I buried the~ both; the first was on saintday; the other on saint.
And now neighbour, you of this country say, your custome is out: but on with your tale neighbour.
By my first wife, whose tongue wearied me aliue, and sounded in my eares like the clapper of a great Bell, whose talke was a continuall torment to all that dwelt by her, or liued nigh her, you haue heard me say I had a handsome daughter.
True neighbour.
Shee it is that afflictes me with her continuall clamoures, and hangs on me like a Burre: poore shee is, and proude shee is, as poore as a sheepe new shorne, and as proude of her hopes, as a Peacock of her taile well growne.
Well said, you speake it like an Englishman.
As curst as a waspe, and as frowarde as a childe new taken from the mothers teate, shee is to my age, as smoake to the eyes, or as vinegar to the teeth.
Holily praised neighbour, as much for the next.
By my other wife I had a daughter, so hard fauoured, so foule and ill faced, that I thinke a groue full of golden trees; and the leaues of Rubies and Dyamonds, would not bee a dowrie aunswerable to her deformitie.
Well neighbour, nowe you haue spoke, heere me speake; send them to the Well for the water of life: there shall they finde their fortunes vnlooked for; Neighbour farewell.
Farewell and a thousand, and now goeth pooreto put in execution this excellent counsell.
Why this goes rounde without a fidling stick; but doo you heare Gammer, was this the man that was a Beare in the night, and a man in the day?
I this is hee; and this man that came to him was a beggar, and dwelt vppon a greene. But soft, who comes here? O these are the haruest men; ten to one they sing a song of mowing.
Gammer, what is he?
O this is one that is going to the coniurer, let him alone, here what he sayes.
Now byandandandandand, and by the honor of my house, it is a wonder to see what this loue will make silly fellowes aduenture, euen in the wane of their wits, and infansie of their discretion. Alas my friend what fortune calles thee foorth to seeke thy fortune among brasen gates, inchanted towers, fire and Brimstone, thunder and lightning. Beautie I tell thee is peerelesse, and she precious whom thou affectest: do off these desires good countriman, good friend runne away from thy selfe, and so soone as thou canst, forget her; whom none must inherit but he that can monsters tame, labourers atchiue, riddles absolue, loose inchantments, murther magicke, and kill coniuring: and that is the great and mighty.
Harke you sir, harke you; First know I haue here the flurting feather, and haue giuen the Parish the start for the long stocke: Nowe sir if it bee no more but running through a little lightning and thunder, and riddle me riddle me whats this, Ile haue the wench from the Coniurer if he were ten Coniurers.
I haue abandoned the Court and honourable company, to doo my deuoyre against this sore Sorcerer and mighty Magitian: if this Ladie be so faire as she is said to bee, she is mine, she is mine.
! the faire maide isand all.
If shee bee mine, as I assure my selfe the heauens will doo somewhat to reward my worthines; shee shall bee allied to none of the meanest gods; but bee inuested in the most famous stocke of, my Grandfather: my father: my mother,: famouslie descended.
Doo you heare sir; had not you a Cosen, that was called?
Indeede I had a Cosen, that somtime followed the Court infortunately, and his name.
O Lord I know him well: hee is theknight of the neates feete.
O he lou'd no Capon better, he hath oftentimes deceiued his boy of his dinner, that was his fault good.
Come shall we goe along? Soft, here is an olde man at the Crosse, let vs aske him the way thither. Ho, you Gaffer, I pray you tell where the wise man the Coniurer dwells?
Where that earthly Goddesse keepeth hir abode; the commander of my thougts, and faire Mistres of my heart.
Faire inough, and farre inough from thy fingering sonne.
I will followe my Fortune after mine owne fancie, and doo according to mine owne discretion.
Yet giue some thing to an old man before you goe.
Father mee thinkes a peece of this Cake might serue your turne.
Yea sonne.
giueth no Cakes for Almes, aske of them that giue giftes for poore Beggars. Faire Lady, if thou wert once shrined in this bosome, I would buckler thee haratantara.
Father doo you see this man, you litle thinke heele run a mile or two for such a Cake,or passe for a pudding, I tell you father hee has kept such a begging of mee for a peece of this Cake, whoo he comes vppon me with a superfantiall substance, and the foyson of the earth, that I know not what he meanes: If hee came to me thus, and said, my friendor so, why I could spare him a peece with all my heart; but when he tells me how God hath enriched mee aboue other fellowes with a Cake: why hee makes me blinde and deafe at once: Yet father heere is a peece of Cake for you as harde as the world goes.
Farewell father, farewell; for I must make hast after my two hand sword that is gone before.
The day is cleare, the Welkin bright and gray, The Larke is merrie, and records hir notes; Each thing reioyseth vnderneath the Skie, But onely I whom heauen hath in hate: Wretched and miserable, Inwas I borne and brought vp,My motherhight a famous Witch, And by hir cunning I of hir did learne, To change and alter shapes of mortall men, There did I turne my selfe into a Dragon, And stole away the Daughter to the King; Faire, the Mistres of my heart: And brought hir hither to reuiue the man, That seemeth yong and pleasant to behold, And yet is aged, crooked, weake and numbe. Thus by inchaunting spells I doo deceiue, Those that behold and looke vpon my face; But well may I bid youthfull yeares adue:
See where she coms from whence my sorrows grow, How now fairewhere haue you bin?
At the foote of the Rocke for running water, and gathering rootes for your dinner sir.
Ah, fairer art thou than the running water, yet harder farre than steele or Adamant.
Will it please you to sit downe sir.
I, sit & aske me what thou wilt, thou shalt haue it brought into thy lappe.
Then I pray you sir let mee haue the best meate from the king oftable, and the best wine in all, brought in by the veriest knaue in all.
I am glad to see you so pleasant,well sit thee downe.
Spred table spred; meat, drinke & bred Euer may I haue, what I euer craue: When I am spred, for meate for my black cock, And meate for my red.
Heere, will yee fall to.
Is this the best meate in England?
Yea.
What is it?
A chine of English beefe, meate for a king And a kings followers.
Is this the best wine in?
Yea.
What Wine is it?
A cup of neate wine of, That neuer came neer the brewers in England.
Is this the veriest knaue in all?
Yea.
What is he a Fryer?
Yea a Frier indefinit, & a knaue infinit.
Then I pray ye sir Frier tell me before you goe, which is the most greediest Englishman?
The miserable and most couetous Vsurer.
Holde thee there Friar,
But soft who haue we heere,away begon.
away, for beset are we, But heauen or hell shall rescue her for me.
Brother, was not thatdid appeare? Or was it but her shadow that was here?
Sister, where art thou?come again He calles, that of thy absence doth complaine. Call outthat she may heare, And crie aloud, foris neere.
Neere.
Neere, O where, hast thou any tidings?
Tidings.
Which way isthen, or that, or this?
This.
And may we safely come whereis
Yes.
Brother remember you the white Beare of Englands wood: Start not a side for euery danger, Be not afeard of euery stranger; Things that seeme, are not the same.
Brother, why do we not the~ coragiously enter.
Then brother draw thy sword & follow me.
What brother doost thou fall?
I, and thou to.
: away with them,Go cary them straight tocell, There in despaire and torture for to dwell; These aresonnes of, That come to seeketheir sister forth: But with a potion, I to her haue giuen, My arts hath made her to forget her selfe.
See heere the thing which doth prolong my life With this inchantment I do any thing. And till this fade, my skill shall still endure, And neuer none shall breake this little glasse, But she that's neither wife, nor widow, nor maide. Then cheere thy selfe, this is thy destinie, Neuer to die, but by a dead mans hand.
Tell me Time, tell me iust Time, When shall Isee? When shall I see the loadstar of my life? When shall my wandring course end with her sight? Or I but view my hope, my hearts delight. Father God speede, if you tell fortunes, I pray good father tell me mine.
You may be ashamed, you whorson scald Sexton and Churchwarden, if you had any shame in those shamelesse faces of yours, to let a poore man lie so long aboue ground vnburied. A rot on you all, that haue no more compassion of a good fellow when he is gone.
What would you haue vs to burie him, and to aunswere it our selues to the parishe?
Parish me no parishes, pay me my fees, and let the rest runne on in the quarters accounts, and put it downe for one of your good deedes a Gods name, for I am not one that curiously stands vpon merits.
You whoreson sodden headed sheepes-face, shall a good fellow do lesse seruice and more honestie to the parish, & will you not when he is dead let him haue Christmas buriall.
Peace, assure aswas, the frollickst frannion amongst you, and Ihis sweete sworne brother,shall haue his funerals, or some of them shall lie on Gods deare earth for it, thats once.
I hope thou wilt do no more then thou darst aunswer.
Sir, sir, dare or dare not, more or lesse, aunswer or not aunswer, do this, or haue this.
Helpe, helpe, helpe, VViggen sets vpon the parish with a Pike staffe.
Hould thy hands good fellow.
Can you blame him sir, if he takepart against this shake rotten parish that will not burie.
Why what was that?
Whosir, who oursir? as good a fellow as euer troade vppon Neats leather.
Looke you sir, he gaue foure score and nineteene mourning gownes to the parish when he died, and because he would not make them vp a full hundred, they would not bury him; was not this good dealing?
Oh Lord sir how he lies, he was not worth a halfepenny, and drunke out euery penny: and nowe his fellowes, his drunken companions, would haue vs to burie him at thecharge of the parish, and we make many such matches, we may pull downe the steeple, sell the Belles, and thatche the chauncell: he shall lie aboue ground till he daunce a galliard about the churchyard for.
; and we make many such matches, we may pull downe the steeple, sell the Belles, and thatche the chauncell: in good time sir, and hang your selues in the Bell ropes when you haue done,, whether will you haue the ground broken, or your pates broken: first, for one of them shall be done presently, and to begin mine, ile seale it vpon your cockescome.
Hould thy hands, I pray thee good fellow be not too hastie.
Your Capons face, we shall haue you turnd out of the parish one of these dayes, with neuer a tatter to your arse, then you are in worse taking then.
Faith and he is bad enough: this fellow does but the part of a friend, to seeke to burie his friend; how much will burie him?
Faith, about some fifteene or sixteene shillings will bestow him honestly.
I euen there abouts sir.
Heere hould it then, and I haue left me but one poore three halfe pence; now do Iremember the wordes the old man spake at the crosse; bestowe all thou hast, and this is all, till dead mens bones comes at thy call, heare holde it, and so farewell.
God, and all good, bee with you sir; naie you cormorants, ile bestowe one peale ofat mine owne proper costs and charges.
You may thanke God the long staffe and the bilbowe blade, crost not your cockescombe; well weele to the church stile, and haue a pot, and so tryll lyll.
Come lets go.
But harke you gammer, me thinkes thisbore a great sway in the parish.
O thiswas a maruelous fellow, he was but a poore man, but very well beloued: you shall see anon what thiswill come to.
Soft, who haue wee heere? our amorous haruest starres.
I, I, let vs sit still and let them alone.
Soft, who haue we here?
O this is a cholerick gentleman, all you that loue your liues, keepe out of the smell of his two hand sworde: nowe goes he to the coniurer.
Me thinkes the Coniurer should put the foole into a Iugling boxe.
Fee, fa, fum, here is the Englishman, Conquer him that can, came for his lady bright, To prooue himselfe a knight, And win her loue in fight.
Who hawe maisterare you here? heare you, you had best sit downe heere, and beg an almes with me.
Hence base cullion, heere is he that commaundeth ingresse and egresse with his weapon, and will enter at his voluntary whosoeuer saith no.
No.
So with that they kist, and spoiled the edge of as good a two hand sword, as euer God put life in; now goesin, spight of the coniurer.
Away with him into the open fields, to be a rauening pray to Crowes and Kites:And for this villain let him wander vp & downe In nought but darkenes and eternall night.
Heer hast thou slaina slashing knight And robbed pooreof his sight.
Hence villaine hence. Now I haue vntogiuen a potion of forgetfulnes, That when shee comes shee shall not know hir Brothers: Lo where they labour like to Country slaues, With spade and mattocke on this inchaunted ground. Now will I call hir by another name, For neuer shall she know hir selfe againe, Vntill thathath breathd his last. See where she comes.
Come hithertake this gode, Here hard at hand two slaues do worke and dig for gold. Gore them with this & thou shalt haue inough.
Good sir I know not what you meane.
She hath forgotten to be, But not forgot the same she should forget: But I will change hir name Faireso this Country calls you, Goe ply these strangers wench they dig for gold
O heauens! how I am beholding tothis faire yong man. But I must ply these strangers to their worke. See where they come.
O Brother see whereis.
Ohappy are we to see thee here.
What tell you mee ofprating swaines? I know nonor know I what you meane, Ply you your work or else you are like to smart.
Whyknowst thou not thy Brothers here? We come fromto seeke thee forth, And thou deceiuest thy selfe for thou art.
Yet more of, then take this and smart: What faine you shifts for to defer your labor? Worke villaines worke, it is for gold you digg.
Peace Brother peace, this vild inchanter Hath rauishtof hir sences cleane, And she forgets that she is.
Leaue cruell thou to hurt the miserable; Digg brother digg, for she is hard as steele.
Stay brother what hast thou descride?
Away & touch it not, it is some thing, that my Lord hath hidden there.
Well sed, thou plyest these Pyoners well, goe get you in you labouring slaues. Come, let vs in likewise, And heare the Nightingale record hir notes.
Now for a husband, house and home, God send a good one or none I pray God: My father hath sent me to the well for the water of life, and tells mee if I giue faire wordes I shall haue a husband.
But heere comesmy sweete sister, Ile stand by and heare what she saies.
My father hath sent mee to the well for water, and he tells me if I speake faire, I shall haue a husband and none of the worst: Well though I am blacke I am sure all the world will not forsake mee, and as the olde prouerbe is though I am blacke, I am not the diuell.
Marrie gup with a murren, I knowe wherefore thou speakest that, but goe thy waies home as wife as thou camst, or Ile set thee home with a wanion.
I thinke this be the curstest queane in the world, you see what she is, a little faire, but as prowd as the diuell, and the veriest vixen that liues vpon Gods earth. Well Ile let hir alone, and goe home and get another Pitcher, and for all this get me to the well for water.
Once againe for a husband, & in faithI haue got the start of you; Belike husbands growe by the Well side; now my father sayes I must rule my tongue: why alas what am I then? a woman without a tongue, is as a souldier without his weapon; but ile haue my water and be gon.
What is this,faire maiden white & red, Combe me smooth, and stroke my head: And thou shalt haue some cockell breadCockell callest thou it boy, faith ile giue you cockell bread.
Foe, what greasie groome haue wee here? Hee looks as though hee crept out of the backeside of the well; and speakes like a Drum perisht at the West end.
Whoope nowe I haue my dreame, did you neuer heare so great a wonder as this? Three blue beanes in a blue bladder, tattle bladder rattle.
Ile nowe set my countenance and to hir in prose, it may be this rim ram ruffe, is too rude an incounter. Let me faire Ladie if you be at leisure, reuell with your sweetnes, and raile vppon that cowardly Coniurer, that hath cast me or congealed mee rather into an vnkinde sleepe and polluted my Carcasse.
Laugh, laugh, thou hast thy fortune, a foole and a husbande vnder one.
Truely sweete heart as I seeme, about some twenty yeares, the very Aprill of mine age.
Why what a prating Asse is this?
Hir Corall lippes, hir crimson chinne,
By gogs bones thou art a flouting knaue, Hir Corall lippes, hir crimson chinne: ka wilshaw.
True my owne and my owne becausemine & mine because mine ha ha: Aboue a thousand pounds in possibilitie, and thingsfitting thy desire in possession.
The Sott thinkes I aske of his landes, Lobb be your comfort, and Cuckold bee your destenie: Heare you sir; and if you will haue vs, you had best say so betime.
True sweete heart and will royallize thy progeny with my petigree.
You are well ouertaken sir.
Who's that?
You are heartily well met sir.
Forbeare I say, who is that which pincheth mee?
Trusting in God good Master, that you are in so good health as all your friendes were at the making hereof: God giue you God morrowe sir, lacke you not a neate handsome and cleanly yong Lad, about the age of fifteene or sixteene yeares, that can runneby your horse, and for a neede make your Mastershippes shooes as blacke as incke, howe say you sir.
Alasse pretty Lad, I know not how to keepe my selfe, and much lesse a seruant, my pretty boy, my state is so bad.
Content your selfe, you shall not bee so ill a Master but ile bee as bad a seruant: Tut sir I know you though you know not me; Are not you the man sir, denie it if you can sir, that came from a strange place in the land of Catita, where Iacke a napes flies with his taile in his mouth, to seeke out a Ladie white as snowe, and as redd as blood; ha, ha, haue I toucht you now.
I thinke this boy be a spirit, How knowst thou all this?
Tut are not you the man sir, denie it if you can sir, that gaue all the money you had to the burying of a poore man, and but one three-halfe-pence left in your pursse: Content you sir, Ile serue you that is flat.
Well my Lad since thou art so impornate, I am content to entertaine thee, not as a seruant; but a copartner in my iourney. But whither shall we goe for I haue not any money more than one bare three halfe-pence.
Well Master content your selfe, for if my diuination bee not out, that shall beespent at the next Inne or alehouse we come too: for maister I knowe you are passing hungrie; therefore ile go before and prouide dinner vntill that you come, no doubt but youle come faire and softly after.
I, go before, ile follow thee.
But doo you heare maister, doo you know my name?
No I promise thee not yet.
Why I am.
, why be it so then.
How say you sir, doo you please to sit downe?
Hostes I thanke you, I haue no great stomack.
Pray sir, what is the reason your maister is so strange, doth not this meate please him.
Yes Hostes, but it is my maisters fashion to pay before hee eates, therefore a reckoning good hostesse.
Marry shall you sir presently.
Whywhat doost thou meane, thou knowest I haue not any money: therefore sweetetell me what shall I doo.
Well maister looke in your pursse.
Why faith it is a follie, for I haue no money.
Why looke you maister, doo so much for me.
Alasmy pursse is full of money.
Alas, maister, does that worde belong to that accident? why me thinkes I should haue seene you cast away your cloake, and in a brauado daunced a galliard round about the chamber; why maister, your man can teach you more wit than this, come hostis, cheere vp my maister.
You are heartily welcome: and if it please you to eate of a fat Capon, a faire birde, a finer birde, a sweeter birde, a crisper birde, a neater birde, your worship neuer eate off.
Thankes my fine eloquent hostesse.
But heare you maister, one worde by the way, are you content I shall be halfes in all you get in your iourney?
I am Iack, here is my hand.
Enough maister, I aske no more.
Come Hostesse receiue your money, and I thanke you for my good entertainment.
You are heartily welcome sir.
Comewhether go we now?
Mary maister to the coniurers presently.
Content: Hostis farewell.
Come my ducke come: I haue nowgot a wife, thou art faire, art thou not?
Mythe fairest aliue, make no doubt of that.
Come wench, are we almost at the wel.
Iwe are almost at the Well now, ile go fetch some water: sit downe while I dip my pitcher in.
Gently dip: but not to deepe; For feare you make the goulde~ beard to weepe.
Oh seeI haue combd a great deale of golde into my lap, and a great deale of corne.
Well said wench, now we shall haue iust enough, God send vs coiners to coine our golde: but come shall we go home sweet heart?
Nay comeI will lead you.
Sothings haue well hir, Thou hast gotten wealth to mend thy wit.
Come away maister come.
Go along, ile follow thee,, they say it is good to go crosse legged, and say his prayers backward: how saiest thou?
Tut neuer feare maister, let me alone, heere sit you still, speake not a word. And because you shall not be intised with his inchanting speeches; with this same wooll ile stop your eares: and so maister sit still, for I must to the Coniurer.
How now, what man art thou that sits so sad Why dost thou gaze vpon these stately trees, Without the leaue and will of? What not a word but mum, Thenthou art betraide.
What hand inuades the head of? What hatefull fury doth enuy my happy state? Thenthese are thy latest dayes, Alas my vaines are numd, my sinews shrinke, My bloud is pearst, my breath fleeting away, And now in my timelesse date is come to end: He in whose life his actions hath beene so foule,Now in his death to hell defends his soule.
Oh Sir are you gon: now I hope we shall haue some other coile: Now maister how like you this; the Coniurer hee is dead, and vowes neuer to trouble vs more. Now get you to your faire Lady, and see what you can doo with her: Alas he heareth me not all this while; but I will helpe that.
How now, what news?
Heere maister, take this sword and dig with it, at the foote of this hill.
How now, what is this?
Maister, without this the Coniurer could do nothing, and so long as this light lasts, so long doth his arte indure, and this being out, then doth his arte decay.
Why thenI will soone put out this light.
I maister, how?
Why with a stone ile breake the glasse, and then blowe it out.
No maister you may as soone breake the Smiths Anfill, as this little vyoll; nor the biggest blast that euerblew, cannot blowe out this little light; but she that is neither maide,wife, nor widowe. Maister, winde this horne; and see what will happen.
So maister, how like you this; this is she that ranne madding in the woods, his betrothed loue that keepes the crosse, and nowe this light being out, all are restored to their former libertie. And now maister to the Lady that you haue so long looked for.
God speed faire maide sitting alone there is once. God speed faire maide; there is twise: God speed faire maide, that is thrise.
Not so good sir, for you are by.
Enough maister, she hath spoke, now I will leaue her with you.
Thou fairest flower of these westerne parts: Whose beautie so reflecteth in my sight, As doth a Christall mirror in the sonne: For thy sweet sake I haue crost the frosen, Leauing faire, I saild vp, As farre aswhose inhansing streames, Cuts twixt theand the,These haue I crost for thee faire: Then grant me that which I haue sude for long.
Thou gentle knight, whose fortune is so good: To finde me out, and set my brothers free, My faith, my heart, my hand, I giue to thee.
Thankes gentle Madame: but heere comes Iack, thanke him, for he is the best friend that we haue.
How now Iack, what hast thou there?
Mary maister, the head of the coniurer.
Why Iack that is impossible, he was a young man.
Ah maister, so he deceiued them that beheld him: but hee was a miserable, old, and crooked man; though to each mans eye he seemed young and fresh, for maister; this Coniurer tooke the shape of the olde man that kept the crosse: and that olde man was in the likenesse of the Coniurer. But nowe maister winde your horne.
Welcome, welcome faire,Welcome, andboth, Now haue I her that I so long haue sought, So saith faire, if we haue your consent.
Valiantthou well deseruest To haue our fauours: so let vs reioyce, That by thy meanes we are at libertie. Heere may we ioy each in others sight, And this faire Lady haue her wandring knight.
So maister, nowe yee thinke you haue done: but I must haue a saying to you; you know you and I were partners, I to haue halfe in all you got.
Why so thou shalt.
Why then maister draw your sworde, part your Lady, let mee haue halfe of her presently.
Why I hopethou doost but iest, I promist thee halfe I got, but not halfe my Lady.
But what else maister, haue you not gotten her, therefore deuide her straight, for I will haue halfe there is no remedie.
Well ere I will falsifie my worde vnto my friend, take her all, heereile giue her thee.
Nay neither more nor lesse Maister, but euen iust halfe.
Before I will falsifie my faith vnto myfriend, I will diuide hir,thou shalt haue halfe.
Bee not so cruell vnto our sister gentle Knight.
O spare faireshee deserues no death.
Content your selues, my word is past to him, therefore prepare thy selfefor thou must die.
Then farewell worlde, adew.
Stay Master, it is sufficient I haue tride your constancie: Do you now remember since you paid for the burying of a poore fellow.
I very well Iacke.
Then Master thanke that good deed, for this good turne, and so God be with you all.
Iacke what art thou gone? Then farewell Iacke. Come brothers and my beauteous,and thy deare: We will towith ioyfull hearts.
Agreed, we follow thee and.
What Gammer, a sleepe?
By the Mas sonne tis almost day, and my windowes shuts at the Cocks crow.
Doo you heare Gammer, mee thinkes this Iacke bore a great sway amongst them.
O man, this was the ghost of the poore man, that they kept such a coyle to burie, & that makes him to help the wandring knight so much: But come let vs in, we will haue a cup of ale and a tost this morning and so depart.
Then you haue made an end of your tale Gammer?
Yes faith: When this was done I
tooke a peece of bread and cheese, and came
my way, and so shall you haue too before you
goe, to your breakefast.<|endoftext|>If ye were not such a brabling foole and mad-braine scold as yee are, yee would neuer thus crosse your husbande in all actions. Tis no matter, let her serue me thus once more, Ile send her home to her dad with a vengeance. I can neuer go foorth a doores, but shee asketh mee whither I go? what I do? what busines? what I fetch? what I carry? * As though she were a Constable, or a tollgatherer. I haue pamperd her too much: she hath seruants about her, wooll, flax, and all things necessary to busie her withall, yet she watcheth & wondreth whither I go. Well sith it is so, she shall now haue some cause, I mean to dine this day abroad with a sweet friend of mine.
Yea mary now comes hee to the point that prickes me: this last speech gaules mee as much as it would doo his wife; If he dine not at home, I am drest.
We that haue Loues abroad, and wiues at home, are miserably hampred, yet would euery man could tame his shrewe as well as I doo mine. I haue now filcht away a fine ryding cloake of my wiues, which I meane to bestow vpon one that I loue better. Nay, if she be so warie and watchfull ouer me, I count it an almes deed to deceiue her.
Come, what share haue I in that same?
Out alas, I am taken.
True, but by your friend.
What, mine owne?
Yours (ifaith) bodie and goods if I had any.
Why thou hast a bodie.
Yea, but neither goods nor good bodie.
Thou couldst neuer come fitter in all thy life.
Tush, I euer do so to my friends, I know how to come alwaies in the nicke. Where dine ye to day?
Ile tell thee of a notable pranke.
What did the Cooke marre your meate in the dressing? Would I might see the reuersion.
Tell me didst thou see a picture, howEagle snatcht away, or howstole away.
Often, but what care I for shadowes, I want substance.
Looke thee here, looke not I like such a picture?
O ho, what cloake haue ye got here?
Prethee say I am now a braue fellow.
But hearke ye, where shall we dine?
Tush, say as I bid thee man.
Out of doubt ye are a fine man.
What? canst adde nothing of thine owne?
Ye are a most pleasant Gentleman.
On yet.
Nay not a word more, vnlesse ye tell mee how you and your wife be fallen out.
Nay I haue a greater secret then that to impart to thee.
Say your minde.
Come farther this way from my house.
So, let me heare.
Nay farther yet.
I warrant ye man.
Nay yet farther.
Tis pittie ye were not made a water-man to row in a wherry.
Why?
Because ye go one way, and looke an other, stil least your wife should follow ye. But what's the matter, Ist not almost dinner time?
Seest thou this cloake?
Not yet. Well what of it?
This same I meane to giue to.
That's well, but what of all this?
There I meane to haue a delicious dinner prepard for her and me.
And me?
And thee.
O sweet word. What, shall I knock presently at her doore?
I knocke. But staie too, let's not be too rash. Oh see shee is in good time comming forth.
Ah, he now lookes against the Sun, how her beames dazell his eyes.
What mine owne, welcome sweete heart.
And what am I, welcome too?
You sir? ye are out of the number of my welcome guests.
I am like a voluntary souldier, out of paie.
, I haue determined that here shal be pitcht a field this day; we meane to drinke for the heauens: And which of vs performes the brauest seruice at his weopon the wine boll, your selfe as Captaine shall paie him his wages according to his deserts.
Agreed.
I would we had the weapons, for my valour pricks me to the battaile.
Shall I tell thee sweete mouse? I neuer looke vpon thee, but I am quite out of loue with my wife.
Yet yee cannot chuse, but yee must still wearesomething of hers: whats this same?
This? such a spoyle (sweete heart) as I tooke from her to put on thee.
Mine owne, well woorthie to bee my deare, of all dearest.
Now she showes her selfe in her likenesse, when shee findes him in the giuing vaine, she drawes close to him.
I thinkegot not the garter fromso hardly, as I got this from my wife. Take this, and with the same, take my heart.
Thus they must do that are right Louers: especially if they meane to beggers with any speed.
I bought this same of late for my wife, it stood mee (I thinke) in some ten pound
There's tenne pounde bestowed verie thriftily.
But knowe yee what I woulde haue yee doo?
It shall bee done, your dinner shall be readie.
Let a good dinner be made for vs three. Harke ye, some oysters, a mary-bone pie or two, some artichockes, and potato rootes, let our other dishes be as you please.
You shall sir.
I haue a litle businesse in this Cittie, by that time dinner will be prepared. Farewell till then, sweete: Come.
Nay I meane to follow yee: I will sooner leese my life, then fight of you till this dinner be done.
Who's there? Call meethe Cooke hither.
, take the Hand-basket, and heere, there'sten shillings is there not?
Tis so mistresse.
Buy mee of all the daintiest meates ye can get, ye know what I meane: so as three may dine passing well, and yet no more then inough.
What guests haue ye to day mistresse?
Here will beand his Parasite, and my selfe.
That's ten persons in all.
How many?
Ten, for I warrant you, that Parasite may stand for eight at his vittels.
Go dispatch as I bid you, and looke ye returne with all speed.
I will haue all readie with a trice.
Surely, I thinke Sea-fairers neuer take so comfortable a ioy in any thing, as when they haue bene long tost and turmoylde in the wide seas, they hap at last to ken land.
Ile be sworn, I shuld not be gladder to see a whole Country of mine owne, then I haue bene at such a sight. But I pray, wherfore are we now come to? must we needs go to see euerie Towne that we heare off?
Till I finde my brother, all Townes are alike to me: I must trie in all places.
Why then let's euen as long as wee liue seeke your brother: six yeares now haue we roamde about thus,, all the vpper sea, all high, all Hauen Towns in, I think if we had sought a needle all this time, we must needs haue found it, had it bene aboue ground. It cannot be that he is aliue, and to seek a dead manthus among the liuing: what folly is it?
Yea, could I but once find any man that could certainly enforme me of his death, I were satisfied; otherwise I can neuer desist seeking: Litle knowest thouhow neare my heart it goes.
This is washing of a Blackamore. Faith let's goe home, vnlesse ye meane we should write a storie of our trauaile.
Sirra, no more of these sawcie speeches, I perceiue I much teach ye how to serue me, not to rule me.
I, so, now it appeares what it is to be a seruant. Wel yet I must speake my conscience. Do ye heare sir? Faith I must tell ye one thing, when I looke into the leane estate of your purse, and consider aduisedly of your decaying stocke, I hold it verie needfull to be drawing homeward, lest in looking your brother, we quite lose our selues. For this assure your selfe, this Towne, is a place of outragious expences, exceeding in all ryot and lasciuiousnesse: and (I heare) as full of Ribaulds, Parasites, Drunkards, Catchpoles, Cony-catchers, and Sycophants, as it can hold: then for Curtizans, why here's the currantest stamp of them in the world. Ye must not thinke here to scape with as light cost as in other places. The verie name shews the nature, no man comes hither.
Yee say very well indeed: giue mee my purse into mine owne keeping, because I will so be the safer,.
Why sir?
Because I feare you wil be busie among theCurtizans, & so be cosened of it: then should I take great paines in belabouring your shoulders, so to auoid both these harms, Ile keep it my selfe.
I pray do so sir, all the better.
* I haue tickling geare here yfaith for their dinners: It grieues me to the heart to think how that cormorant knauemust haue his share in these daintie morsels Butwhat? Iscome alreadie, before I could come from the Market?how do ye sir? how haps it ye come so soone?
God a mercy my good friend, doest thou know mee?
Know ye? no not I. Where's mouldichappes that must dine with ye? A murrin on his manners.
Whom meanest thou good fellow?
Whyworship, that whorson lick-trencher, your Parasiticall attendant.
What? what attendant? My Attendant? Surely this fellow is mad.
Did not I tell ye what cony-catching villaines yee should finde here?
, harke ye sir, ye come too soone backe again to dinner, I am but returned from the Market.
Fellow, here thou shalt haue money of me, goe get the priest to sacrifice for thee. I know thou art mad, els thou wouldst neuer vse a straunger thus?
Alas sir,was wont to be no stranger to you, know ye not?
, or, or what the diuell thou art, I know not, neither do I care to know.
I know you to be.
Thou shouldst be in thy wits, in that thou namest me so right, but tell me, where hast thou knowne me?
Where? euen heere, where ye first fell in loue with my mistresse.
I neither haue Louer, neither knowe I who thou art.
Know ye not who I am? who fils your cup & dresses your meate at our house?
What a slaue is this? that I had somewhat to breake the Rascals pate withall.
At your house, when as I neuer came intill this day.
Oh thats true. Do ye not dwell in yonder house?
Foule shame light vpon them that dwell there, for my part.
Questionlesse, hee is mad indeede, to curse himselfe thus. Harke ye.
What saist thou?
If I may aduise ye, ye shall bestow this money which ye offred me, vpon a sacrifice for your selfe: for out of doubt you are mad that curse your selfe.
What a verlet art thou to trouble vs thus?
Tush he wil many times iest with me thus. Yet when his wife is not by, tis a ridiculous iest.
VVhat's that?
This I say, Thinke ye I haue brought meate inough for three of you? If not, ile fetche more for you and your wench, and snatchcrust your Parasite.
VVhat wenches? what Parasites?
Villaine, Ile make thee tell me what thou meanest by all this talke?
Away Iack Napes, I say nothing to thee, for I know thee not, I speake to him that I know.
Out drunken foole, without doubt thou art out of thy wits.
That you shall see by the dressing of your meat. Go, go, ye were better to go in and finde somewhat to do there, whiles your dinner is making readie. Ile tell my mistresse ye be here.
Is he gone?I think vppon thy words alreadie.
Tush marke I pray, Ile laie fortie pound here dwels some Curtizan to whom this fellow belong.
Butwonder how he knowes my name.
Oh ile tell yee. These Courtizans assoone as anie straunge shippe arriueth at the Hauen, they sende a boye or a wench to enquire what they be, what their names be, whence they come, wherefore they come, &c. If they can byany meanes strike acquaintance with him, or allure him to their houses, he is their owne. We are here in a tickle place maister, tis best to be circumspect.
I mislike not thy counsaile.
I, but follow it then. Soft, here comes somebodie forth. Here sirs, Marriners, keep this same amongst you.
Let the doore stand so, away, it shall not be shut. Make hast within there ho: maydes looke that all things be readie. Couer the boord, put fire vnder the perfuming pannes, let all things be very handsome. Where is hee, thatsayd stood without here? Oh, what meane you sweet heart, that ye come not in? I trust you thinke your selfe more welcome to this house then to your owne, and great reason why you should do so. Your dinner & all things are readie as you willed. Will ye go sit downe?
Whom doth this woman speake to?
Euen to you sir, to whom else should I speake?
Gentlewoman ye are a straunger to me, and I maruell at your speeches.
Yea sir, but such a straunger, as I acknowledge ye for my best and dearest friend, and well you haue deserued it.
Surely, this woman is also mad or drunke, that vseth all this kindnesse to mee vppon so small acquaintance.
Tush, did not I tell ye right? these be but leaues which fall vpon you now, in comparison of the trees that wil tumble on your necke shortly. I tolde ye, here were siluer tong'de hacsters. But let me talke with her a litle. Gentlewoman what acquaintance haue you with this man? where haue you seene him?
Where he sawe me, here in.
In? who neuer till this day set his foote within the Towne.
Go, go, flowting Iack.what need al this? I pray go in.
She also calls me by my name.
She smels your purse.
come hither, here take my purse. Ile know whether she aime at me or my purse, ere I go.
Will ye go in, to dinner sir?
A good motion, yea and thanks with all my heart.
Neuer thanke me for that which you commaunded to be prouided for your selfe.
That I commaunded?
Yea, for you and your Parasite.
My Parasite?
, who came with you this morning when you brought me the cloake which you got from your wife.
A cloake that I brought you, which I got from my wife?
Tush what needeth all this iesting? Pray leaue off.
Iest or earnest, this I tell ye for a truth. I neuer had wife, neither haue I, nor neuer was in this place till this instant: for only thus farre am I come, since I brake my fast in the ship.
What ship do ye tell me off?
Marry ile tell ye, an old rotten weather-beaten ship, that we haue saild vp and downe in this sixe yeares, Ist not time to be going homewards thinke ye?
Come, come,, I pray leaue this sporting and go in.
Well Gentlewoman, the truth is, you mistake my person, it is some other that you looke for.
Why, thinke ye I know ye not to be, the sonne of, and haue heard ye say, ye were borne at, wheredid raigne, then, then, and now.
All this is true.
Either shee is a witch, or else shee hath dwelt there and knew ye there.
Ile goe in with her, Ile see further of this matter.
Ye are cast away then.
Why so? I warrant thee. I can loose nothing, somwhat I shall gaine, perhaps a good lodging during my abode heere. Ile dissemble with her an other while. Nowe when you please let vs go in, I made straunge with you, because of this fellow here, least he should tell my wife of the cloake which I gaue you.
Will ye staie any longer for youryour Parasite?
Not I, Ile neither staie for him, nor haue him let come in, if he do come.
All the better. But sir, will yee doo one thing for me.
What is that?
To beare that cloake which you gaue me, to the Diars, to haue it new trimd and altred.
Yea that will be well, so my wife shall not know it. Let mee haue it with mee after dinner. I will but speake a word or two with this fellowe, then ile follow yee in. Hocome aside: goe and prouide for thy selfe, and these shipboyes in some Inne, then looke that after dinner you come hither for me.
Ah maister will yee be conycatcht thus wilfully.
Peace foolish knaue, seest thou not what a sot she is, I shall coozen her I warrant thee.
Ay maister.
Wilt thou be gone?
See, see, she hath him safe inough now. Thus he hath escaped a hundreth Pyrates hands at sea: and now one land-rouer hath bourded him at first encounter. Come away fellowes.
* Twentie yeares I thinke and more, haue I playde the knaue, yet neuer playd I the foolish knaue as I haue done this morning. I follow, and he goes to the Hall where now the Sessions are holden: there thrusting our selues into the prease of people, when I was in midst of all the throng, he gaue me the slip, that I could neuer more set eye on him, and I dare sweare, came directly to dinner. That I would he that first deuised these Sessions were hang'd, and all that euer came of him: tis such a hinderance to men that haue belly businesses in hand. If a man be not there at his call, they amearce him with a vengeance. Men that haue nothing else to do, that do neither bid anie man, nor are themselues bidden to dinner, such should come to Sessions, not we that haue these matters to looke too. If it were so, I had not thus lost my dinner this day: which I think in my conscience he did euen purposely couzen me off. Yet I meane to go see: if I can but light vppon the reuersion, I may perhaps get my peny-worthes. But how now? is thiscomming away from thence? dinner done, and all dispacht? what execrable lucke haue I?
Tush I warrant ye, it shall be done as ye would wish, Ile haue it so altered and trimd anew, that it shall by no meanes be knowne againe.
He carries the cloake to the Dyars, dinner done, the wine drunke vp, the Parasite shut out of doores. Well, let me liue no longer, but ile reuenge this iniurious mockerie. But first ile harken awhile what he saith.
Good goddes, who euer had such lucke as I? Such cheare, such a dinner, such kinde entertainment? And for a farewell, this cloake which I meane shall go with me.
He speakes so softly, I cannot heare what hee saith, I am sure he is now flowting at me for the losse of my dinner.
She tels me how I gaue it her, and stole it from my wife. When I perceiued she was in an error, though I knew not how, I began to sooth her, and to say euery thing as she said. Meane while I far'd well, and that a free cost.
Well, I'le go talke with him.
Who is this same that comes to me?
O well met fickle-braine, false and treacherous dealer, craftie and vniust promise breaker. How haue I deserued, you should so giue me the slip, come before and dispatch the dinner, deale so badly with him that hath reuerenst ye like a sonne.
Good fellow what meanest thou by these speeches? Raile not on mee, vnlesse thou intendst to receiue a Railers hire.
I haue receiued the iniury (sure I am) alreadie.
Prethee tell me, what is thy name?
Well, well, mock on sir, mock on, doo ye not know my name?
In troth I neuer sawe thee in all my life, much lesse do I know thee.
Fie, Awakeawake, ye ouersleepe your selfe.
I am awake, I know what I say.
Know you not?
, or, I know thee not.
Did ye filch a cloake from your wife this morning, and bring it hither to?
Neither haue I wife, neither gaue I any cloake to, neither filcht I any from any bodie.
Will ye denie that which you did in my company?
Wilt thou say I haue done this in thy company?
VVill I say it? yea I will stand to it.
Away filthie mad driuell away, I will talke nolonger with thee.
Not a world of men shall staie me, but ile go tell his wife of all the whole matter, sith he is at this point with me. I will make this same as vnblest a dinner as euer he eate.
It makes mee wonder, to see how euery one that meetes me cauils thus with me. VVherefore comes foorth the mayd now?
, my mistresse commends her hartily to you, and seeing you goe that way to the Dyars, shee also desireth you to take this Chaine with you, and put it to mending at the Goldsmythes, shee would haue two or three ounces of gold more in it, and the fashion amended.
Either this or any thing else within my power, tell her, I am readie to accomplish.
Do ye know this Chaine sir?
Yea I know it to be gold.
This is the same you once tooke out of your wiues Casket.
VVho, did I?
Haue you forgotten?
I neuer did it.
Giue it me againe then.
Tarry, yes I remember it: tis it I gaue your mistres.
Oh, are ye aduised?
VVhere are the bracelets that I gaue her likewise?
I neuer knew of anie.
Faith, whengaue this, I gaue them too.
VVell sir, ile tell her this shall be done?
I, I, tell her so, shee shall haue the cloake and this both togither.
I pray, put a litle iewell for my eare to making for me, ye knowam alwaies readie to pleasure you.
will, giue mee the golde, ile paie for the workemanship.
Laie out for me, ile paie it ye againe.
Alas I haue none now.
When you haue, will ye?
I will. Goe bid your mistresse make no doubt of these, I warrant her, ile make the best hand I can of them. Is she gone? Doo not all the gods conspire to loade mee with good lucke? well I see tis high time to get mee out of these coasts, least all these matters should be lewd deuises to draw me into some snare. There shall my garland lie, because if they seeke me, they may thinke I am gone that way. * I wil now goe see ifcan finde my man, thatmay tell him howhaue sped.
Thinkes hewill be made such a sot, and to be still his drudge, while he prowles and purloynes all thathaue to giue his Trulles?
Nay hold your peace, wee'll catch him in the nicke. This way he came, in his garland forsooth, bearing the cloak to the Dyars. And seepray where the garland lyes, this way he is gone. See, see, where he comes againe now without the cloake.
VVhat shallnow do?
VVhat? that which ye euer do, bayt him for life.
Surelythinke it best so.
Stay, wee will stand a side a little, ye shall catch him vnawares.
It would make a man at his wittes end, to see how brabbling causes are handled yonder at the Court. If a poore man neuer so honest, haue a matter come to be scand, there is hee outfaste, and ouerlaide with countenance: If arich man neuer so vile a wretch come to speake, there they are all readie to fauour his cause. VVhat with facing out bad causes for the oppressors, and patronizing some iust actions for the wronged, the Lawyers they pocket vp all the gaines. For mine own part,come not away emptie, thoughhaue bene kept long against my will: For taking in hand to dispatch a matter this morning for one of my acquaintaunce,was no sooner entered into it, but his aduersaries laide so hard vnto his charge, and brought such matter against him, that do whatcould,could not winde my selfe out til now.am sore afraydthinks much vnkindnes in me thatstaid do long, yet she will not be angry considering the giftgaue her to day.
How thinke ye by that?
thinke him a most vile wretch thus to abuse me.
will hie me thither.
Yea go pilferer, goe with shame inough, no bodie sees your lewd dealings and vile theeuery.
How now wife, what aile yee? what is the matter?
Aske yee mee whats the matter? Fye vppon thee.
Are ye not in a fit of an ague, your pulses beate so sore? to himsay.
Pray wife, why are ye so angry with me?
Oh you know not?
He knowes, but he would dissemble it.
What is it?
My cloake.
Your cloake.
My cloake man, why do ye blush?
He cannot cloake his blushing. Nay I might not go to dinner with you, do ye remember? to him I say.
Hold thy peace.
Ha hold my peace, looke ye, he beckons on mee to hold my peace.
I neither becken nor winke on him.
Out, out, what a wretched life is this that I liue.
Why what aile ye woman?
Are ye not ashamed to deny so confidently, that which is apparant.
I protest vnto you before all the goddes (is not this inough) that I beckond not on him.
Oh sir, this is an other matter, touch him in the former cause.
What former cause?
The cloake man, the cloake, fetch the cloake againe from the Dyars.
What cloake?
Nay ile say no more, sith ye know nothing of your owne doings.
Tell me wife, hath any of your seruants abused you? Let me know.
Tush, tush.
I would not haue you to be thus disquietted.
Tush, tush.
You are fallen out with some of your friends.
Tush, tush.
Sure I am, I haue not offended you.
No, you haue dealt verie honestly.
Indeed wife, I haue deserued none of these words, tell me, are ye not well?
What shall he flatter ye now?
I speak not to thee knaue. Good wife come hither.
Away, away, keep your hands off.
So, bid me to dinner with you againe, then slip away from me, when you haue done, come forth brauely in your garland to flout me: Alas you knew not me, euen now.
Why Asse, I neither haue yet dined, nor camethere, since we were there togither.
VVho euer heard one so impudent? Did yee not meete me here euen now, and would make me beleeuewasmad, and said ye were a straunger, and ye knew me not?
Of a truth since wee went togither to the Sessions Hall, I neuer returned till this very instant, as you two met me.
Go too, go too, I know ye well inough. Did ye think I would not cry quittance with you, yes faith, I haue tolde your wife all.
What hast thou told her?
I cannot tell, aske her.
Tell me wife, what hath he told ye of me? Tell me I say, what was it?
As though you knew not, my cloake is stolne from me.
Is your cloake stolne from ye?
Do ye aske me?
Ifknew, I would not aske.
O craftie companion, how he would shift the matter, Come, come, deny it not, I tell ye, I haue bewrayd all.
What hast thou bewrayd?
Seeing ye will yeeld to nothing be it neuer so manifest, Heare mee, and ye shall know in fewe words both the cause of my griefe, and what he hath told me. I say my cloake is stolne from me.
My cloake is stolne from me?
Looke how he cauils, she saith it is stolne from her.
I haue nothing to say to thee: I say wife tell me.
I tell ye, my cloake is stolne out of my house.
Who stole it?
He knowes best that carried it away.
Who was that?
T'was very ill done of him. Whatwas that?
You.
I, who will say so?
I will.
And I: and that you gaue it to.
I gaue it?
You.
You, you, you, shall we fetch a kennell of Beagles that may cry nothing but you, you, you, you. For we are wearie of it.
Heare me one word wife, I protest vnto you by all the gods,gaue it her not, indeed I lent it her to vse a while.
Faith sir,neuer giue nor lend your apparell out of doores, mee thinkes ye might let mee dispose of mine owne garments, as you do of yours.pray then fetch it mee home againe.
You shall haue it againe without faile.
Tis best for you thathaue: otherwise thinke not to roost within these doores againe.
Harke ye, what say ye to me now, for bringing these matters to your knowledge?
say, when thou hast anie thing stolne from thee, come to me, and I will helpe thee to seeke it. And so farewell.
God a mercy for nothing, that can neuer be, forhaue nothing in the world worth the stealing. So now with husband and wife and all,am cleane out of fauour. A mischiefe on ye all.
My wife thinks she is notably reueng'd on me, now she shuttes mee out of doores, as though I had not a better place to be welcome too. If she shut me out, I know who wil shut me in. Now will I entreateto let me haue the cloake againe to stop my wiues mouth withal, and then willprouide a better for her. Ho who is within there? somebodie tellI must speake with her.
Who calls?
Your friend, more then his owne.
O, why stand ye here? pray come in.
Tarry, I must speake with ye here.
Say your minde.
Wot ye what? my wife knowes all the matter now, and my comming is, to request you, that I may haue againe the cloake which I brought you, that somay appease her: and I promise you, ile giue ye an other worth two of it.
Whygaue it you to carry to your Dyars, and my chaine likewise, to haue it altered.
Gaue mee the cloake and your chaine? In truth I neuer sawe ye since I left it heere with you, and so went to the Sessions, from whence I am but now returned.
Ah then sir, I see you wrought a deuice to defraude mee of them both, didtherefore put yee in trust? Well, well.
To defraud ye? No, butsay, my wife hath intelligence of the matter.
Why sir,asked them not, ye brought them me of your owne free motion. Now ye require them againe, take them, make sops of them: you and your wife togither, think ye I esteeme them or you either. Goe, come to mee againe when I send for you.
What so angry with mee, sweete? Staie, I pray staie.
Staie? Faith sir no: thinke ye I will staie at your request?
What gone in chasing, and clapt to the doores: now I am euerie way shut out for a very benchwhistler: neither shall I haue entertainment heere nor at home. I were best go trie some other friends, and aske counsaile what to do.
Most foolishly was I ouerseene in giuing my purse and money to, whom I can no where find, I feare he is fallen into some lewd companie.
I maruaile that my husband comes not yet, but see where he is now, and brings my cloake with him.
I muse where the knaue should be.
I will go ring a peale through both his eares for this his dishonest behauiour. Oh sir, ye are welcome home with your theeuery on your shoulders, are ye not ashamde to let all the world see and speake of your lewdnesse?
How now? what lackes this woman?
Impudent beast, stand ye to question about it? For shame hold thy peace.
What offence haue I done woman, that I should not speake to you?
Askest thou what offence? O shamelesse boldnesse.
Good woman, did ye neuer heare why the Grecians termedto be a bitch?
Neuer.
Because she did as you do now, on whom soeuer she met withall, she railed, and therfore well deserued that dogged name.
These foule abuses and contumelies, I can neuer endure, nay rather will I liue a widowes life to my dying day.
What care I whether thou liuest as a widow or as a wife. This passeth, that I meet with none but thus they vexe me with straunge speeches.
What straunge speeches? I say I will surely liue a widowes life, rather then suffer thy vile dealings.
Prethee for my part, liue a widow till the worldes end, if thou wilt.
Euen now thou deniedst that thou stolest it fromme, and now thou bringest it home openly in my sight. Art not ashamde?
Woman, you are greatly to blame to charge mee with stealing of this cloake, which this day an other gaue me to carry to be trimde.
Well, I will first complaine to my father. Ho boy, who is within there?go runne quickly to my father, desire him of all loue to come ouer quickly to my house. Ile tell him first of your prankes, I hope he will not see me thus handled.
What a Gods name meaneth this mad woman thus to vexe me?
I am mad because I tell ye of your vile actions, and lewde pilfring away my apparell and my Iewels, to carry to your filthie drabbes.
For whome this woman taketh mee I knowe not,know her as much as I knowwiues father.
Do ye not know me? That's well, I hope ye know my father, here he comes, looke, do ye know him?
As much as I knewof. Euen him and thee I know both alike.
Doest know neither of vs both, me nor my father?
Faith nor thy grandfather neither.
This is like the rest of your behauiour.
* Though bearing so great a burthen, as olde age, I can make no great haste, yet as I can, I will goe to my daughter, who I know hath some earnest businesse with me, that shee sends in such haste, not telling the cause why I should come. But I durst laie a wager, I can gesse neare the matter: I suppose it is some brabble between her husband and her. These yoong women that bring great dowries to their husbands, are so masterfull and obstinate, that they will haue their own wils in euerie thing, and make men seruants to their weake affections. And yoong men too,must needs say, be naught now a dayes. Well ile go see, but yonder mee thinks standsmy daughter, and her husband too. Oh tis euen as I gessed.
Father ye are welcome.
How now daughter? What? is all well? why is your husband so sad? haue ye bin chiding? tell me, vvhich of you is in the fault?
First father know, that I haue not any way misbehaued my selfe, but the truth is, I can by no meanes endure this bad man to die for it: and therefore desire you to take me home to you againe.
What is the matter.
He makes me a stale and a laughing stocke to all the world.
Who doth?
This good husband here, to whom you married me.
See, see, how oft haue I warned you of falling out with your husband?
I cannot auoid it, if he doth so fowly abuse me.
I alwaies told ye, you must beare with him, ye must let him alone, ye must not watch him, nor dog him, nor meddle with his courses in any sort.
Hee hauntes naughtie harlottes vnder my nose.
Hee is the wiser, because hee cannot bee quiet at home.
There hee feastes and bancquets, and spendes and spoiles.
Wold ye haue your husband serue ye as your drudge? Ye will not let him make merry, nor entertaine his friendes at home.
Father will ye take his part in these abuses, and forsake me?
Not so daughter, but if I see cause, I wil as well tel him of his dutie.
I vvould I vvere gone from this prating father and daughter.
Hitherto I see not but hee keepes ye vvell, ye vvantnothing, apparrell, mony, seruants, meate, drinke, all thinges necessarie: I feare there is fault in you.
But he filcheth away my apparrell and my iewels, to giue to his Trulles.
If he doth so, tis verie ill done, if not, you doo ill to say so.
You may beleeue me father, for there you may see my cloake which now he hath fetcht home againe, and my chaine which he stole from me.
Now willgoe talke with him to knowe the truth. Tell me, how is it, that I heare such disorder in your life? Why are ye so sad man? wherein hath your wife offended you?
Old man (what to call yeknow not) by high, and by all the Godssweare vnto you, whatsoeuer this woman here accuseth mee to haue stolne from her, it is vtterly false and vntrue, and if I euer set foote within her doores,wishe the greatest miserie in the worlde to light vppon me.
Why fond man, art thou mad to deny that thou euer setst foote within thine owne house where thou dwellest?
Dodwell in that house?
Doest thou denie it?
I do.
Harke yee daughter, are ye remooued out of your house?
Father, he vseth you as he doth me, this life I haue with him.
, I pray leaue this fondnesse, ye iest too peruersly with your friends.
Good old father, what I pray haue you to do with me? or why should this woman thus trouble me, with whom I haue no dealings in the world?
Father, marke I pray how his eies sparkle, they rowle in his head, his colour goes and comes, he lookes wildly. See, see.
What? they say now I am mad, the best way for me is to faine my selfe mad indeed, so I shall be rid of them.
Looke how he stares about, now he gapes.
Come away daughter, come from him.
, do ye call mee to come hunt in the woods with you, I see, I heare, I come, I flie, but I cannot get out of these fields. Here is an old mastiffe bitch stands barking at mee, and by her standes an old goate that beares false witnesse against many a poore man.
Out vpon him Bedlam foole.
Harke,commaunds me thatshould rende out hir eyes with a burning lampe.
O father, he threatens to pull out mine eyes.
Good gods, these folke say I am mad, and doubtlesse they are mad themselues.
Daughter.
Here father, what shall we do?
What if I fetch my folkes hither, and haue him carried in before he do any harme.
How now? they will carry mee in if I looke not to my selfe: I were best to skare them better yet. Doest thou bid me, to teare this dog in peeces with my nayles? if I laie hold on him, I will do thy commandment.
Get thee into thy house daughter, away quickly.
She is gone: yeaI will sacrifice this olde beast vnto thee: and if thou commandest mee, I will cut his throate with that dagger that hangs at his girdle.
Come not neare me sirra.
Yea I will quarter him, and pull all the bones out of his flesh, then will I barrell vp his bowels.
Sure I am sore afraid he will do some hurt.
Many things thou commandest me, wouldst thou haue me harnesse vp these wilde horses, and then clime vp into the Chariot, & so ouer-ride this old stincking toothlesse Lyon. So now I am in the Chariot, and I haue hold on the raines, here is my whip, hait, come ye wilde Iades, make ahideous noyse with your stamping: hait I say, will ye not go?
What? doth he threaten me with his horses?
Harke, nowbids mee ride ouer him thatstands there, and kill him. How now? who pulles mee downe from my Chariot by the haires of my head. Oh shall I not fulfillcommandment?
See, see, what a sharpe disease this is, and how well he was euen now. I will fetch a Phisitian straight, before hee grow too farre into this rage.
Are they both gone now? Ile then hie me away to my ship, tis time to be gone from hence.
My loines ake with sitting, and mine eies with looking, while I staie for yonder laizie Phisitian: see now where the creeping drawlatch comes.
What disease hath hee said you? Is it a letarge or a lunacie, or melancholie, or dropsie?
Wherfore I pray do I bring you, but that you shuld tell me what it is? and cure him of it.
Fie, make no question of that, Ile cure him I warrant ye. Oh here he comes, staie, let vs marke what he doth.
Neuer in my life had I more ouerthwart fortune in one day, and all by the villanie of this false knaue the Parasite, mythat workes such mischiefs against mee his King. But let me liue no longer, but ile be reuengde vppon the life of him: his life? nay tis my life, for hee liues by my meate and drinke, Ile vtterly withdraw the slaues life from him. Andshee sheweth plainly what she is: who because I require the cloake again to carrie to my wife, saith I gaue it her, and flatly falles out with me. How vnfortunate am I?
Do ye heare him?
He complaines of his fortune.
Go to him.
, how do ye man? why keepe you not your cloake ouer your arme? It is verie hurtfull to your disease. Keepe ye warme I pray.
Why hang thy selfe, what carest thou.
Sir can you smell anie thing?
I smell a prating dolt of thee.
Oh I will haue your head throughly purged. Pray tell me, what vse you to drinke? white wine or claret?
What the diuell carest thou?
Looke, his fit now begins.
Why doest not as well aske mee whethereate bread, or cheese, or beefe, or porredge, or birdes that beare feathers, or fishes that haue finnes.
See what idle talke he falleth into.
Tarry, I will aske him further., tell me, be not your eyes heauie and dull sometimes?
What doest thinke I am an Owle?
Doo not your guttes gripe ye, and croake in your belly?
When I am hungrie they do, else not.
He speakes not like a mad man in that. Sleepe ye soundly all night?
When I haue paid my debts I do. The mischiefe light on thee, with all thy friuolous questions.
Oh now he rageth vpon those words, take heed.
Oh this is nothing to the rage he was in euen now. He called his wife bitch, and all to nought.
Did?
Thou didst, mad fellow, and threatenedst to ryde ouer me here with a Chariot and horses, and to kill mee, and teare me in peeces. This thou didst,know what I say.
say, thou stolestCrowne from his head,and thou wert whipt through the Towne for it, and that thou hast kild thy father, and beaten thy mother. Doo ye thinke I am so mad that I cannot deuise as notable lyes of you, as you do of me?
Maister Doctor, pray heartily make speede to cure him, see ye not how mad he waxeth?
Ile tell ye, hee shall be brought ouer to my house, and there will I cure him.
Is that best?
What else, there I can order him as I list.
Well, it shall be so.
Oh sir,will make yee take neesing powder this twentie dayes.
Ile beate yee first with a bastanado, this thirtie dayes.
Fetch men to carry him to my house.
How many will serue the turne?
Being no madder then hee is now, foure will serue.
Ile fetch them, staie you with him maister Doctor.
No by my faith, Ile goe home to make readie all things needfull. Let your men bring him hither.
I go.
Are they both gone? Good Gods what meaneth this? These men say I am mad, who without doubt are mad themselues. I stirre not, I fight not,am not sicke. I speake to them, I know them. Well what were I now best to do? I would goe home, but my wife shuttes me foorth a doores.is as farre out with me too. Euen herewill rest me till the euening, I hope by that time, they will take pittie on me.
* The proofe of a good seruant, is to regard his maisters businesse as well in his absence, as in his presence: and I thinke him a verie foole that is not carefull as well for hisribbes and shoulders, as for his belly and throate. When I think vpon the rewards of a sluggard, I am euer pricked with a carefull regard of my backe and shoulders: for in truth I haue no fancie to these blows, as many a one hath: methinks it is no pleasure to a man to be basted with a ropes end two or three houres togither. I haue prouided yonder in the Towne, for all our marriners, and safely bestowed all my masters Trunkes and fardels: and am now comming to see if he be yet got forth of this daungerous gulfe, where I feare me is ouer plunged, pray God he be not ouerwhelmed andpast helpe ere I come.
Before Gods and men,charge and commaund you sirs, to execute with great care that which I appoint you: if yee loue the safetie of your owne ribbes and shoulders, then goe take me vp my sonne in lawe, laie all hands vpon him, why stand ye stil? what do ye doubt? I saie, care not for his threatnings, nor for anie of his words. Take him vp and bring him to the Phisitions house: I will go thither before.
What newes? how now masters? what will ye do with me? why do ye thus beset me? whither carrie ye mee? Helpe, helpe, neighbors, friends, Citizens.
O, what do I see? my maister abused by a companie of varlets.
Is there no good man will helpe me?
Helpe ye maister? yes the villaines shall haue my life before they shall thus wrong ye. Tis more fit I should be kild, then you thus handled. Pull out that rascals eye that holds ye about the necke there. I'le clout these peasants, out ye rogue, let go ye varlet.
I haue hold of this villaines eie.
Pull it out, and let the place appeare in his head. Away ye cutthroat theeues, ye murtherers.
O, O, ay, ay,
Away, get ye hence, ye mongrels, ye dogs. Will yebe gone? Thou raskall behind there, ile giue thee somewhat more, take that. It was time to come maister, you had bene in good case if I had not bene heere now, I tolde you what would come of it.
Now as the gods loue me, my good friend I thank thee: thou hast done that for me which I shall neuer be able to requite.
I'le tell ye how sir, giue me my freedome.
Should I giue it thee?
Seeing you cannot requite my good turne.
Thou art deceiued man.
Wherein?
On mine honestie,am none of thy maister,had neuer yet anie seruant would do so much for me.
Why then bid me be free: will you?
Yea surelie, be free, for my part.
O sweetly spoken, thanks my good maister.
, we are all glad of your good fortune.
O maister, ile call ye maister still, I praie vse me in anie seruice as ye did before, ile dwell with you still, & when ye go home, ile wait vpon you.
Nay, nay, it shall not need.
Ile goe staight to the Inne and deliuer vp my accounts, and all your stuffe: your purse is lockt vp safely sealed in the casket, as you gaue it mee. I will goe fetch it to you.
Do, fetch it.
I will.
I was neuer thus perplext. Some deny me to be him that I am, and shut me out of their doores. This fellow saith he is my bondman, and of me he begs his freedome: he will fetch my purse and monie: well if he bring it, I will receiue it, and set him free, I would he would so go his way. My old father in lawe, and the Doctor saie I am mad, who euer sawe such straunge demeanors? well thoughbe neuer soangrie, yet once againe ile go see if by intreatiecan get the cloake on her to carrie to my wife.
Impudent knaue, wilt thou say that I euer saw thee since I sent thee away to day, and bad thee come for mee after dinner?
Ye make me starke mad: I tooke ye away and reskued ye from foure great bigboand villaines, that were carrying ye away euen heere in this place. Heere they had ye vp, you cried, Helpe, helpe, I came running to you, you and I togither beate them away by maine force. Then for my good turne and faithfull seruice, ye gaue mee my freedome: I tolde ye I would go fetch your Casket, now in the mean time you ranne some other way to get before me, and so you denie it all againe.
I gaue thee thy freedome?
You did.
When I giue thee thy freedome, Ile be a bondman my selfe: go thy wayes.
Whewe, marry I thanke ye for nothing.
Forsworne Queanes, sweare till your hearts ake, and your eyes fall out, ye shall neuer make me beleeue that I carried hence either cloake or chaine.
O heauens, maister what do I see?
What?
Your ghoast.
What ghoast?
Your Image, as like you as can be possible.
Surely not much vnlike me as I thinke.
O my good friend and helper, well met: thanks for thy late good helpe.
Sir, may I craue to know your name?
I were too blame if I should not tell thee anie thing, my name is.
Nay my friend, that is my name.
I am ofin.
So am I.
Are you a?
I am.
O, ho, I know ye: this is my maister, I thought hee there, had bene my maister, and was proffering my seruice to him, pray pardon me sir, ifsaid any thingshould not.
Why doating patch, didst thou not come with me this morning from the ship?
My faith he saies true, this is my maister, you may go looke ye a man: God saue ye maister: you sir farewell. This is.
I say that I am.
What a iest is this? Are you?
Euenthe sonne of.
My fathers sonne?
Friend,go about neither to take your father nor your country from you.
O immortall Gods, let it fall out as I hope, and for my life these are the two Twinnes, all things agree so iump togither. I will speake to my maister.?
What wilt thou?
call ye not both, but which of you came with me from the ship?
Not I.
did.
Thencall you. Come hither.
Whats the matter?
This same is either some notable cousening Iugler, or else it is your brother whom we seeke.neuer sawe one man so like an other, water to water, nor milke to milke, is not liker then he is to you.
Indeed I thinke thou saiest true. Finde itthat he is my brother, andhere promise thee thy freedom.
Well, let me about it. Heare ye sir, you say your name is?
do.
So is this mans. You are of?
True.
So is he.was your father?
He was.
So was he his. What will you say, if I find that ye are brethren and twins?
I would thinke it happie newes.
Nay staie maisters both, I meane to haue the honor of this exploit. Answere me: your name is?
Yea.
And yours?
And mine.
You are of?
I am.
And I.
Well, this goeth right thus farre. What is the farthest thing that you remember there?
How I went with my father to, to a great mart, and there in the preasse I was stolne from him.
O!
Peace, what exclaiming is this? How old were ye then?
About seuen yeare old, for euen then I shedde teeth, and since that time, I neuer heard of anie of my kindred.
Had ye neuer a brother?
Yes, as I remember, I heard them say, we were two twinnes.
O Fortune!
Tush, can ye not be quiet? Were ye both of one name?
Nay (as I think) they cald my brother,.
It is he, what need farther proofe? O Brother, Brother, let me embrace thee.
Sir, if this be true, I am wonderfully glad, but how is it, that ye are called?
When it was tolde vs that you and our father were both dead, our Graundsire (in memorie of my fathers name) chaungde mine to.
Tis verie like he would do so indeed. But let me aske ye one question more, what was our mothers name?
Brother, the most welcome man to mee, that the world holdeth.
I ioy, and ten thousand ioyes the more, hauing taken so long trauaile and huge paines to seeke you.
See now, how all this matter comes about. This it was, that the Gentlewoman had ye in to dinner, thinking it had bene he.
True it is, I willed a dinner to be prouided for me heere this morning, and I also brought hither closely a cloake of my wiues, and gaue it to this woman.
Is not this the same, Brother?
How came you by this?
This woman met me, had me in to dinner, enterteined me most kindly, and gaue me this cloake, and this Chaine.
Indeed she tooke ye for mee: and I beleeue I haue bene as straungely handled by occasion of your comming.
You shall haue time inough to laugh at all these matters hereafter. Do ye remember maister, what ye promised me?
Brotherwill intreate you to performe your promise to, he is worthie of it.
am content.
Brother, will ye now go with me to?
So soone as I can sell away such goods as I possesse here in, I will go with you.
Thanks my good Brother.
, plaie thou the Crier for me, and make a proclamation.
A fit office. Come on. O yes. What day shall your sale be?
This day sennight.
All men, women and children, in, or elsewhere, that will repaire tohouse this day senight, shall there finde all maner of things to sell: seruaunts, houshold stuffe, house, ground, and all: so they bring readie money. Will ye sell your wife too sir?
Yea, but I thinke no bodie will bid money for her.
Thus Gentlemen we take our leaues, and if we haue
pleasde, we require a.<|endoftext|>How now children, will you not rise to day?
What ist a clock?
It is seue~ a clock.
I beleue you not
Why do you not beleue me?
Because I am yet all sleepye andthat I am accustomed to awake alwayes at fiue of the clocke.
Beleue this bearer: he is scant well awake at eight of the clocke, how then could he be awaket at fiue?
You say true.
You will iest.
Rise quickely: It is tyme to go to schoole: your maister will ierke you, if you can not say your lessons.
Oure maister hath no roddes.
I will carye him som.
It is needelesse for we will study well.
Geue me my hosen.
Which of them?
My redd hoses.
And to me my blacke ones.
Bring me my whit hoses, and a cleane shyrt: Or els, bring me my graye hoses, my greene dwbletand a handkercher.
Holde, here be your hosen.
Here lacke some pointes.
You played the~.
I haue not, they be broken.
Button your ierkin Peter: where be your garters?
I lost them.
You deserue to be beaten: But you feare nothing, why doe you not gyrt you Stephen?
I can not bowe downe.
Truely you are but a wagge, whiche lookes but for the death of the day.
Geue me my doublesoulshoes
Here be them.
Where is the showing horne?
Take it vpon the table.
Geue me my pantables, and my pompes: But where be my sockes?
Here be them, Iames, put on your hatte: make cleane yourcap:Peter, where layde you your night cap?
I left it vpon the bedde.
Are you ready?
How should I be ready? You brought me a smock, in steade of my shirt.
I forgat my selfe: holde, here is your shirt.
Now you are a good wenche.
Why doe you not put on your showes? you goe alwayessleepe-shotte.
My showes be naught.
Better is to haue a bad excuse, then not at all.
Now, we be ready: Geue vs our breakefast, that we may goe to schoole.
Did you say your prayers?
Not yet.
It is not well done: Pray God, then you shall haue your break fast.
Brother, it is for you to day topray God: and my cosen shall pray GOD to morowe: Then, it shalbe my turne to pray. Sonneday Monneday Twesday Weddenesday Thursday Friday Sathurday.
Kneele downe all.
Our helpe be in the name of GOD, whiche hath made heauen and earth. So be it. Ovr Father whiche art in heauen, halowed be thy name. Thy kingdome come. Thywill be done, in earth, as it is in heauen. Geue vs this day our dayly bread, and forgeue vs our offences, as we forgeue them that trespasse agaynst vs: And let vs not be led into temptation: But deliuer vs from euill: For thine is, the kingdome, the power, and the glory for euer and euer.
So be it.
Let vs eate, and drinke, acknowledging, that all goodnesse doe come from God, In the name of the Father, andof the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost.
So be it.
Now breake your fast, then go aske your fathers, and mothers blessing.
I pray you Father, pray to GOD to blesse me.
God blesse you youmy sonne.
I pray you mother, geue me your blessing.
God blesse you all, my children.
Go to children.take your books and goe you to schoole: But play not by the way. Go you in peace and learne well, then you shalbe called the children of God.
Where is my booke?
Where did you put it?
I layde it ysterday vppon the window.
Take it then.
Geueme my paper booke.
Hold, here isyour paper, and your inkehorne also.
There is neither pennes, nor ink.
What did you with all?
He lost them, and he sold his penneknife.
Truely, I will tell it to your mother.
I pray doe not tell her, and I will loue you well.
Will ye doe so? Goe to, I will not tell her: Here is a peny to buy you somequilles.
I thanke ye, I will buy some as I go to schoole.
Well sayd, Goe in Gods name.
Is it not tyme to goe to the market? It is almost ten a clocke: Goe I pray, and make hast to come agayne.
I goe by and by: But is it so late as you say?
Yes truely, Goe quikely.
Good morow cosen Androw.
And to you also cosen Ralf.
How doe you? How is it with you?
Well thankes be to God: So so.
From whence come you?
I come from home.
Whether goe you?
I go to the market.
And I also: We shall goe together, if you will.
I am glad of your company: But before we goe, it were good to drinke a pinte of wine.
Whether shall we goe?
At the Byshops head, or at the Cardinals hat.
Let vs goe: How Symon, shall wehaue a pynte of wine well drawen?
You be well come: What wine will you drinke? Will you eate any thinke.
Geue vs of the best wine you haue: Geue vs some whitte wine. Clairet wine, Red wine. Frenche wine. Gaskyne wine. New Renishe wine. Good Sakke. Good Mamesie. Good Muscadene. New wine. Old wine,
Bring vs a quart of your best Whitte wine: For it is wholesommer in the morning: and a role and some butter.
You shall haue it: How like you this wine?
I like it very well.
This wine is faire and pure.
To you gosseppe Ralf.
I thanke ye, Gra~mercy, good brother.
Let vs dispach: Let vs make hast, to breake our fast.
Pure some wine: Geue me some wine.
The pot is emptie: There is no more: Shall we haue an other pynt?
No, It is tyme to goe to the market.
Whe~ you please.
How Simon.
Doe you lacke any thinke? Doe you call?
What doe weowe? What haue we to pay? What must you haue? Let vs haue a reakening: What is to pay?
You haue to pay: you owe, eight pence, and you be well come.
Hold your money, Fare you well gossippe.
GOD be wy my frendes at your commaundement.
Now let vs goe to the market.
Let vs go.
What doe youbuye? What doe you lacke?
Showe me a coupell of good, and fatte Rabettes, A fat Capon. A good henne. A fatte goose. A good goseling A dosen of larkes. A stoke doue. A Hayre. A mallart. A ducke. A drake. A crane. A sparow. A woodcoke. A swanne. A blackbirde. A Parret.
Here be them,that be very good and fat.
They be very stale.
Truely, they be very new.
How sell you them? How much?
Ten pence the couple.
It is to much, you are to, deare, They be not worth so much. They be worth but a grote.
They be not mine for that price. They coast me more.
Tell me your lowest word.
Are you willing to buye?
Yes, if you will, be reasonable.
At one word: you shall pay two grotes for them.
I will pay but six pence for.
I may notsell them so.
Fare you well then.
Here ye Syr: Cast th'other penye.
I will pay no more for.
You are a very hard man: Well, you shall haue them: I sell this day. Robin-hoodes peners: Shall I fleae them?
Yea, here is your money. God be wy Ser.
Well come Ser, at your commaundement.
Buyyou any apples? Who buye of my apples?
How many for a peny? How sell you the hundreth?
I sell them, twelfe a peny. You shall pay two shillings for the hundreth.
Haue you any pepines?
The fayrest in London.
Shal I haue thirtie for a peny? Or els, you shall haue a shilling for the hu~dreth of your pepines.
Here ye, fayre mayde: Will you haue them for twenty pe~ce the hundreth.
I am at one word.
Go to, you shall haue them: Where will you haue them.
Put them in myne apurne.
One, Two, Three, Foure, Fiue, Sixe, Seuen, Eight, Nyne, Ten, Eleuen, Twelfe, Thirten. Foureten. Fiften. Sixten. Seuenten. Eighten. Ninten. Twenty. One and twenty. Two and twenty.Three and twe~ty. Foure and twe~ty. Fiue and twenty. And here be foure, whiche makes fiue score and foure.
You shall geue me one aboue.
Hold, here is, for you: As you shall finde the~, come agayne.
So I will.
What lacke ye? What doe ye buy. What will you haue. What will youbuy. What please you to buy. What please you to haue. What seeke y. Will you haue any cloth. Come in, I will show you some. Come hether Ser. Come in, you shall haue good cheape. See if I haue any thing that likes you. I will vse you well. You shall finde me as reasonable, or more, as any other, you shall see good wares. Come in, if youplease.
God be here.
Well come Ser.
Haue you any good broade cloth. Haue you any fine Caresie. Haue you any Caresie Flanders deye. Haue you any Cottun. Any Fryse. Any rugette. Any stamell. Any frisadoe. Any sardge. Any skarlatte. Any veluet. Any granadoe silke. Any Spanishe silke. Any satten.Any damaske. Any taffettey. Any sarsenet. Any grosgrayne. Any chamelet. Any worstede. Any mokadoe. Any braunched veluet. Any tuffte taffetey. Any Welshe plaine. Any fustiane. Any buckeren. Any sacke cloth. Any holland. Any trype veluet. Anytuffte veluet.
What collour will ye haue.
What collour haue ye.
I haue fayre whitte. Blacke. Gray. Fayre French taney. Violet. Greene. Mingled collour. Sheepes collour. yallow. Blue. Orenge collour. Fayre straw collour. Fayre purple collour. I haue of all collours, and of all prices.
Showe me some fayre darke greene if you haue any.
yea forsoth, Ihaue that which is very fayre, and good. There is no better in this towne. It is of good syse. Vew it well. Did you euer see better.
I haue sene better, and worse also. Haue you any better.
yes marye: But it is of more higher price.
Let me haue the sight of it.
Here is of the best you did euer see.
It is good indid: But showe me of the very best that you haue.
It shalbe done. Hold, here is of the best that I haue.
If you haue no better, you haue nothing for me.
What say you to this same.
It is indifferent. So, So.
I haue no better. The collour is sure. It is in grayne.It will not stayne.
How sell you the yard of it? How do you sell the yard. How is it the yard. What shall coast me the elle? What shall I pay for the yard. What shall I geue for the elle. What is worth the yarde of this cloth.
At one word, I would sell it fayne: for twelue shillinges and eight pence the yard. I sell it for fiften shillings the yard.It shall caost you sixtene shillings, and sixe pence the elle. you shall pay a marke for the yarde of the same. It is well worth eleuen shillings the yard. you shall geue me twenty shillinges for the yard.
It is to much. you are to deare. you hold your wares to high.
What is it worth of your money.
I will geue nine shillingsfor the yard.
you offer me not that it caost me. What will you geue. What will ye geue for. Tell me a good word, that I may sell.
I will geue ten shillinges sixe pence for the yard.
I can not sell it for that price. you offer me to much lost.
Shall I haue it for foureten shillinges.
No truely. I should be a loser by, it caost me more.It is better worth.
It is worth no more. Will ye take sixten shillinges for the yard.
It caost me more then you offer me.
You shall not sell it at your owne word.
I could sell it for no lesse. But bycause I am desirous to sell: I will bate out a shilling of my price.
At one word, I will geue but seuentenshillinges for.
It is not mine for that price. Neuerthelesse, you shal haue it. Haw much will ye haue of it.
I must haue three elles and a half.
You shall haue what you please. One. Two. Three, and a halfe good measure.
Make a good measure I pray.
Measure it your selfe if you please.
It is needelesse, I would trust you in greater matter. How much must you haue in all.
Three elles, and a halfe, come to foure yardes, and two third partes of the yard: So at seuenten shillinges the yard, the whole, comes to three pound nineten shillinges and foure pence.
you say true: Here is your money.
God geue me a good handsell, Ido buy your custome: I hope that you shall bare me good lucke, and that I shall haue more of your money.
Dout not of it: Fare ye well Syr.
God be wy Syr, at your co~maundement.
But I pray Syr. Could you not mache this collour?
yes forsoth, I can: We must see: Let me see: Here is the nearest that I haue.
This like me not.
I haue none other.
Fare ye well the~.
What doe you lake.
What fishe haue you.
I haue good salt fish, Soles. A good plaise. Viuers. Rotches, or Gornettes. Whittinges. Waisters. Thurnebacke. Smeltes. Redde hering. Whitte hering. Shrimpes.A loupster. Crabbes. A Picke. A pickerell. A millers thu~be. A saumond. A lamproye. Elles. A dorey. A makerell. A trouette. Small la~proyes. Moskels. Cockelles. A tenche. A carpe. Kempes. A whale. And of sondry other fishes.
What shall I pay for a quarteron of waisters, for this side of salt fish. For this Thurnbacke, and forhalfe a hu~dreth of smelts.
Will you haue but one word.
No.
you shall paye eight grotes for.
I shall not: I will pay, but fiue grotes for.
you come not to buy.
But I doe: But you will sell your waeres to deare. Will you take money.
yea, with other:A word wye Syr. I will buy your custume. Take all for two shillinges.
I will pay no more for.
I should be a looser by: Cast th'other two pence.
I can not.
Take it in Gods name.
Hold here is your monney. Fare you well.
What doe you buy? Come hether Syr. What will youhaue? What lake you?
A fatte shippes flesh. A side of porke. This breast of beefe. A quarter of vealle. A nettes toung. This roumpe of beefe. A calfes plucke. Calfes feete. Sheepes feete. A sheepes head. A sheepe gather. A calfes leagge. A shoulder ofmotton. A loygne of veale. A quarter of lambe.
I haue the beast meate in this towne and the fatest. Choose,
How sell you the waight of this beef.
Foureten pence the waight if you will.
I will pay for it twelfe pence at a word.
You must come higher: For my wares is not leane: See in an other place,and if you doe finde, fatter flesh then myne you shall haue it at your prise.
I am a ma~ at oneword.
Take the wares without money, andas you shall finde it, you shall pay me for.
I thanke you: Take my money if you may.
You shall haue it, for the old acquaintance sake: Will you haue all the whole side.
Yes, what doth it waight?
It waightes, fiue waightes, two poundes, and a halfe good waight.
Hold, here is fiue shillinges and foure pence I pray GOD to graunt you a good market.
Fare you well brother Simon. At your co~mau~dement.
Dicke.
Anone forsoth. What is your pleasure.
Goe tell my neighbour roper, that I pray him to come to morow to dine with me: And fro~ thence. Go thou desire my sonnes schoolemaister, to beare vs co~paignie.
Well Syr. Good euen maister roper.
Good euen my frend.
My maister desireth you to beare him company to morow at dyner.
How doth your maister, and your mistresse.
They be in good health, thankes be to God.
Where be them?
They be at home.
Haue me recommaunded To him. To her. To them. And tell them,that I will not misse.
I will tell them so: God saue you Syr.
And you also my frend: What newes?
My maister, and my mistresse desire you, to dine to morow with them.
I trouble them euery foote: But sence they will haue it so: I will come.
Fare you well Syr.
God be wy my frend Dicke.Haue me recommau~ded to your maister, and to your mistresse also.
I will tell the~ so.
Will they come?
I Syr. They promised so.
God be here.
Good morow neighbour. Here well come.
I thanke ye mistresse.
God saue all the company.
Well come Syr.
I thanke you Syr.
Why is not come my gossip your wife?
She is very busie at home. She is gone forth. Shee is gone to the market.
What to doe?
She is gone thether to buy some egges. A pigge. Some nuttes. Some peasen. Some beanes. Some aotte meale. Some pudinges. som saucerlings.Some apples. Some peares. Some pease cottes. Some cherises. Some raisins. Some figges. Some butter. Some rise. Some milke. Some plummes. Some prunes. Some almondes Some turneps. A pye, or a pasty. A caeke. A custarde. Some oringes. Some lymones. A cabushe. A henne.
Be her affaires so great that she may not come?
I, in deede.
It shalbe then for an other tyme.
Be it so.
You be all well come. Much good may it do to you. You see your fare.
Pore here some drinke. To you Syr. I recommaunde you my sonne.
I thanke you mistresse: your sonneis altogether recommaunded vnto me: He is a very prety child.
But a very shroude boy.
He is the mothers sonne.
I loue him in deede.
What newes?
There is no other newes, but of the sickenesse and the dearth, which be now a dayes almost thoroughout all Fraunce.
It is Gods hand which reue~geth the iniurie done to his Church.
you say true.
I beleue, that there scappes alwayes some of them.
Few, or none at all.
Is the number of them great, that are come ouer into this cou~trey?
Very great: and there be many of them whiche doe liue very hard, so great is their pouertie.
Truely, I take great pitie of their miserable estate: But I hope that God will remember them: for heneuer forsaketh them which doe thrust in him.
Commen Syrs, let euery one take rowme. Iames pray God.
The eyes of all thinges do looke vp, and thrust in thee, O Lord, thou geuest the~ meate in due season: Thou openest thy hand and fillest with thy blessing euery liuyng thing: Good Lord Blesse vs, and all thy giftes, which we do receaue of thy bou~teous liberality through Iesu Christ our Lord.
So be it.
Let vs eate, and drinke, acknowledging, that all goodnesse doe come of God. In the name of the Father, and of the sonne, and of the holy ghost.
It is a most true saying.
You spend the tyme in talking, and you eate nothing. Geue vs some whitte bread. Some mancher. Bring the seco~d course. Goe fetche the fruite: Geue here atarte, and a custarde. My frend, haue we not a cake.
Here is one.
you be very litle eaters: Take away, and pore vs some wine: My sonne come say graces.
The kyng of eternall glory, make vs partakers of his heauenly table.
So be it.
God saue his vniuersal Church our Queene and the Realme, and graunt vs peace,and truth in Christ Iesus.
So be it.
God blesse you my children: Syrs, come nere the fier. There ayre of the fire is alwayes good. Make vs a good fire. Bring a byllet, or twayne. Now goe fetch a Fagot and some coales.
Syr, It is tyme to goe.
What hast haue you?
I must goe to myschollers, to the end they leese no tyme.
You haue yet tyme enough.
I pray you to geue me leaue this once, an other tyme you shall commaund me.
Syr, you shalbe alwayes, well come to me: I would be loth to let you from your good worke.
I thanke you sir: Good euen mistresse.
God be wy sir, and you also mistresse. I thanke you for your good chere
It is not worth thankes, good euen neighbour, you are well come.
Fare ye well Syrs: We doe thanke you for your good company. Iames, Goe to schoole, with your maister.
Well mother, I goe.
What is it of the clocke?
It is almost two a clocke. Tyme to goe to play if it please you to geue vs leaue.
Children, Goe play: But take heede that you hurt not one an other.
I thanke you maister.
Doe soe, that we here no complaintes on ye.
We will play quitely.
What game shal we play at?
Let vs play at dyce.
I did neuer learne to play at dyce.
Let vs then play at tables.
Our maister should not be wel pleased with all.
Shall we then play at boules?
No: But we shall play at tanyse, or els at Cartes.
Let it be at Cartes, we bestow our tyme in vayn: and I feare much, that our maister calles vs to our bookes, before we haue bego~ our game.
Let vs then play for pynes.
Let it be so: But let vs hast to begin. Shall we play at Trumpe?
Yea.
How shall we play?
The kyng shalbe worth six pynes. The Queene, foure: The knaue, two: and eche carte one: and who haue the asse shall rubbe.
You say well: We will play my brother, and I agaynst Stephen and against you.
Will you haue it so Stephen?
Yea.
Let vs begin the~. Who shal deale?
The same shall deale, that shall cut the fayrest carte.
Let vs see then: Who shall deale.
I must deale: for I did cut a kyng.
Deale twelue a peece.
Nine for euery man is enough.
Well deale then.
I dealt right. The trumpe is. Of clubbes. Of hartes. Of speades. Of dyamondes.
I rubbe: But you dealt all to the~.
I can not mende it:The cartes did rise so.
You did not shufle them wel.
But I haue.
You doe owe me euery man two pinnes, for the knaue that I haue.
Let see.
Here it is.
And you do owe me euery man ten, for the king, and the Queene
Show them.
Here be them.
Notwithsta~dyngall your fayre cartes, I haue the game: And you do owe me euery man, for six cartes.
Children, Come to your bookes: The schoolemaister doth tary for you in the schoole.
We doe but begyn to play. Do you call vs allready? you ieste I beleue.
I doe not: Come I pray you, least you be beaten.
Let vs goe then, and we shall make an end anothertyme.
Our maister co~meth himselfe for vs.
Will you neuer be weary of playing: To your bookes, and learne well your lessons: The~ goe you home quietly.
So shall we doe maister.
Good euen maister.
Where is your cutsie? you forget it alwayes: Haue me recommau~ded to yourparentes, and be here to morow betymes.
Neadd bring hether my horse, It is great tyme to be goyng.
Whe~ you please: sir here is your horse.
Let vs ride a good passe, to ouertake that man, which doth ride there afore vs: God saue you sir.
God blesse you Syr.
Whether go you sir.
I would fayne be in Fraunce.
And I also. But where about do you mynde to take shipping?
At Rye, God willing.
I would we were there.
I hope we shalbe there to morow betymes.
Nedde, geue me a waund: For I will not spurremy horse.
Here is one sir.
Is it a hasell wanne?
No Syr: It is a holly wanne.
But I pray you Syr: Be we not out of our way?
I can not tell in deede: This plowman, which tilleth his grounde, will set vs againe on our way, if we be out of the same. Here ye myfrend: Is this the ready way to goe to Rye?
Yes syr: Keepe still on the right hand.
Is there neuer a house here by, wherein we may lodge.
Yes forsoth: you haue two milles hence, a very good Inne.
I thank ye my frend. God be here: Shall we lodge with you, this night? Haue you any beadyng? Good stables?Good hay? and good oates.
You be very well come Syrs.
I pray rubbe well our horses and geue them good litter: Bring some hay, and some oates.
How much will you haue.
Bring halfe a bushell of oates for our three horses and full the manger of hay.
You shal haue it.
Nedd, pull of our bootes, and make the~ cleane and our spurres also: Let the bridle of my horse be hu~ged on the pommell of his sadle.
It hungeth there already? But there is one of your styruppes broken: and one of the gyrtes ready to breake.
Goe buy others, and bring me a new gyrdle: For myne is worne. Goe fetche A saddler. A spurrier. A teyler.A shoemaker. A cabeller. A hattemaker. A capper. A seamester. A habredasher. A mercer. A grosser. An armourer. A cutteller. A chandeler. A grinder. A carier. A vintener. A brewer. A cooke. A cooper. A fishmonger. A butcher. A baker. A draper. A pewterer. A peinter. A smith. A locksmith. An yronmonger. A broker. A poulterer. A goldsmith.A carpendore. A loygner. A fruiterer. A woodmonger. A gyrdler. A clockmaker. A coalier. A thinker. A glouer. A ieweller.
Syr. Is it not tyme to goe to bed: We must be on horsebacke to morow verye earely.
You say true: Myne host, let our beds be made, and let vs haue a fire made, & cleaneshittes.
It shalbe done. Syrs, your beds be made: When it please you, you may go to bed.
Nedd, take thou the candell, and showe me light to the priuyes.
When it please you Syr.
Good euen Syr.
God geue you good night: But it were good for vs to pray before we go to bed.
Let vs pray whe~ you please.
O lord whiche art onely good, true andgracious and mercyfull, which commaundeth them that loue thy name, to cast all feare, and care from them, and to cast it on thee promising most mercyfully thy selfe to be their protector against all their enemies, and their refuge in daungers: their gouernour in the day: their light in darkenesse, and their watchman also on thenight: Neuer to slip, but to watch continually for the preseruyng of the faythfull: We beseeche thee of thy bounteous goodnesse, O Lord, to forgiue vs, where in we haue offended thee this day, & to receaue vs in thy protection this night, that we may rest in quietnesse both of body, & soule: Graunt our eyes sleepe: But let our hartes watch perpetuallye vnto thee that the weknes ofthe flesh, cause vs not to offend thee: Lord, let vs at all times feele thy goodnes toward vs, that we be at all tymes styrred to prayse thee & that late, early and at mid day thy praise be in our own mouthes and at midnight: Lord instruct vs in thy iudgme~ts, that al the dayes of our life beyng lead in holines, & puritie, we may be co~ducted at late into the euerlastyng rest, which thou hast promised by thy mercy to the~ that obey thy word: To thee O Lord, be honor, prayse & glory for euer.
So be it.
The peace of God, which passeth all vnderstandyng, keepe our hartes, and myndes, in the knowledge and loue of God, and of his sonne Iesus Christ our Lord: and the blessing of God all mightie: The father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, be amongest vs, and remayne with vs alwayes.
So be it. Now Syr, I byde you the good night.
He that mayd the good nights Graunt to geue you foureten in stead of foure.
Syr, Is it not yet tyme to goe?
What is it of the clocke.
It is almost fiue of the clocke.
Is it a fayre weather.
Very fayre Syr.
Are you ready Syr? Let vs pray God?
Whe~ you pleaseSyr.
O LORD good God, eternall and almightie Father, whiche hast by thy grace, guided and conducted vs vnder thy holy protection to the begynnyng of this day, we most humbly beseeche thee, to keepe, and susteine vs alwayes by thy vertue, that in the same we may fall into no sinne: But direct vs rather to obey and serue thee accordyng to thy holy will: Let all our thoughtes be wholly lifted vpvnto thee, and guide so our wordes, and our deedes, that we may say, nor thinke, nor doe any thyng contrary to thy holy will: Here vs our GOD, and Father, and so replenishe vs with thy graces, and mercy, that we employ all this day in ioye, and that we may delite in singing of thy prayses, through Iesus Christ thy sonne our Lord.
So be it. Now it is tyme to goe.
When you will, I am ready: I hope we shall haue a fayre weather to day.
God graunt it.
Nedd, bring my sword, my dagge, My harkebuse. Bring heather our horses. My mowile. Mine asse. Mine oxe. My hogge. My dogge. My grayhunde.
Syr, here be your horses and all that you commaunded me.
Thou diddestforget my head peece.
I goe for it, Syr.
Myne host, let vs haue a reakenyng. Let vs reaken. Reaken with vs. And come for your monney.
God saue you Syrs.
And you also myne host.
Syrs, you doe owe for you and for your men, and horses, foure shillings and six pence: And you be well come.
It is to much.
Truely Syr, all is very deare now a dayes.
Hold your monney.
Are you pleased myne host.
Yea, forsooth: I thanke you.
I pray you myne host set vs on our right way to Rye.
Folow on this path till youcome to the high way. Then keepe alwayes on the left hand, leauyng on the right hand, a high hedge the whiche you shall finde, about a myle hence: Doubtlesse that way will bryng you straight to Rye.
How farre is to Rye?
There is about twenty myles.
Is it a fayre way?
Yea Syr very fayre.
I thanke you myne host: I commit you to God.
God be your speede Syrs: Fare you well, at your co~maundement.
Lord GOD, we beseeche thee most humbly to be our conductor in this our 
voyage: So that (beyng by thy bountifull mercy, preserued in the same 
from all daungers, and perils) we may returne in peace:Blesse vs good Lord, and bryng our affaires to a good ende. 
Through Iesus Christ thy sonne our Lord. To whom be geuen all honor 
and glory for euer. 
So be it.<|endoftext|>Ho Fraunces rise, and get you to schoole: you shalbe beaten, for it is past seuen: make your self readi quickly, say your prayers, then you shall haue your breakefast. Margerite, geeue mee my hosen: dispatche I pray you: where is my doublet? bryng my garters, and my shooes: geeue mee that shooyng horne. Take first a cleane shirte, for yours is fowle. Make hast then, for I doo tarie too long. It is moyst yet, tary a litle that I may drie it by the fier. I cannot tary so longe: go your way, I will none of it. Your mother will chide mee if you go to schoole without your cleane shirt. I had rather thou shouldst be shent, then I should be either chid, or beaten: where haue you layde my girdle and my inckhorne? where is my gyrkinof Spanish leather? of Bouffe? Where be my sockes of linnen, of wollen, of clothe? Where is my cap, my hat, my coate, my cloake, my kaape my gowne, my gloues, my mittayns, my pumpes, my moyles, my slippers, my handkarchif, my poyntes, my sachell, my penknife and my bookes? Where is all my geare? I haue nothyng ready: I will tell my father: I will cause you to be beaten: Peter, bring me some water to wash my hands and my face. I will haue no riuer water, for it is troubled: geue mee Well, or Fountayne water: take the ewre, and powre vppon my handes: powre high. Can you not wash in the baason? shall you haue alwayes a seruaunt at your tayle? you are to wanton. Wilt thou that I wash my mouthe and my face, where I haue washed my handes, as they doo in many houses in England? geue mee a towell: mayden, now geue mee my breakefast,for I am readie: make haste. Haue you saluted your Father and your Mother? haue you forgotten that? Where is he? He is in the shoppe. God geeue you good morow my father, and all your companie: father geeue mee your blessyng if it please you. Are you vp? is it time to rise at eight of the clocke? you shalbe whipt: go, and kneele downe, and say your prayers: God blesse thee. Our father which art &c.
Now goe, and haue mee recommended
vnto your maister and maistris,
and tell them that I pray them
to come to morow to dinner with mee:
that will keepe you from beating:
learne well, to the end that you may
render vnto mee your lesson when you are
come againe from schoole. Well father.
 God geeue you good morow gossip.
 And you also: how doo you
this morning? How doth my gossip?
 wel God be praysed: at your co~mandme~tHow is it w=t= you since yesternight supper?
 Well thankes be to God, sauyng that I
could not sleape all the night.
 Why? who hath letted you?
 What, haue you not heard the
minstrels and players of instruments,
which did play so sweetly before
the Cities stoarehouse, from midnight
euen vnto the breakyng of the day?
 Truly I haue not heard them.
 Verely you sleap very deepe.
 As he whiche sleapeth without care,
& which had drunk very wel yesternight.
 But to the purpose, which were those
singers and players of instruments?
 I cannot tell truely: except perchaunce
they were the minstrels of the towne,
with those of the Queenes, mingled
with voyces of Italions and Englishme~,
which did singe very harmoniously.
 Would God I had heard them,
and it had cost mee a quarte of wyne.
 I would you had for your sake:
for it would seeme vnto you to be rauished
in an yearthly paradise:
you had heard first and formostthe Violes, Cornets, Harpes, Hobois,
Trumpets, with foure Flutes
the which did triumphe.
 Is it true? in whose name did they play?
who had hyred them?
 The best of the citie, to pla~te the maipole
at the marketplace.
 But should it not be for some weddinge?
for the daughter of one of the sheriffes
of the citie is maried to daie.
 That may be: but so it is y=t= the may Pole
is planted verie sumptuouslie.
 Let vs go and see it if you will.
I am conte~t of it: let vs go when you wil.
 What musick doo I heare there at the
lanes ende? is it not some weddinge?
 It is the bride of whom I haue tolde you
 Truelie it is a faire wenche, though
her hed bee ill dressed: doo you see
the faire carkant whiche she hath hanging
on her neck?
 But do you see the faire chain of gold
whiche she hathe girded aboute?
 I think y=t= it is worthe aboute fiue hu~dred
frenche crownes.
 Where is the briedgrome? ah I see himthere at the middestof the great streete.
 Truly he is a fayre gentilman:
it doth appeare by his behauiour that
he is of a good house, and of great vertue.
 Whether go they? to Churche, or to
some great Lordes house?
 They go to y=e= Church of Saint Paule.
 What is a clocke?
 It is almost nine.
 What, is it so late? Yea truly.
 It is time to go to the Churche.
 Let vs go see that Mariage, and then
wee will go to heare the sermon
at Paules crosse.
 There shalbe no let for mee: for I haue
heard say that a yonge batcheler
of diuinitie, which is very well learned,
shall preache to day at the crosse.
 I beleeue it well: for there preacheth
no body but is of choyce, and of
great learning: and for cause.
 I doo thinke that they be y=e= best sermons
that men may heare in all the
rest of the Realme of England.
 And of those which be made before the
Queenes maiestie in the time of Lent,what say you of it?
 You say true: those be of weight:
but one must not meruell at,
for the Preachers be warned of
longe time before: so by that meane
they be sermons premeditated.
 Is it not better to take
a deliberation before hand, then to
come to the Pulpit rashly?
 I confesse it: for men doo see all
Sundayes and holy dayes a great
& a noble company in Pauls churchyeard.
beholde the church is all full of folkes:
how shall wee enter in?
 Enter you first, and I wil follow you:
thrust hard, & cause the way to be made.
 Harken, I doo heare a sweet musick:
I neuer heard the like.
 See whether wee may get to the quier,
and wee shall heare the fearest voyces
of all the cathedrall churches
in England.
 I beleeue you: who should haue them,
if the Londonners had them not?
 I thinke that the Queenes singyng men
are there, for I doo heare her baase.That may be: for, to tell the trueth,
I neuer heard better singyng.
 Harken, there is a good versicle.
 I promise you that I would heare them
more willingly singe, then eate or drinke.
 I am not of your minde: for mee
thinketh that I would heare them more
liuely, if I had well dined: but
wee doo tarie heare to longe: let vs go
and take our roume that wee may heare
the Sermon: shall wee go?
 I am content: how shall wee get out?
 Wel enoughe: follow mee: here is great
prease: I neuer saw such a multitude.
 Where shall wee sit? all is full:
all the formes be occupied.
 Wee will finde place enough, care you
not for that: let mee alone.
 Sit hard by, and right ouer against
the preacher, y=t= wee may heare him better.
 I will doo it if I may: William,
I pray you sit a side a litle, and
make vs some roume here by you.
 With a very good will Syr.
 What Lorde is that, whiche is aboue in
the Galerie?Doo you not know him? No truly.
 It is my Lorde of Bedford: and that
Lady which sitteth by him,
is my Lady thadmirall, the dutchesse
of N: the countise of N: the marquise
of N: My Lady Tresorer.
 Doo you know those gentleweme~, which
be behinde? Yea, as mee thinketh:
is it not maystris N. and
maistris of N: with their
two nices and coosins? Yea.
 Beholde the Preacher commeth:
shall wee helpe to singe this Psalme?
 I cannot singe, except I doo learne:
now, the sermon is almost ended:
let vs rise to get out first:
let vs not tarie for the prese.
 As it pleaseth you: I will doo all
that you will.
 By your leaue: let me go by
I pray you. With all my harte.
 Well gossip, whither go you to dinner.
 At home.
and you where dine you?
 At maister chauncelours of London:
he hath bidden mee aboue a fortnight a go.
 Truly wee shall dine together.I thanke you hartely gossip:
you shall scuse mee for this time if it
pleaseth you, for hee and I haue to
confer together touchyng some businesse.
 I pray you doo not denie it mee
at this time: doo an other time as
you shall thinke good: as it wil please you.
 I feare that he will take it in an euell
parte, if I doo deceaue him at this howre.
 No, no: I will make your scuse to him:
he knoweth mee very well: he and I
haue been schoolefellowes
at the Colledge of Winchester.
 Is not that your lackey which crosseth
the streete? except I be deceaued, it is he.
 Yea verely: call him.
 Lackey, come hither.
 What is your pleasure Syr?
 Whither go you? whither run you
so fast? it seemeth that you haue neither
woon nor lost.
 I went to seeke you: for those that
you bad yeesterday be at home
which doo tarie for you a good will a go.
 Hath no body asked after mee since
I departed?I cannot tell, Sir, because I haue
not been at home till now.
 Where haue you been so longe?
 My maistris hath sent mee on two
or three arands.
 You haue played by the way, and then
you bryng to mee these feare scuses.
 No forsoothe, Sir, if it
doth please you to aske of N. you
shall know the truth, for he was
with mee.
 Yea verely, I shall aske of thy fellow,
which is as great a liar
as thou art: is thy maistresse at
home.
 Yea, Sir, she is now
come from the Churche.
 Is the seruice doone in our parish?
 It is already a good halfe hower:
and it is neere twelue at our clocke.
 Runne before, and say that wee come:
see that the dinner be reddie when
wee bee come, and without a faute:
draw som wine in y=e= mean time, go quicklie.
 You haue there a pretie boy,
and quicke of wit.I promise you y=t= I will draw out more
seruice of that boye, then of three seruants
which will doo nothyng els then to make
greate cheere, and play at dice and cardes.
 There be some, to tell y=e= trothe, which be
very slougish: and as men say commonly,
he is happie which hath a good
seruant, and a good wife.
 What noyse doo I here there within?
 Knock at y=e= doore: knock hard, or els they
wil not heare it: pul the bel for the best.
 Truly I saw it not.
 Who is there?
 Open the doore: I thinke that you are
deafe: where is my wife?
 She is within, syr.
 Wife, shall wee go to dinner?
wife, shal wee dyne?
 When it will please you my louer: al is
ready: the meate mareth: where haue you
taried so longe? you come not now
from the Churche, that know I well, for
it is twelue stroken.
 Go to: let vs go to dinner: let vs go sit.Go cause the folke to sit which are
in the Haule: and I go to the kitchin
to cause to serue the boorde.
 Make speede then I pray you, for truly
I am hungrie: masters, you bee
all welcome: I am sorie that
I make you tarie so longe.
 No force, Sir?
wee doo warme vs in the meane while:
come neere the fier: come warme you.
 Truly I am more hungry then a colde:
go too, let vs wash handes.
 Wash you first, I will wash 
afterward well enough.
 Let vs wash al together I pray you:
 Sir, what doo you there? wash with vs
 As for mee I haue washed.
 And I haue handled nothing since that
I haue washed. Sit then, Syr.
 Pardon mee of that: it shalbe after you:
sit you first, I will sit afterwarde.
 You shall sit there: haue I not power
to commaunde in my house?
 Yes forsoeth, Syr.
 When I bee at yours, doo with mee
as it shall please you.You say well: go to then, sit downe here
by this yonge gentelwoman.
 Well, by commaundment I will doo it,
although it be half agaynst my will.
 There is no remedy: you must obey for
this time: page, call the children
for to blesse the boorde: rynge the bell.
 It is ronge. Bryng vs some meate.
 Iames. What is your pleasure mother?
 Where are you? why went you not 
to meete your father, and your vnckle?
I will tell your maister: I will cause you
to be beaten: go quickly say grace,
and take your sister by the hande:
take of your cappe, and make curtsie.
 Wel mother, I go thither: you are
welcome father, and all your companie.
 Where haue you been wa~ten? one must
alwayes call and seeke you when
one should say grace: pray vnto God.
 Our good Father almightie, &c.
 Is that your sonne Syr?
 Yea, it is my sonne. It is a fayre childe
God blesse him, & make him a good man.
 Of what age is he? Nine yeres & a half.
 Doth he go to Schoole? God forbidhe should not: you know well that it
is better to be vnborne,
then vntaught.
 You say true: what doth he learne?
 He doeth learne to speake Frenche.
 Doeth hee? it is very well doone: Henry
can you speake good Frenche?
 Yea, a litle Syr.
 Whither go you to schoole?
 At Lewsham, hard by the Church.
 Haue you of longe time learned to
speake Frenche?
 Aboute half a yeere. Doo you learne also
to write? Yea Syr. What more?
The Latin tongue. It is wel done: learne
alwayes well: how doo men call your
Maister? He is called. Is he maried? Yea Syr.
 Hath hee any children?
 He hath a sonne and a daughter.
 What countreima~ is hee? A Frenchman.
 I am glad of it: you wil learne y=e= better
the true and liuely pronounciation and
phrase of the frenche tongue.
 Very well, it is talke enough: now eate,
and make good cheere: you shall talkeafter dinner and at leasure.
 Beginne in the meane while: go 
thorow and doo not tarie for mee: for I haue
very well broken my fast this mornyng:
I take a great delight to talke with this
yonge boye: is this your daughter also?
 Yea gossip.
 Truly it is a feare gerle:
she will cost you nothyng toward her
mariage: she wilbe maried for her
beautie and good grace.
 Yea truly, you say well: she is a fayre
blacke one: take your spectakels, and
looke a litle neerer: doo you mocke?
 No truly: I haue not put on my 
mocke.
 Ione, is the childrens table couered?
 Not yet maistresse.
 Bryng their round table: and make the~
dine there at the bordes ende: reade a
chapter or two of the new Testament,
whilst they make ready your table.
 Peter, where is the booke? What booke?
 Where I read yesterday. Doo you
not see it? are you porblind? it will
put out your eyes, except you take heede:it is there vpon the pulpit.
 Father where shall I reade? Wher you
left yesterday, at the seconde of S. Iohn.
 Is it in the reuelation, in his Epistles, or
in his Gospell?
 Where you will.
 There is a fayre chapter truly: god geue
vs grace to doo the contence therof:
hold there, it is enough: marke it with
a litle incke: you make great haste:
you cannot reade moderatly:
your nose is in the kitchin I see it
well enough: it seemeth to your belly
that you haue lost your teeth:
now go to dinner.
 I cannot tel what faute you finde in it
gossip, but he readeth very distinctly
for his age.
 What, is not the childrens table
couered yet? what doest thou there
great lubber? why goest thou not
and serue the children?
 They bee two or three about it Syr.
 Who? Their lackey and their
chamberlayne: maister lackey truly you
shalbe whipped to day:you doo licke here the disshes in the
kitchin, lookyng if the roast be roasted,
and taste if the sauce is saulted: and
serue not your litle maister: who
hath drawen the lard out of these rabbets?
It is not I.
 You lie: go your wayes, you are
lickerish: O Lorde, he hath supped vp all
the brothe of this mince pie, I would not
be in thy skinne for twentie
crownes of golde.
 I know not where the table clothe lieth
neither the childrens napkins.
 No, but thou knowest well where the
fat of the pot is, and the sauciges in
the droppyng panne: thou shalt be beaten
thine belly full after dinner, be of good
cheere: and ye shalbe tremmed euen
vnder the belly, and euery where, beleeue
mee if thou wilt.
 You threaten much, who shall
whip mee?
 Who? the mayster steward.
 Wilt thou go lay the table clothe vile
gallowes? what dost thou marre here?
 What can I tell where it lieth, go yourselfe.
 It is vpon the cubbord, or within the
drawer: holde, carie these trenchers
and the saltseller.
 I dare not go before my maister,
for feare that he will chide mee.
 No force: thou hast not
onely deserued to bee shent, but
also to be well beaten.
 Lackey, from whence come you?
 I come from the kitchin beneathe.
 Very well, you are a cooke: well wee
will recken together after dinner:
I owe vnto you one, and this
makethtwo: I will pay you all
together, be sure of it: call vnto mee
the butlar.
 I am here Syr.
 Go set mee a broche the best
peece of wyne which is in the sellar:
Sirs, I pray you make good
cheere: yee bee welcome: cosin,
I drinke to you with such a good
hart as euer I did when I haue
been very drie.
 Truly I pledge you with such agood will as euer I came from
the schoole: doo you not beleeue mee?
 Yea, verely: I beleeue you without
any other swearyng: but doo mee
reason: drinke all out.
 What coosen, doo you not remember
Kynghis banket,
where euery one dranke as he listed,
and no body was constrayned?
 Oh, I crie mercie: pardon mee
if it pleaseth you: you haue stopped
my mouth: now for al amends
will you haue a bit of this pouder beef,
 As it shall please you: truly it is
very good: it is as tender and shorte
as Veneson: geeue mee some
mustarde.
 What sir, you loue Mustard
as I perceaue: it wil make you a 
red nose and a crimsin face.
 I wil blot it out w=t= a drauft of maumsie.
 By my faith it is a good meeter:
aske of what wyne it shall please you
to drinke, spare it not, the vynes
are faire: William, geeue here som bread:
take a ladder, and see what wantethvppon the boorde: you will neuer learne
to serue: why doo you not lead it
with a trencher plate, and not with
the hande? I haue told it to you aboue
an hundred times: you learne nothynge:
it is a great shame: holde, geeue this
platter of porage vnto the children, and
geeue them some spoones: Peter,
take vp my knife which is fallen vnder
the table.
 You doo nothyng but play the wanton
litle fellow: I will tell your father:
why doo you not eate your porage
whylste they be hot? you
are not hungrie.
 They are yet to hot: I haue burned my
tongue, and my lippes.
 If they be too hot, blow them.
 Are those your good manners to blow
your porage at the borde? where
haue you learned that? at your vilage?
geeue mee some drinke.
 Eate first a litle, for you
would be sicke: will you drinke fastyng?
 But I wil not bee: geeue mee some beere.
 Holde the pot: holde it well: you spill:doo not you see what you doo?
 I knew not that it was so full.
 Brother, is any thyng in the pot?
 Not very much: Iohn, fill
him som drinke.
 What will you drinke? ale, or
beere? why doo you not answer?
 Fill mee some beere in this pot:
fill this glasse: fill not so full:
fill no double beere, but
of the smalest, for I am very drie:
I cannot quenche my thirst.
 Husband, I pray you pull in peeces that
Capon, and help your neighbour:
truly he eateth nothyng.
 Tarie a litle wife, I haue not
yet tasted of these Cabeges.
 You cannot eate of them, for they
be to much peppered and salted.
 Ah, what pitie is that? it is the meate
that I loue best, and it is marred:
they say commonly in England
that God sendeth vs meate, and the 
Deuill cookes.
 My louer, tast a litle of these turneps,
and you will finde them of a good taste.I care not very much for:
are these rootes well seasoned?
 If you will eate of a good meate,
cut of that legge of mutton stuft
with garlicke.
 Geeue mee rather of that Capon
boyled with leekes: for I should smell of
garlicke three dayes after.
 Take away this boyld meat: now bring
vs the roaste: pull hither that
shoulder of Veale: it is very wel larded,
it prouoketh mee to eate truly: make
roume to set the disshes: set that a side
a litle: cut that Turkie cocke in
peeces: but let it be colde,
for it is better colde then hot:
Sir shall I bee your caruer?
 Yea forsooth Syr, on that condition that
I shalbe your cupbearer.
 Wee are agreed: will you haue this
Hennes wynge?
 As for mee I loue the white of the hen:
and you loue the roump.
 You are a scoffer, as I perceaue.
Peter, fill mee some wine.
 What wine will it please you to drinke?It is all one to mee: geeue mee
claret wine: put water in it, for it is
to stronge to drinke without water:
powre still: holde vp, it is enough.
 I will not drinke with you, for you
put to much water in your wine.
 I shall not be so soone droken.
 What? will you be dronken? will
you make your selfe droken?
 No, but it is the wine which maketh
mee dronke.
 The faute is not in the wine, but in
him which doth drinke it.
 I am glad to see you merie.
What? an once of mirth is better,
then a pounde of sorow,
yea, and make good weight.
 How would you weigh them?
 I wil tell it you, when I haue dronken:
geeue mee some wine, if there be any.
 There is no more. Is there no more?
go fetch some: is the seller so farre?
 Sir, I dranke yesterday of the best fre~ch
wine that is in all the
Tauerns of London. Where is that?
 At the signe of the Rose,at Temple barre.
 Let vs haue a quarte of it.
 I had rather that you should say
a pinte: what will a quarte serue among
so many? one must speake
of a gallon or two.
 Come hither Iohn, you will doo this
message wel: tel the good man of y=e= Rose,
that he will sende mee of such wine which
wee drank y=e= other daie at his lodging: & tel
him that if he doo not sende mee of the like
which I did taste in his sellar,
wee wil send it backe agayne: run quickly
are you there yet?
 I will not tarie: but by what
token?
 You neede no token: doo
onely that I bid you: 
he will not fayle, for he knoweth mee
very well.
 My Maister sendeth mee to you,
praying you to sende him
a flaggen of the best wine
that you haue.
 Who is your Maister my freend?
I know him not.Doo you not know him? he dwelleth
on th'otherside of y=e= street: he did drinke on
Saterday last with you in your seller.
 You say true: I remember it
now: William.
 What is your pleasure maister?
 Fill him his bottell with wine,
and of a fresh peece.
 Geeue mee your bottell: come with
mee into the seller, and you shall see it
perced: put a broche.
 See what you doo: you spill:
take the Fonnell: dispatche a litle
for I haue great hast: they tarie for mee.
 Holde, go your way: and tell your
maister that there is of the best y=t= I haue.
 Here is the wyne. What saieth hee?
Hee hath him commended to you, and
sendeth you the choyce, and the flower of
all his wines.
 Rince the glasse, that I may taste of it:
how like you this wine?
 I like it very well: I like him the better
for that he sente vs such good wine: hee
hath doon vnto mee y=e= turne of a good freend
 Geeue mee a cleane trencher: thesechickens are to much roasted: open that
Pastie of Veneson: this Doe was
very fat, was it not?
 Yea verely: it is
the fattest that I haue
yet seen this yeere.
 Bring vs some suggred Mustard
for our Veneson: Syr, doo not
mislike mee if I bee
bolde in your house.
 You cannot bee to bolde here,
I pray you commaunde as
if you were in your house,
and you shall doo mee pleasure.
 Geeue mee drinke in that Goblet.
 What, will you not haue vs to
see how much you drinke?
you are a subtel fellow, you will
deceaue folkes.
 Truly I did not thinke on it: you
imagine alwayes euell, where
no goodnesse is to bee had.
For what doo you laugh? wherof I laugh?
 He dooth laugh at your page which hath
supped vp a cup of wine, & then wipeth
his bill as if he hadnot touched on it.
 Doth hee not well? it is not the
first that hee hath swalowed vp: hee
knoweth well the trade of it.
 Maistresse, shall I geeue you some
crust of this pie?
 As it will please you: I am well God
be thanked.
 Mee thincketh that it is too much baakt.
 No forsoothe, it is but well:
but it is great pitie that
the licker is so runne out.
 It is the faulte of the baker: I would
that he had it in his belly.
 I woulde bee sory of it truly, for I
should lose. And I also, to tell the truth.
 Wyfe, haue wee nothyng els?
 Yea husband: are the blackebyrdes
rosted, the larkes, and the woodcockes?
set here this partrich larded.
 Coosin, if you will eate of a good
morsell, cut some of these loynes
of the hare, drest with a blacke sauce.
 Unckle, here is to much meate:
mee thinketh that wee bee at a weddyng.
 I doo heare some body which knockethat the doore: see who it is.
 Mighell, where bee the keyes?
 They hange on a nayle behinde y=e= doore.
 Who is there? They bee freendes:
open the doore: I haue been here
aboue halfe an houre: hath your
maister dined?
 Hee is not at the Fruit yet.
 Are there many folkes with him?
 Fifteen, or sixteen: what is your pleasur
what shal I say who asketh for him?
 Tel him that it is N.
 Come in Sir: come in gentilwoman:
Sir, there is a gentilman beneathe
which would fayne speake with you.
 Cause him to come in. Father, it is
my godfather, and my godmother.
 Ah lickerish, you know them well
by the cumfits, and lickerishnesse
which they geeue you.
 Gossyp, you are welcome:
and you also, my shee gossyp:
how doo you?
 So, so. Wherefore?
haue you been sicke?
 Yea, and of an euill sicknesse.What sickenesse hath taken you?
 Lackyng of money.
 Oh, take heede of that
disease, for lackyng of money is 
a payne which there is not the like:
I know it well: I haue prooued it:
but yet, what sickenesse haue you?
 None, God be thanked, at this present,
but the toothe ache: but I will
heale it as soone as I
shall come to my vitayles: so it is
notwithstanding, that I haue had an ague
a fortnight or three weekes
which hath much weakned mee, and I
feele yet some fit of it,
because I haue not broken my fast.
 Where haue you taried so longe?
from whence come you now?
truly you are to blame:
wee haue almost dined.
 Wee come from the court.
 What newes at the court?
doth the Kynge go to huntyng?
 Wee haue seen the Queen in her
coutche which cam from walkyng
out of the Parke: and as she went to thechappell to heare the seruice,
there was a Lady of the court
auncient enough, which hath presented her
a request: the Queene hath taken it
very gentely, truly, and hath geeuen
her her hand to kisse.
 Shee is a very courteous Princesse,
God preserue her longe vnto vs.
 So be it: truly it is a Lady
woorthy of a great prayse: shee hath
kept vs a longe time in peace and
tranquilitie: the which yee haue not
read in any chronicle of England,
that there hath been any Prince since the
conquest, which hath maintayned this
Realme in such a longe and good peace:
and if I should say since,
I should not lie.
 But in the meeane time make mee some
roume: you occupie more roume
then three others: doo you see what a
payre of buttockes he hath?
 It is well sayd, gossip, make them to go
backe, for you haue neede of it: I thinke y=t=
you haue a good stoomacke,
 So haue I truly: why should I lie?Will you sup some brothe?
 Bryng vnto him the broth of that capon
which I haue caused to be kept.
 Sirs, I pray you doo not tarie
for mee: follow your enterprise:
as for mee, I wil make a lawiers dinner.
 What doo you meane by that?
 Did you neuer heare speake of
hunters breakfast, lawiers dinner,
marchants supper, and drinkyng
of Moonkes? he which maketh all these
meales, doth hee not fare well?
 Where doth he take the sacke to thrust
in so much meate?
 He is worse then an.
 There be founde in y=e= world such guts.
 It is more pitie that there is no
more disciplin among men.
 Hee which hath two kniues, let him
lend mee one.
 Haue you no knife? No.
 Cut my finger, I geeue you
leaue, and I will not repent.
 You are an hardy man: you go
to the battell after the blowes are geuen:
George, lende mee your knife.It is not sharp: he cutteth nothyng:
I will go whet it.
 Geeue it mee, I will make it cut well enough
 Gossip, I thinke that you are
yet fastyng.
 What, should I fast so longe? I coulde
not surely: I haue dronken this morning
a draught of Maumsie, with a litle
toast: I haue dronke also some Muscadet.
 Elizabeth, take all away: geeue vs
the fruite.
Sirs, will you eate of a
Pike with a high dutche sauce?
what say you of a stued Carpe?
 Oh Syr, it is to much: it wold be excesse:
besides, you will put your self to
great coste.
 Care you not for the charges:
it is drest: set them vpon the boorde,
and eate of it who will.
 I thinke that this Carpe was an
ell longe: is it of your ponde?
 And that Pike, it is the greatest and
biggest that euer I see.
 Now serue the Fruite: laye herethose rosted paires, and the scrapped
cheese set those appels lower: they bee
pepins, as it seemeth vnto me:
did you euer see fearer pepins?
 I hold a penie
that it comethe out of Normandie.
 No no, it is growen in England:
these tartes bee cold, & the egges
pies also: maistris, will you haue
some cake? trulie it is but dow
I wold that the baker had been
backed when he did heate the ouen.
 But so it is that this wether shold
warne him to heate his ouen well,
for it is verie cold: it doth snow and
frisethe all together.
 It did raine nowe: Henry, go
fetch some wood and make good fier: bring
a busshell of coales. wel maister.
 Roland, shall we haue a song?
yea Sir: where bee your bookes of 
musick? for they bee the best corrected.
 They bee in my chest: Katherin take
the key of my closet, you shall find
them in a litle til at the left hand:
behold, therbee faire songes atfouer partes.
 Who shall singe with me?
 You shall haue co~panie enough: Dauid 
shall make the base: Iohn, the tenor:
and Iames the treble.
 Begine: Iames, take your tune:
go to: for what do you tarie?
 I haue but a rest.
 Roland, drink afore you begine,
you will sing with a better corage.
It is wel said: geue me some white wine:
that will cause me to sing clearer.
 You must drink greene wine. Yea trulie
to cause me to lose my voice.
 Oh, see what a fonell, for he hath powred downe
a quarte of wine without anie takinge
of his breath.
 I shold not bee a singing man except I could
drink well: and for feare wee shold haue
the throte drie, wee weat the
mouthe often: and among vs
singers, wee haue a good recepte
for to be neuer drie.
 What is it I praye you? I
wold faine learne it.
 I will teach it vnto you for a quarteof wine, is not that good cheape?
 Truly thou shalt haue two quartes,
and geeue it mee in writyng.
 You neede no writing in that: you
will remembre it well enough by harte.
 Say then I pray thee.
 For to quenche well the thirst, one must
drinke often, and longe draughtes.
 Is that thy receite? go, go
with a morion: I know that
aboue ten yeeres a go.
 I could not geeue you a better
phisicke then the same which I take for
my selfe.
 Thou hast a conscience as large as a
grea Friers sleeue: if I should doo
that, I shouldehaue the dropsie
before a monthes ende.
 And I, if I should not drinke, I should
become as drie as a ga~mon of Bacon hong
on a chimney: therefore your
nature and mine bee contrary:
and as I perceaue, you cannot
tell the songe which beginneth
I had rather go without hosen
then forbeare drinkyng.I praye thee let vs haue it.
 With all my harte.
 Truelie he is a merie fellowe.
 Leonard, ar the chestnutes rosted?
 Yea Sir. Geue them vppon the borde.
 Henry, rise, and your sister also:
what, you kepe table as long
as wee: serue here: and see
whether anie thing be wa~ting vpo~ y=e= bord
but I praye you cut that cheese:
you doo not make good cheere:
you are not merie: this
musick doth not make you merie.
 Yes forsoth: truelie I take a
great delight in it.
 There is a good song: I do
maruell who hath made it.
 It is the maister of the children
of the Queenes chapell.
 What is his name?
 Maister Edwards. Is he a liue?
I heard saie that he was dead.
 It is alreadi a good while a go: ther are at
the least fiue yeers and a half.
 Truelie it is pitie: he was a man
of a good wit, and a good poete:and a great player of playes.
 Well, hee is gon before,
wee shall follow him hereafter
when it will please God.
 Geeue mee that sheepe cheese:
will you haue of this frenche
Angelot? it is yet green.
 It is more deintie, as men doo say,
notwithstandyng I loue it not, because
it is so fat: it is but creame.
 Tast then of this parmison, or of
this Holland cheese.
 Where is my lackey? I did send him
to fetch some Renish wine, and I thinke
that he lieth by the way.
 Hee is come agayne: he drieth him
selfe in the kitchin, because hee is
wette.
 Doth it rayne? No Sir, but it doth
snow harde.
 I dare lay that he hath played with 
snow baules by the way:
I drinke vnto all the companie:
thanking you that you haue shewen
vnto mee so much curtesie as to haue come
to my house: I am sorie thatI am not able to make you
better cheere.
 Wee do thank you, Sir,
what better cheere could
you wishe?
 Take away the boord: & call the childre~
for to saie grace.
 George, take awaie this dish,
can you not?
 I can not retch to it. Awaye:
you can doo nothing: you are
good but to drink, eate and sleap.
 Father doth it please you that I saye 
grace?
 Tarie yet a litle that all
be taken awaie: now saie.
 To thee wee do geue thankes, &c.
 Now rehearse some faire
sayinge or sentence, that wee
maye see what you haue learned.
 What shall I saie father? a
sentence, a prouerb, a fable,
an epigrame or an apophthegme?
 Say what you liste.
 For one pleasure, a thousand sorowes.
 It is verie well and truelie said:you are a feare childe:
come neare to mee
that I may reason with you:
what booke doo you reade at schoole?
 My maister readeth vnto vsand, Syr.
 Who is the captayne of your
schoole?
 It is Henry Edmoundes.
 What, hee whiche did pronounce
an Oration before the Queenes
maiestie, when she was
now of late at?
 Yea Syr, it is hee.
 I know his father very well:
he is a good gentilman truly.
 Now, haue you talked longe enough
with that boy? let vs wash after dinner:
let vs wash all together I pray you:
Gentilwoman, come neare,
you are very straunge: I pray
you bee bolde here, as if
you were at your house, for
so are you: spare nothyng
that I haue, and you shal doo mee pleasure.
 I thanke you with all my hart:I knowe not when I shalbe able
to recompense you of such a
curtesie whiche you show me
dailie: I am here ordinarlie
at dinner and supper.
 It pleaseth you to saye so:
you can not come so often,
but you are the better welcome:
let vs go take the aire of the fier:
I beginne to wax cold: gossip,
what do you there? why come you
not nere the fier? page,
laie a faggot on the fier.
 Husband you will set the chemnie
on fier, except you take heede.
 I will not my she louer, for it is
therin alreadi.
 It is time to departe, for they haue
ronge twise to eueninge praiers.
 Haue you so great haste? let vs warme
vs first, and then
wee wellgo all together.
 By your leaue: wee will take our
leaue of you: thanking you
hartelie for our good chere.
 Will you be gone?Yea, if it pleaseth you.
 As it will please you.
 God geeue you a good and longe life
Sir.
A good & longe life God geeueth vnto you.
 God bee with you gossip till I see you agayne
 They bee gon.
 God bee their guide. God saue you Maister Robert.
 Sir, God geeue you a good and long lif.
 How doth your health since
I saw you.
 So, so.
 Mee thinketh that you doo not
so well as you were wont.
 How know you that?
 By your face which is so pale.
 I haue had fiue or six fits of an ague,
which haue much weakened mee: and
haue taken away all my stomack.It is an euell sickenesse:
whither ride you so softly?
 To London, to Barthelmew fayre.
 And I also: if you will,
wee will go together.
 It pleaseth mee very well: but you
 ride a litle to fast for mee.
 Let vs ride as you will,
it is all one to mee, for my horse
aumbleth very easely.
 And mine doth trot to hard:
now let vs go in gods name.
 Who bee they that doth go afore vs?
 I know them not truly: they be
Marchants: let vs pricke our horses
for to ouertake them, for I am afrayde
that wee bee out of our way.
 Wee bee not, bee not afrayde:
yet it is good to aske it.
 Aske of that shee sheapherd.
 My shee freend, where is the right
way hence to N. right before you,
turnyng neither on the right
neither on the left hand, till
you come to an highe elme tree,
then turne on the left hand.How many miles haue wee hence
to the next village?
 Twoo miles and a half, and a litle more.
 Now let vs go at leasure, for I am
out of doubt: I see the tree
wherof shee hath tolde vs: it is
very dustie: the dust doth
put out mine eies.
 Take this Taffeta to holde
before your face, and it will
keepe you from the dust and the sunne.
 It is not neede of, for the sunne
goeth downe: therefore I am afraied
that wee come not by day light
to the towne.
 Yes forsooth: but the worst is,
that this way is daungerous
because of theeues: they did rob
th'other day a riche Marchant
at that side of the tree, the which
maketh mee afrayde to be robbed,
except wee take heede:
I see the steepell of the towne
except I bee deceaued.
 Truely it wilbe late afore wee
come thither: I doubt that weemay not enter in.
 Yes forsooth: they doo not shut the
gates before neene.
 It is the better, for I would
not gladly lie in the subburbes.
 Nor I too.
 Let vs aske of these folkes for the best
Inne of this towne.
 Take no care for that:
I know well the best lodging of
the towne: it is the Swan, at the
great market place right ouer against
the crosse.
 Let vs make hast I pray you,
for they draw the drawyng bridge.
 I am so weary, that I cannot
go further: furthermore,
my horse halteth, I doo thinke that a nayle
doth pricke him, or hee is hurted vpon the
backe: besides, this pauement is so hard,
that it bruseth mee altogether.
 Let vs enter in then: god saue you
my freende.
 God geeue you good euenyng, Sir.
 Shallwee lodge within for this night?
 Yes forsooth, Sir: how many bee you?Wee bee ten of a company.
 Wee haue lodgyng enough for three
times as many: light downe when
it will please you.
 Haue you a good stable, good hey,
good oates, and good litter?
haue you good wine?
 The best in the towne: you shal tast of it.
 Haue you any thing to eate?
 Sir, light downe onelie,
you shall lacke nothyng.
 Vse vs well, for wee bee werie,
and halfe dead by hunger and thirst.
 Sirs, you shalbe very wel vsed,
and your horses also.
 It is well sayd: rub well my horse
when you haue taken of his saddell:
vndoo his tayle: geeue vnto him good
litter: take his halter which is in the
purs of the saddell: if he hath none,
buie you one, and then I will,
geeue you your money again, and you shal
haue some to drinke.
 Sir, there shalbe no faute:
hath your horse dronke?
 No, but doo not water him yet,for he is yet to hot: you
would cause him to take the Glaunders:
walke him a litle, and when he
hath eaten somwhat, you shall
bryng him to the water side: see if
the girtes bee not broken:
brynge my bouget which hangeth
on the sadels bowe: pull my bootes,
and make them cleane: then put my
boote hosen within.
 It shalbe dun: dooth it please you now
to come to supper? Thou sayest well:
thou art a good fellow: go too, let vs go:
I am readie.
 I go to supper to the towne:
if any body asketh after mee, you
shall finde mee at the Treasurers house:
or els tell them that I will come
streight after supper: harke,
to morow morning before you water
my horse, bryng him to the smith,
and let him take heede for prinkyng him:
Sirs, doo not forget to drinke
to mee, and I will pledge you all.
 Truly you are to blame, to breake
such a good companie.There is no remedie, I will keepe you
companie to morow all the day longe.
 What folkes bee there within?
 They bee gesse. Of what countrey.
 They bee Londonners: wil it please you
to sup with them? It is all one to vs.
 Much good may it doo you Sirs.
 God a mercy mine hoste.
 I pray you make good chere, and
spare not the wine, for it is
hot: drawer, draw a pinte
of Claret wine, that they may
taste of it: my gesse, how doo you like
this wine? hath it not a good tast?
hath it not a fayre colour?
what doth hee lacke? is it not worth
drinking?
 It is fayre & good: where is my hostes?
 She will come anone: make good cheere
in the meane time of such thinges that
you haue: you shalbe better an other time.
 Wee bee very well mine hoste, wee
thanke you.
 Sir, I drinke to you.
 I loue it of your hande my hoste, I
pledge you with all my harte.Sir, will please you to geue me leaue
to drink to you?
 I thank you an hundred thousa~ds times.
 I thinck to haue seen you
some time, but I do not remember
well where: me thinketh
that it is at London.
 Yea truelie: I am of London.
 It will not displease you if I aske
your name: let it not be anie displeasure
vnto you if I aske your name: shall I
be so bold as to aske your name?
 Howe do men call you?
 What is your name?
 Sampson: I am called Sampson:
men do call me Sampson.
 Of what kindred are you?
 Of the linage of the Marshes.
 You saie true: I know you verie well:
howe dothe your health?
 As you see. Howe do you?
 As your frend: readie to do you
pleasur: ready to obeie you.
 I thank you of your good will:
from whence com you now?
 From beyond the sea: from Fraunce:out of Flanders: from highe dutchland.
 What newes in France?
 Truelie nothing good. How so?
 The ciuil warre is there so enflamed,
that the father is against the sonne, and
the sonne against the father: and are so
madde, that they drawe their
swordes against their proper bowels,
 God preserue vs from ciuill warres,
for it is an euell fleale: is it
true that I haue hearde saye?
 What Syr? That they haue doone
such a great murther in Paris?
 That knowe I not: when came
the newes?
 Yesternight by a post.
 O immortall God, how men bee
vnconstant: well, one must haue
patience: wee shall haue peace
when it will please God.
 What newes doth men report in
this towne?
 What newes do you hear?
 What good dothe men saie?
 What newes saye you?
 What newes?All is well: all goeth well.
 I know no newes.
 Nothyng but good. Sirs, by your
leaue: I am sumwhat euill at ease.
 Sir, if you bee ill at ease,
go and take your rest: your chambre
is readie: Iane, make a good fier
in his chambre, and let him lacke nothing.
 My shee freend, is my bed ready?
is it good? Yea Sir:
it is a good Fetherbed: the
sheetes bee all cleane.
 Pull my hosen, and warme
my bed, for I am very ill at ease:
I shake as a leafe vpon the tree:
warme my kerchif, and bynde
my head well: soft, you tie it
to harde: bryng my pillow,
and couer mee well: draw the curtines,
and pin them with a pin:
where is the chambre pot? where is the
draught? where bee the priuies?
where be the iakes?
 Follow mee lackey, and I will
shew you the way: go vp.
streight, you shall finde themat the righthand: if you see them
not, you will smell them well enough:
Sir, doo you lacke any thing els?
are you well?
 Yea my shee freend: put out the candel,
and come neare to mee.
 I will put it out when I am out
of the chambre: what is your pleasure?
are you not well enough yet?
 I haue my head to loe, lift vp
a litle the bolster, I cannot
lie so loe: my shee freende, kisse mee
once, and I will sleape the better.
 Sleape, sleape: you are not sicke,
seeyng that you speake of kissyng
rather to die, then to kisse
a man in his bed, neither in other place:
take your rest in gods name: God geeue
you good night, and good rest.
 I thanke you fayre mayden.
 Ho, shall wee rise? is it not
time to rise? what is a clocke?
 It is one of the clocke:
it is two, &c.
 Boy, bryng some light:
make some fier, that wee may rise.Crie more a loude, he
heareth you not.
 Here I am Sir, what is
your pleasure? it is not daylight yet:
you may well sleap twoo
good howers afore it
bee day.
 Go, go: kindell the fier, thou wilt
make vs as slougish, and as
good husbandes as thou art: drie my
shirt that I may rise: let him tarie
at bed that listeth, as for mee
I haue to much businesse: where is
the horse keeper? go tell him that hee
leade my horse to the riuer
when hee hath wel rubbed & curried him,
combed his maine, sadled, and trust
his tayle: that he will let him drinke wel,
and then let him geeue him a pecke
and a halfe of Oates: go buie mee
a doosen of poyntes:
the oylet holes of my hosen are
broken: lende mee your bodkinne.
 Are you vp Sir? Yea,
is it not time? It is not late:
the marchauntes haue not yet openedtheir shoppes, neither vnfolde their
ware: make your self readie at ease.
 Wee go to the church, prepare in the
meane while the breakefast.
 What shall I prepare for you? it is
to day a fish day. How?
 It is Saint Barthelmews euen:
it is the euen of Saint N.
it is a day of fastyng: fastyng day.
 I did not thinke on it truely: I know
not that it had been fastyng:
prepare vs then a dosen
of new layde egges rosted in the imbers:
new hot cakes, and sweet butter:
let vs go Sirs, are yee redy.
 Truly here is a fayre and a rich towne:
beholde what fayre streets & faire houses:
there is a fayre temple: a fayre
Churche: there is a fayre mayden, a faire
woman, a fayre man.
 What gentilman is that?
It is the noblest,
the hardiest,
the most honest,
the wisest,
the richest, of y=e= cou~trythe most humble,
the most courteouse,
the most liberall. of the contrie.
 What man is that
 It is the prowdest,
the most couetouse, 
the greatest boaster,
the most ialiouse,
the greatest cockold,
the greatest coward, 
the most fearfull,
the poorest, 
the greatest geuer
of good morow. of all y=e= town.
 What woman is that?
 She is the fairest,
the prowdest,
the strongest horre,
the most honest, 
the most chast, 
the worst,
the best,
the happiest,
the vnhappiest. of the streete.
 What maiden is that?
 It is not a maiden:shee is maried:
 shee is not maried:
 shee is betrouth:
 shee is a weedow:
 shee is a good housewife:
 shee hath a good dowrie:
 shee hath a good mariage.
What hath shee for her mariage?
 Shee hath vertue and honestie:
is not that enough? Yea.
 Who is here buried?
 It is the byshop of N.
 There is a fayre graue:
a fayre and riche Sepulcher: let vs
reade the Epitaph.
 Now let vs returne to our lodgyng
to breake our fast, and then wee will buie
such thinges as wee lacke.
 Sirs, what would you gladly buie?
see if I haue any thyng
which serueth your turne: I will sell
you as good cheape, as any man within
London: come in.
 Haue you any karsies of Flaunders
diyng? Yea sir:
 I haue very fayre and good:the best of the towne, yea in England:
of what coulour do you lacke?
browne, grey, orenge, taunie, red,
yalow, violet or blew? I haue
of all the coulours, and of all prices.
 How sell you a yarde of this blacke?
I pray you doo not ouer sell it.
 Will you but a woorde? it shall
cost you a crowne a yearde.
 It is to much: I wil geeue .iiij. shillings.
 It is to litle truly: I should leese in it:
it coste mee more: take the whole
peece for sixe poundes
foure shillynges ten pence halpenie:
it is but foure shillynges sixe pence 
halpenie the yearde.
 It is to deare: how many yeardes
bee therin? You shall see it measured:
there bee .xxvii. els and a halfe,
and a half quarter.
 I will geeue sixe poundes at the last
worde: I haue forsaken as good
as this, and better
cheepe by a groate in an ell.
 You should take it: but I promise
you that except you were mycustomer, you should not
haue it vnder six poundes
fifteene shillynges: but seeyng that
it is you, I doo bate you aboue
neene shillinges on the peece.
I thinke that you desier not
my losse: and truly if you refuse it,
no man in the world shall haue it
for the price: yea if it were my brother.
 Well, you shall bate mee that ten
pence for to make a rounde rekenyng.
 I will not sticke at ten pence.
 I will pay you in good gold, & of weight.
It is all one to mee: white money is as
good vnto mee as golde: but truly
you are to harde: neuerthelesse
I had rather leese, then to sende
you away: I hope that an other time
I shall haue of your money
sooner then an other.
 Yea in deede: I will not forsake you
for an other: I would I had
a porter, a packbearer, for I
must buie manie other
thinges, and my lodging is fare of.
 What lack you more?A peece or two of veluet:
 I haue none truely: but go
to the next shop at the other
side of the streete, and he will let
you haue it better cheape for my sake.
 Sir, what lacke you? 
 doo you seeke for any good veluet, Saten
damaske, fustian, worsted, buckram,
sarsenet, or any sort of silke
clothe? what will you haue?
you shall haue good cheape.
 That prentise hath a good tongue:
he waiteth for his maisters profit:
 Shew mee a peece of blacke veluet.
 Well, I will: beholde, is it not
good? did you euer see the like?
 Haue you not better?
 Yes forsooth, but it is of a greater price.
 I care not whatsoeuer it costeth,
if it bee good.
 Here is the best veluet which you
euer did handell.
 You will make mee beeleeue so:
I haue seen better, and worse
too: doo not vnfolde it all:
I haue had the sight of it.There is no hurt: he which
hath vnfold it, shall fold it agayne well enough:
for a knaues paine is not to bee set by.
What shall I pay for the yard?
 Twentie shellinges. You hold it to hie.
 No truely, for it is not possible to
find better, neyther of a fayrer colour.
 Saye what you will, but I will not
geue so much.
 What will you geue for? that I may
sell, and may haue your handsell:
I trust that you will bring mee good loock.
 I will geue seuenten shillings at
one word: shall I haue it? no truelie:
I can not fourde it at that price,
you know it well, one need not
to tell it vnto you: it costeth mee more
then you doo offer me: I should leese
to much.
 How sell you the twoo peeces
together? and let vs haue but a woord.
 Will you but one woord? you shall
pay two and thirtie pounds,
as much at one woord as in an hundred:
you should not auayle a halpeny.
 No, no: you are to deare: tell methe last woorde, and doo not cause mee
to tarie so longe.
 Sir, I haue tolde it you: I am
a man of one worde: I can not
vtter it for lesse, except I would leese.
 Seeyng that you are a man of one word,
wee must go to other places,
for you set your ware out of reason.
 Go whether it will please you in gods
name: seeke for your best:
I had rather that an other doo get in it,
then I should leese: yet I may
assure you of one thinge, that if
you should go to all the shoppes and store
howses in London, you shall
not get such a pennieworth as
I offer vnto you: notwithstandyng if
you finde no better come agayne:
you know my price.
 Your price is not for vs.
 Well, at your commaundement:
you know what you haue to doo.
 Well, seeyng that wee cannot
agree of the price farwell:
haue mee commended.
 At your good pleasure: if I couldlet it for a lesser price, you should haue it
as soone as any man in the world:
chieflie for his sake
which hath sent you to mee.
 They go awaye: they be gone.
 Let them go: let them runne
they be calues: when they haue
runned their bellie full about the faire,
they wilbe glad to come againe:
 Sir, it seemeth vnto me that the veluet
is verie good: if wee do refuse it,
we shall not find easelie
such for the price: let vs aske him
if he will bate the fourtie shyllinges.
 Shall wee tak it? Yea, if you
do beleeue me, and you will not
repent of it.
 Maister, they come againe.
 They shalbe welcome if they
bring monie.
 I pray you do not cause vs to
take more labour: will you take
thirtie poundes for both the peeces
without any turning againe? and tell
monie.
 Truelie you are tedious:you care not whether I leese 
or winne: it is all one vnto you:
go to, go to: let vs measure it.
 No, no: I take it as if it weremesured:
I trust you well.
 This olde angel is to short:
this frenchcrowne is to light:
these peeces of ten shillynges be clipped:
this ducate is not of weight:
this crowne of Flaunders is not
corant: this ryall is base golde:
this dauller is not of good siluer:
these spanish reals
are not of good mettell.
 You are very difficult in receauyng
of money: if I had knowen so much, if
you had solde mee your marchaundise
for twentie poundes,
verely I would not
haue it.
 Sir, it is at your choice,
to take it or leaue it:
I doo not get so much in it, that I
should take anie light money,
or which is not corant.
 Truely I haue not coyned it,neither clipped. I beleeue it well:
I know no help in it.
 Holde, there is my purse, pay
yourself at leasure.
 There is a counterfet shillyng.
 Nayle it at the threshal of the doore.
 It shalbee doone: brynge mee an
hammer and a nayle: I would
that the eares of him which hath
coyned it, were as well nayled
as it is.
 It would bee no hurt at all:
now, are you contented?
 Yea Sir, I thanke you:
spare nothyng that I haue aswell
without money, as with money.
 God a mercy Sir: Porter,
lay this vpon your backe, and
carie it to my lodgyng.
 I know not where you doo lodge.
 At the signe of the golden Lion,
in Fishstreete:
and tell them that they will prepare the 
dinner, for wee will depart by and by.
 Shall wee buie a baby or two 
for our children.Buie some for vs both.
 Well hostesse, shall wee dine.
 Washe when yee will, and go
and sit.
 Cause our horses to bee sadled & brideled
wee shouldbee two 
miles hence: goto, let vs dine standing:
let vs go, let vs haue a rekening myne hoste:
what do wee owe?
 You owe foure shyllinges six pense
man and horse.
 Hold are you contented. Yea Sir.
 Where is y=e= maide~? hold my shee freend,
ther is for your paines: bring hyther
my horse: haue you dressed him well?
yea Sir, he did wante nothing.
 Hold, ther is someto drink, as I haue
promised thee, to the end that thou maiest
remember me an other time.
 I thank you Sir, you shall find me
at all times readie to do you seruice.
spare not the lodging when you shall
passe here by, for you shalbe as well
vsed and serued, as in anie lodging
within London.
 I haue found it so: I will not
chaunge it for an other.<|endoftext|>Wherefore hath God placed vs in this worlde?
To know and serue him.
VVill he be knowne and serued according to our vnderstanding & wil: or according to that, which it hath pleased himselfe, to declare and sette out vnto vs touching the same?
According to that which hee hath declared vnto vs concerning the same.
VVher hath he declared and set out the same vnto vs?
In that booke which wee cal the Bible, comprehending togither with diuers histories, the Law and the Gospell.
VVho hath made this booke?
God himselfe, by the ministery of his holy Prophets and Apostles.
VVhat is the Lawe?
The doctrin which teacheth vs what we ought to do, as wel towards God, as one of vs towards another.
VVhat is the Gospell?
That heauenlye doctrine which teacheth vs, what we must beleeue to our saluation thorow Jesus Christ only.
Doth this vvord contayne all that which we must beleue and doe?
Yea, without hauing any neede to ad or ioyne anye thing thereto, or to take anye thing therefrom.
Say novv the articles of your beliefe.
I beleue in god, the father almighty. &c.
Doth this doctrine teach vs that there is but one onely God, or that there are more Gods then one?
It teacheth that there is but one God only, and that we may not haue more.
VVherefore say you so?
Because it must nedes be, y=t= he which is God, shoulde bee aboue all other thinges, and therefore hee may not haue a fellowe or companion ioyned with him.
Yet you in naming God haue seemed to rehearse three, that is to say, the father, the sonne, & the holy Ghost?
In dede there are three persons in one only Godhead: but yet these three persons are but one, and the selfe same onely God.
Meane you that God is deuided into three partes?
No, for God cannot bee deuided, but I say, that euery one of these thre persons is one, and the selfe same onely God altogeather perfect.
How can this be?
It is a misterye or secreat beyond alour vnderstanding, and yet notwithstanding most certaine and sure, for God hath so declared it, and set it forth vnto vs, by hys holy word.
Doe you then beleeue in one onely God, the father, the sonne, and the holy ghost?
Yea: and by Gods goodnes, will dye in thys fayth.
How is the sonne of God called?
IESUS CHRIST.
VVhat meane these words Iesus Christe?
is as much to say, as Sauiour, andis as much as annointed and co~secrated to be our soueraigne king, hauing power ouer all creatures, our soueraigne or high prophet, who hath fullye declared vnto vs the will of God his father, touching our saluation, and our soueraigne or high priest, which hath fullye appeased and pacified the wrath of God against vs for our sinnes.
VVhat hath he don and suffered to saue vs?
He was conceiued by the holy ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary, suffered vnder Pontious Pilate. &c.
Can God suffer or dye?
No,
Is not Iesus Christ true and very God eternall, vvith his father and the holy ghoste?
Yea.
Howe then is he sayd to haue dyed?
Because that being verye God, hee was made man also, to the ende that in hys person our nature might beare or suffer the whole punishmente due to our sinnes and transgressions.
Do you meane that the sonne of God was chaunged into man?
No, because then he shuld be no more God: & God can not eyther change himselfe or be changed. But being of himselfe verye God, hee hath taken our nature vnto hymselfe, that so he might be very God and very man.
If he had not bin God, could he haue bine our sauiour.
No, for it belongeth vnto God only to pardon and forgiue sinnes, and to giue eternall life.
And if he had not bin man, could he haue bin our sauiour?
If he had not bin man, he coulde not haue dyed, and therfore we our selues should haue bin subiect vnto death.
Shall all the world be saued?
No, for the greater part of the world refuse their saluation.
VVho then are they which shall be saued?
They that haue fayth and beleeue.
And vvhat is fayth?
A certaine perswasion and assurance,which euery true Christian man oughte to haue, that God the father loueth him, for Iesus Christ his sons sake.
VVherfore do you say for Iesus Christs sake?
Bicause that wee being altogither corrupted and wholy peruerse in our selues, God could not loue vs, but in respect of him onelye, which is man altogether iuste and perfect, that is to saye, Iesus Christe hys sonne.
Commeth this fayth of our selues?
No, but from the onely grace and goodnesse of God, which doth freely giue it to his elect and chosen ones.
And they which haue this faith ar they saued?
Yea of necessity, for God hath giuen his sonne to the ende that euerye one which beleueth in him, should haue life euerlasting: and he is not a lyer.
But vvhereby may a man know whether he haue faith or no?
By good workes.
VVhich be good workes, and which be euill?
Those onely are good which he hymselfe hath commanded, and those euill which he hath forbidden.
Rehearse now the commandements of God?
The summe wherof is, thou shalt loue the Lord thy God.
To know Gods commaundements is notonely to know to say them, but men muste also vnderstand that vvhich they say: wherfore I demaund of you vvhat meaneth that vvhich is sayde in the thirde commaundement, to take the name of GOD?
It is to name God which we must neuer doe, but vppon iust and good cause, and with feare of his maiesty whom we name.
Then it is by stronger and greater reason more forbidden to sweare by God in vaine, that is to say, to take him for a vvitnes and iudge, without iuste and good cause vvhy?
It is so in deede.
VVhat meaneth it to sanctifie the Sabaoth day or day of rest?
It is to dedicate and consecrate it to the glory of God.
Ought vve not also to dedicate vnto him al the rest of the dayes of our life?
Yea but this day is particularly and chiefely ordeyned for this end and purpose.
Doe men forbid to trauaile or vvorke on the saboth day, as thogh to labor wer a thing euil of it self?
No, but they forbid ordinary and vsuall labor, to doe a worke which is better and more profitable.
You haue said that they only are good works which God hath commanded. VVherfore tel me can we acco~plish & fulfil the commaundements of God?
No, not so much as begin to doe anye thing, but by a certaine singuler and speciall grace of God. Yea there neuer hath bine orshall be a man, excepting Iesus Christ only, which hath perfectly fulfilled the same.
VVherefore say you so?
Because God will saue vs thorowe his onely mercy in Iesus Christ.
Yet so it is that a good life is the way to saluation?
It is true, that repentaunce & amendment is ioyned with the forgiuenesse of our sinnes: but yet followeth not therevpon that we be saued by our workes.
And vvhy shall vvee not bee saued by oure vvorks, seeing that they are good?
Because they be not good ynough for that purpose.
VVherefore then are they good?
To set forth Gods honour: to winne or else to strengthen our neighbours, and to make vs know and feele in our selues, that we are the children of God.
Good vvorks then make vs not gods childre~?
No, for contrariwise, a man must first be the childe of God before hee can doe good workes: but this is a marke or badge wherby a man may know the children of God.
VVhat then maketh vs the children and sonnes of God?
The onely grace and mercye of God, by his holye spirite, because hee hath elected and chosen vs from before all euerlastingnes, according to hys good pleasure.
The holy ghost then is he vvhich maketh vs the children of God: but vvhat instruments or means doth he ordinarily and commonly vse to bring vs to that honour and keepe vs in the same?
The preaching of the worde, prayer, and the vse of the Sacraments.
VVhat call you preaching of the word?
An exposition of the writinges of the Prophets and Apostles, which is don in the Church by such as he hath called to that holy ministry: of whom it is sayd: he that receiueth you, receiueth me.
Hovv doe you pray?
O our father which art in heauen. &c.
To whom speak you these words?
To God the Father.
Hovv is he your father, seing that he hath but one onely Sonne, that is to saye, IESVS CHRIST?
First bicause that Iesus Christe his eternall sonne, being made man is become our brother: secondly bicause he loueth me in Iesus Christ his sonne, with a greater then a fatherly loue and affection.
Albeit then that you direct not your speach and words, eyther to the Sonne or to the holy ghost, yet you doe not exclude or shutte out eyther the one or the other.
No, for I can not cal him father but in the name of his sonne Iesus Christe, nor pray vnto him but by the holy Ghost.
And is it not lavvful for a man to frame or make his prayer to the person of the sonne & of the holy Ghost?
Yea in deede. For seeing that the three persons are one only, and the selfe same God, inuocation or prayer both equally belong vnto them. And whether I call vpon the father in the name of the son by the holye ghost, or that I make my praier vnto y=e= sone to lead and bring me to the father, or that I pray the holy ghost to teach me the father & the sonne, all commeth to one.
And vvhat is a Sacrament?
It is a thing which God setteth before mens eyes in his Church, to signifie vnto vs for our saluation, an other thing which men see not.
And wherefore hath God ordeyned these signes to his promises?
For to make vs so much the more assured of the certainty of them.
Hovve manye suche signes are there in the christian Church?
Two, that is to saye, Baptisme, and the holy Supper.
VVhat see you in Baptisme?
Water.
VVhat doth this water signifie vnto you?
The bloud of Iesus Christ.
To vvhat ende?
To make cleane my sinnes, as the water being occupied maketh cleane the filthines of the body.
Doth this water make cleane and purge sins?
No, but it signifieth vnto mee, that which washeth my sinnes, to wit, the bloude of Iesus Christ.
Meane you that this matter or substance of the bloud of Iesus Christ vvasheth our soules?
No, for our soules can not be clensed with any matter as our bodyes. But this bloud maketh me cleane, because that Iesus Christ hath shed it for satisfaction and ful recompence for my sinnes.
Is there anye difference betwenethe water of Baptisme, and common vvater?
No, as concerning the matter and substance (for it is alwayes water) but there is very great difference, as concerning the vse: for the common water serueth to washe and make cleane our bodely filthinesses, and the water vsed in Baptisme, is a sacrament of the washing of our soules.
VVhat see you in the supper?
The bread and the wine which is ther giuen and receiued, according to the ordinance and institution of God.
VVhat doth this bread and this vvine signifie vnto you?
The bread signifieth to me, the bodyecrucified for me, and the wine signifieth vnto me, the bloud shed out for me.
To what end?
To testifie vnto me, & to assure me that euen as this bread & this wine, are ordeyned for the maintenance and nourishment of this life, so our Lord Iesus Christ hath giuen his body and his bloud for me, & giueth himselfe to me, to the ende that from him, as from a fountaine, there may flowe vnto me eternall life.
Are this bread and vvine our spirituall nourishment?
No, but they signifie vnto vs y=t= from whence very eternall lyfe it selfe procedeth, that is to saye, from him which hath suffered his death and passion, to take away the cause of our death, that is to saye sinnes, and to renue vs vnto eternall life, thorow a spirituall liuelinesse, which resteth and remaineth in him.
Is there any difference betvvene the breade and vvine vsed in this sacrament, and common breade and vvine?
No, as touching the matter and substance, (for it is alwayes bread and wine:) but there is very great difference, as concerning the vse: for ordinary and co~mon meates are appoynted for the vse of this present life, but this sacrament is ordeined to signify andseale vnto vs our spirituall and euerlasting nourishment.
VVherefore hath the Lord ordeyned & instituted tvvo signes in his holy Supper, seing that in Baptisme there is but one onely.
To assure vs that hee doth not feede vs to the halues but wholly, being not only our meate but also our drinke.
VVhere is Iesus Christ nowe according to hys humaine nature?
In heauen, from whence he shal come to iudge the liuing and the dead.
By what meanes can you then which are on the earth receiue him?
As I receiue with my hande and my mouth the Sacrament, that is to saye, that bread and that wine, for the nourishment of this body, euen so by the vertue, and power of the holye ghoste, I doe in wardly and in my soule receiue and imbrace thorowe fayth our Lord Iesus Christ, very God and verye man, that by him I may liue eternally.
Doe they which haue no faith receiue Iesus Christ in the Supper?
No, for Iesus Christ is not receiued but by faith, yet doe they in deede receiue the sacraments, but to their condemnation.
Hovv so?
Because that they make no differe~ce betwene common bread and common wine,and that which is the sacrament of the body and bloud of Iesus Christ, whom they reiect and throw from the~ thorowe their vnbeleife.
How must a man prepare himselfe to come worthely to the supper.
If he haue true repentance of the life that is passed, confessing their sinnes before God, and amending them towards God and his brethren, so much as in him lyeth, wyth a ful deliberation and purpose to doe better in time to come, and imbracing Iesus Christ by a true fayth in his promises and Sacraments for the alone and onely sauiour.
But hath Iesus Christ left it vnto our libertye and choyse, whether vve will go to the supper, or not goe to it?
In forbidding men to resort thither
vnworthily, he co~mandeth al them which haue
iudgement and discretion, to prepare
themselues that they may repaire worthily to it.<|endoftext|>Well ouertaken, father Pilgrime, and in good time.
Good Madam you are moste hartely welcome.
Father I pray you, whether doo you iourney this waye.
ForsoothMadam now God willing I meane to passe to, and from thence into.
I perceyue your Pilgrimage hath bin longe, but when meane you to cease and take your rest.
Madam when my body is layed in Graue. For truely, al mankinde hath but a pilgrimage in this worlde: yea although they liue at home in their natiue Countrey and delectable houses, an ende they must haue of their pilgrimage. But I and suche other poore Pilgrimes doo often see by Lande and Sea, the admyrable workes of the almightie. The which to tell when I come home, the foolish wyll holde me for a lyar: yet I dooe dayly more and more, praise God, who is so great, and this is my only contentacion
But tell me father Pilgrime go you now to visit any monument of the Goddesse, here in.
No Madam I care not for such relikes. For my frend aPhilosopher warned me by y=e= waye as I came, saying.: yea also he wished me not to buye repentance too deare, among Damedames.
Well father, doo you meane to abide heere any long season?
No lenger Madam then I may amend my Shooes, Hose, and also prouide other furniture for my Scrippe and Bottell.
I pray you good father holde me not for importunate, to demaund of you a question or two.
Rather Madam you seeme so wise, that I receyue pleasure by your communication: therfore good Madam say on.
I will not require of you to signifye vnto me the lawes, customes, rites, ceremonies, and strainge vsages of the, among whom you haue trauailed, for I know the same to be horryble and abhominable. But tell me I pray you, haue you bin among the Christians in.
YeaMadam I abode a certaine time, in the famous Cittie called, which standeth scituated neare the pleasaunt Riuer of. This Cittie is not onely adorned with beautie of sumptuous Temples, Towers & costly Howses, plesant Orchards, & sweete Gardens: but cheefely decked with notable gouernment and celestiall Iustice.
Hath this Countrey a Kinge or a Prince for chiefe Lord and Ruler.
A Prince forsooth called.
Then I praye you tell what reuerence doth those subiects to their Prince.
O Madam truely exceeding great. But first they say, yea and stedfastly beleeue, that theyr Prince, is the onely Deputie and Lutenaunt of God him selfe within his dominions, to execute and maintaine Iustice, yea such a one, that is not noted of any great crime, for say they God is pure and holy, euen so ought his Deputie tobe in maintayninge right and Iustice. So that the subiects of this Prince, are wonderfull obedient, with life and goods, and other loyall seruice.
Then must needes follow, that the Nobilitye are vertuous and prudent.
Yea Madam, as members so necessarye to so godly a Prince, they are decked with humble harts, and farre from all corruption.
The Cleargye then should seeme, to liue according to the Gospell.
O Madam I cannot let, but highly co~mend y=e= Cleargye, for the ritchest Bishops & Prelats are not trimmed in sylkes, but clothed in honest dece~t attire. These men name themselues the Criers of God, and Steward of the poore. For saye they euen as the lawes of the Prince are Proclaimed, through his dominions to the intent his subiects should know his will, euen so say they, are we the Cryers of God to proclayme, preache and set foorththe lawes of the euerlasting God, as well in teaching, as in our liuing & behaueour: for if we do not so say they, the Prophet telleth vs that the bloud of our flock shalbe demau~ded at our hands.
But why do they go so plaine appareled, being Lords and of great calling?
I of my selfe Madam, will say no more then I haue harde at their owne mouthes. They say that Christ willed his holy Apostels, to leaue their Nets and other worldly goods, and follow him, who in at the time, that his sacred Maiestie abode vpon earth, had neuer any great bodilye rest: but continuallye like a good Shepheard went from valley to valley, from hill to hill, from pasture to pasture, to seeke his lost Sheepe, and being fou~d, brought them home vpon his blessed shoulders, to his hierd and Sheepefolde, calling allwayes synners to repentaunce: so say they we being his disciples mustevery one of vs take vp his owne Crosse and followe him.
Why the~ how can they dispend the great profit and reuenues of their bishoprikes and other benefices.
Why Madam doo you maruell at that, Then harken I pray you. These good Prelats doo weekely go vnto the common Iaile, where a great number of prisoners are, some for debt, and some for other offence, and there doo they preache the worde of God amonge them, perswading them to repentance and to forsake their euill liuing, they doo not onely in this sort comfort the poore afflicted prisoners, but also do according to neede, cloath them which want clothing: yea and three times in the yeare, at the principal feasts, all such prisoners which lie in prison for the sum of twentye Markes or vnder, theese good religious men, doo pay the debt, and set the poore at liberty with great admonishion, how toflee from fallinge into daunger againe. This liuely worke of faith springeth not alone in them, but also the poore Orphants and Maydens, which want dowries for mariage, are prouided out of theyr house of Mercy, yea euery sorte of poore people are wel remembred amonge the~. And in this sort say they we are Stewarde of the poore according to Christ his commaundement.
Why then they deale not in Vserye, or other like Marchandize.
O no good Madam those wicked vices, are farre from them, for truely I may boldly saye, that at the yeares end, all their great reuenues are consumed, in order aforesayde.
And is there no other sorte of religious persons, within the dominion of?
Yes Madam, there is an other sorte of Contemplatiues, who liueth by the labour of theyr handes, in the Mountaines, and these areSilkeweauers, which liue onely vpon that occupation, and at certayne tymes doo occupye themselues in prayer, calling vpon the name of Iesus.
Truely father Pilgrime I doo reioyce to heare of such vertuous and religious men, who are occupied daye and night in the lawe of God, for I would scarcely haue beleeued that any such had liued on earth, well good father proceede to the Ministers of the Lawe.
I I shoulde not seeme vnto you good Madam tedious: I would say somewhat of theyr behaueour.
Naye rather you doo me pleasure, and I geue you moste hartye thankes.
Firste their Iudges are excellent learned men, & such as are chosen out of the Vniuersity, by the Princes Counsell, for their excellency, grauitye and learning. These graue Iudges haue no kinde of fees, for seales or reknowledging of writings, or suchlike, but are maintained with reasonable stipend at the Princes cost.
Why then there are no Iuries of twelue men to trye the right of any?
Alas no Madam would you wish twelue simple men, without learning to decide the doubtfull and hard cases in lawe: no, God forbid.
Will not those Iudges now and than take bribes?
No Madam, for the punishment is greeuous for such an offence: yea and the Prince to auoide that wickednesse, dooth yeerely make preuie enquiry of the administration of Iustice, to gratify the good Iudges and to punish the wicked. But yet I doo remember of one Iudge, that tooke a Goose stuffed with gold for a bribe. But when the case was knowen to the Prince, he commaunded the Iudges legge to be sawen off, with a woodden sawe, in the open Market place. And when the execution was doon, the Prince caused theIudge to come before him, saying vnto him: sirra is the stuffing of a Goose good meate, but the Iudge answered not one word. Wel quoth the Prince receyue your office againe, and looke well what meate you eate: who ruled afterward exceeding well. The example whereof did so terrifie, that bribes were cleane banished.
Now assuredly, this Prince may welbe called the Deputie of God, but sythens the Iudges are so vpright in Iustice, than what say you to the Counsellers and other ministers of the law?
I must needes commend them Madam, for there the good Lawyers haue verye fayre and large studies, and beset with many fayre Chayres, so that the client when he commeth is commaunded to sit him downe in one of those chayres, and to put on his bonet. Then he openeth his case, if it appeare a iust and lawfull sute: then the sayd Lawyerdeuiseth his Plea, and his Clarke penneth the same, with the lines neare together, for they know not what great spaces betwixt lines after eight pence a sheete, meaneth. Now the Plea being drawen, and contayne a large sheete of paper, written as aforesayde, the Clyent paieth to his Lawier two shillings and three pence for the Clarke, wherewith they are well satisfied. But if the cause apeareth not good and iust, then the Lawyer perswadeth the party, not to deale any further: and so alwayes wronge is thrust out of the dores. These Lawyers abhorre couetousnesse, and know not what Golden Angels meane. The Iudges syt dayly through the yeare in iudgement, the Festiual dayes excepted, so that there is no issue or tryall vpon one point or braunch of a matter, but rather by those learned Iudges, a whole matter is ended at once,which is a good and godly waye. The Counsellers in Lawe, sit on each syde of the Iudges: I meane not on the same benche where the Iudges syt, but rather on each syde of the iudiciall place, and the Iudges at the vpper end. So there is no strife who shal come to the Bar: But when any ple is related. Then it is lawfull for euery Lawyer to exclaime the meaning of the words on his Clyents behalfe: but with very fewe wordes.
But may not the party agreeued, appeale of any sentence?
Yes, if the cause amount aboue the sum of one hundred pounde, the partie agreeued may appeale to the Princes Counsell: where alwayes two synguler Counsellers attendeth such causes, euen as a Chauncery to mittigate extremity of Law.
Then how dooth the poore folke obtaine Iustice against the riche and mightye.
O Madam wounderfull well.For the poore shall haue rather more fauour then the ritch, it is so Madam that the most famous learned man within the precynct of the whole Cittie, he I say is appointed for Aduocate of the poore, and hath a great stipend of the Cittizens for his paynes. And thinke you Madam that he is the basest office in a Common weale? No: for this aduocate is had in greatest honour, next vnto the Princes Councell, & chiefe Iudges. And againe when the complaint of the poore commeth before the Iudges in the iudicial Hall, then saith the Attorny of the poore, who hath also his wages of the Citizens. My Lords, it may please you to heare a poore mans cause. This voyce is no sooner heard, when the Iudges staieth all matters, except it touch the estate, and incontinent the poore mans sute is dispatched: for if it should not be so, then many times would it happen, as once asute depending betweene a poor Poticary and a Butcher, for when their Plea is determined by the inferior Iudge: the Poticary caried priuely to the Iudge a little Pot of Conserua, beseeching him to reme~ber his matter against the butcher. The Iudge tooke it and sayde he would prouide Iustice. But when the Butcher heard of the presenting of this bribe, he went and killed a good fat Hog and brought it to the Iudge, requesting his fauor against the Poticary: y=e= Iudge also receiued it, and bad him depart. It so fell out, that the sentence passed on the Butchers syde. But whe~ the poore Poticary had notice thereof, he came railing to the Iustice house, saying to the Iudge: syr how chaunst you remembred not both my right & pot of Conserua. Yes quoth the Iudge, I remember them bothe, but as for your Conserua, there came a Hog & threw down your pot, ye & spilt it, sothat I neuer found any sweetenes therein. Mary sir quoth y=e= Poticary a murraine and a pestilence take such a Hog that spilt both my Iustice and Conserua. So that Madam I tell you this merry tale, to the ende that you may know how in this happy Lande, it preuaileth not for the ritch to say I haue a fat purse: for why, the good Iudges, hath so great a feare of God and the Prince, that no corruption can auaile. And certainely the godly Diuines, are a great cause thereof, for they will not let to tell all estates their faultes, by some honest meanes: by reason whereof, they doo well know, that they the~selues, shall come to iudgement, and be Iudged, so that according to the oppinion of S., they haue dayly the sounde of the Trumpet in their eares, that shall call to Iudgement. And this is the principall cause, that they do liue inthe feare of God, and are blessed.
I doo most highly praise this godly rule and order. But how are Criminall matters decided.
Forsoothe Madam the Iudges which haue the charge of Criminall matters, doo likewise sit all the whole yeare in the iudiciall place: but as I sayde before, festiuall dayes excepted. These Iudges vse great pollicye to searche out the troth, against any accused of crime, and the troth manifestly knowen, the offence is corrected with greeuous punishment: but otherwise they haue great feare of shedding innocent bloud, by reason wherof euery prisoner is permitted to haue an aduocate, & make exceptions against his accusers. And when any offender is condemned to suffer paines of death, he hath three dayes respite to repent his former life, they also haue good men that neuer leaueth perswading them earnestly torepent, and only to stick vnto the mercy of our Lord Iesus. Truely Madam I haue seene some dye, with such penitent & humble harts, that any good Christian would haue co~mended their constant faith.
Sure this is a charitable act.
I must needes confesse Madam, that the people in this Country are fully perswaded, that there are but two wayes of eternitye, the one leadeth vnto perpetual ioy and euerlasting, felicity, and the other to euerlasting, horrible and vnquenchable hell fier, the which bothe places, shall haue no end, whilest God is God, and y=t= is infynite.
The name of Iesus be praised for such a Country and people.
Also Madam whilest I abode in, I saw three persons punished, the one was a woman, and she was conuicted of Sorcery & Witchcraft, but no hurt doone by her to either manor beast, approoued: yet for her dealing inthat arte, she was condemned. The execution was, she was set vpon an Asse, her body naked vnto her Nauill, and annoynted all ouer with Honny, the which was beset full of small Feathers of Downe, with a Miter on her head, of a yarde long, and in this sorte she rode about the streets accustomed, with a Trumpet blowen before her, and a Cryer manifesting her offence. An other was punished for periury, this man rode likewise vpon an Asse, about the accustomed streetes: but not naked. And in the Market place, there was a Barbor attending for hym, with his Instruments, and there he was foreced to open his mouthe, and all his teeth being accoumpted, the Barbor drew out euery fifthe toothe, in such sort Madam, that neither money, nor friendship can redeeme any punishment in that Countrey. The thyrde person thatI saw punished, was a wittoll and he I say, rode vpon an Asse about the sayd streetes, with a Hartes horne on his head ful of small Bels, and his wife rode after whipping him, and then followed the hangeman whipping them bothe.
O moste happy Land, where vice is so punished. But I pray you say father the poore Prisoners that are imprisoned for det, are they put in yrons?
No Madam, for there they hold opinion, that none ought to were Yrons, but such as hath co~mitted odious crimes, for otherwise say they y=e= Iaile is no other thing but onely a safe custody.
Yet they pay fees for their Yrons.
Alas Mada~ God forbid: for thinke you, that it were a iust cause, that a poore man, who hath fallen into debt by sundry mishaps, should now in prison be punished with fees of Yrons, and incurre into a new debt: nay they hold such vsage for abhominable extorcion,and a thinge odious in the sight of God.
But yet I thinke they paye eighteene pence a day for their meate, and a groate for their bead, or at the least twelue pence a day, and a groate for their bead.
That also Madam is holden for an abominable vse. But troth it is that any Prisoner for debt, may bring his bead, his meate and drink from whence he wil. And if he be so poore that he hath nothing wherewith to maintaine himselfe. Then the house of charitie prouided for such a one.
What fees hath the Iayler then?
Forsooth syxe pence for euery Prisoner, and also a yearely stipend of the Cittizens, sufficient to mainetaine an honest man.
I haue father Pilgrim throughly vnderstood all your talke. But now I pray you how dooth the Notaries, Skriueners, and such like officers vse themselues.
Madam I must also commend their vsage: for whyyou shall vnderstand, that euery Notary, Scriuener or suche like officer, concerninge either temporall or ecclesiasticall affaires haue their offices from the Prince, for a certayne summe of money vnder the Princes Seale: the which offices each one dooth enioye for terme of life, except he make resignation thereof to his sonne, or some other friend, fifteene dayes or more before his death and for wante of suche resignation the office commeth againe to the Prince: but in effect, euer such officer geueth sufficient Sureties to the Prince, for the true and faithfull executing of his office, by meane whereof all false wrytinges, and abhominable deceipts are vtterly banished. More euer euery such Notary or Scriuener hath his bookes of Recordes, wherein the parties obliged dooth set their firmes and seales, with two or three witnesses, which testifyethat they do know, that the parties so obliged, are the very selfe same men, to auoide all collusion. This doon the Scriuener vnder his firme and sygne, geueth the partie creaditor the copye of the Bonde, which is auaileable, and pleadeable in Lawe: the cause hereof is to auoide all subtiltie, for many times poore men by some sinister meane or casualty, hath his writings stollen, enbesseled, burned, or loste: yet were it not iust, that those men should lose their right and title. In consideration whereof the originall matters remayneth aliue in the sayde Scriueners bookes, in order aforesayde. Euery Obligation contayneth a sheete of Paper, neere written, for the which the Scriuener is to haue syxe pence and no more, and other syxe pence for the Copye if the partye wyll haue it. But thys muste I saye vnto youMadam the cause of this godly gouernment is, that once in two or three yeeres, the Prince sendeth secret visitors: who taketh all these Scriueners or Notaries Recordes into theyr power, and commaunde to Proclaime through the Cittye, that if any person or persons, know any falshood in the sayde Officers, concerning their Offices, that then they come and manifest the same: and the offence or offences knowen, some hath their hands cut off, other some depriued from their offices and others condemned to the Gally for slaues: yea the Lawe is that if any writing chaunce to be enterlyned, then must the Scriuener recite the same words at the foote of the writing, before the partie or parties seale thereto.
But is this order throughout all the Princes dominions, in Citties, Viliages, and Townes?
Yea truely Madam, and all other writings of noeffect, except some Billes or writing made in extreme necessity, which are afterward recknowleged before the Iudge, or els remaine of none effect.
This godly order must needes be profitable to the Prince.
Nay Madam much more profitable I say to the common weale, for the auoyding of many brabling and wicked sutes attempted in law.
Father Pilgrim, I am well satisfyed in these pointes. But how dooth Maiors or other gouernours of great Citties behaue the~selues?
O Madam exceeding well. For each ruler of a famous Citty delighteth not in Glottony, and Belly cheere, but rather is very vigilant and carefull for the benefyt of the Citty: he I say, commeth not vpon dayes appointed, to visyt the Bakers and other Vittellers, but rather followeth the order that Christ hath prescribed, which is how his comming shalbe when he is notlooked for: euen so dooth this good Ruler of, come at suche tymes to visyt the Cittizens, that some dooth reioyce, but others doo tremble at his sodaine comming, ye in the night season when others sleepe at quyet rest, he wandereth round about the Cittie, personally in all blinde lanes, and solitary places, to see what watch is kept, to harken for bibbers and dronkerds, to searche out Hoores, and Hooremongers, and to examine suspitious guestes. I am sure Madam that the Gouernour of, hath expulsed a number of such vicious persons, out of that Cittye, yea it seemeth now a terrenall paradice: but wot you what is the cause of this? Forsoothe at the time of the terme of expiration of the sayde Gouernours charge, the Prince appointeth a new Gouernour, who commaundeth the former Gouernour and al his officers,to keepe their owne houses as prisoners for the space of fortye dayes: and then Proclaymeth throughout the Cittye, that if any person or persons, poore or ritche, can laye any extorcion, bribes, or other offence, against the sayde Gouernour or Officers, that then they come and complaine, and shall haue present remedy and satisfaction. But when those fortye dayes are expired, and no offence founde: O what great Honour receyueth such a Gouernoure: yea and how highly is he esteemed of his Prince?
Truely father Pilgrime that is a blessed Lande: but what can you saye of all such officers, which hath the receite and dealinges aboute the Princes reuenues?
Once in three yeare Madam secret enquyrye is made of theyr dealinges, and theyr bookes narrowlye searched, so that the Prynce cannot bee deceyued.
O father Pilgrime, the sunne declyneth apace, and loth I am to leaue your godly conuersation: but yet I pray you say, how dooth women behaue themselues in that contrey?
Very honest and vertuous they are Madam. For in that Citty, you shall not see neyther Wiues, nor Maydes with hand Baskets, or otherwise wander about the Citty, because the Husbands and theyr men slaues do prepare all necessaries, for their houses and Families: so that the women straye not abroad, except on the Sabboth day, or other Festiuall dayes, when they go to the Temple, or els when they go abroade in their Husbands company to recreate themselues: for otherwise the Husbandes feare that they should haue some euill wares brought home in those hand baskets.
I haue yet many other things to enquire of you: but I pray you tel me, haue you bin at any timein England?
Neuer but once Madam, and then I came to the famous Cittye of, to take Shipping into.
But that Lande?
Forsoothe Madam at that time Raygned, and I hope yet dooth, a vertuous Mayden Queene, whose beautye and rare vertues, whose wisdom and synguler learning: yea her wonderful knowledge in sundry languages: the like, I neuer heard nor knewe in in any parte of the worlde where I haue traueiled into: And yet haue I byn in some part of, in some part of, and in some parte of.
This is beleeue me the straungest thinge that as yet you haue tolde mee. God preserue her, and if I were as younge as I haue byn, I would gladly go see so gracious a Lady and Maiden Queene. But I perceyue consydering you went that way to take Shippinginto the Lande of, you had no leysure to enquire of the commoditie of that Lande.
No truely Madam, tyme would not permit me: for I was no sooner come to, but the shippes were readye to hoyse vp sayles and depart.
I feare father Pilgrime, the shutting in ofGates, because night approcheth on so faste: Wherefore good father, let vs now make the more haste, and sythe you are a strainger here, you shall abide this night with me, with such poore cheare as I may make you.
God reward you good Madam, I wyll not refuse your gentle offer.<|endoftext|>See you neighbourwhat hote spurring there is made after the Buck ouer yonder land? were it with you and me as it hath bene since each knew other, we could not behold such sport thus farre of, but rather so farre as might become vs, keep way with the formost.
Sir then was then, and now is now, they that cannot do as they haue done, must content themselues with what they may do: pleaseth it you therefore to giue ouer the game in the plaine fielde, and let me tie vp our horses to yonder bough, reposing our selues awhile vnder the shade of this goodly greene Oake.
I readily consent to your indifferent motion.
Because it is vnwholsome and not altogether safe to sleepe in this wilde wood, let me beseech you to discourse such matters as our experience may delight vs to remember: withall, voutchsafe I pray you, to report the newes of London, for thence I vnderstand your maistership is lately come.
With a glad will, but ere we enter into them, let me first tell you what I latest heard, which proouing true will equally glad vs both. This noble Earle is not come hither to take an honorable recreation only, as heretofore he was wont, but purposeth withall to keepe a standing house here the whole yeare thorough.
But that I feare the contrarie, how should I reioyce these glad tidings.
My selfe in like manner hold the matter doubtfull, knowing the speciall imploiments her Maiestie hath daily to make of his most approoued good seruices, being full as he hath bene alwaies so excellent a becomming states peare, that his worthinesse cannot but carrie him from vs to matters of farre greater consequence. To say truly,our vntoward deseruings haue merited no such benefit from him for longer then we are receiuing good turnes at his hands,
Since it is your pleasure to stay your discourse with a desire to heare my plaine eloquence, I rather blame you for speaking too little against that which is so worthy reproofe, then otherwise thinke much or that you ouer said in the Earle his praise. To say truly, such are our grosse manners, not caring what we say so we say somwhat, and somwhat we must say, else could not the world take knowledge of our sufficiencies, which serue vs much better to finde wants in other men, where they are not, then to feele the burthen of our owne extremities, lying heauy vpon ourshoulders ready to breake our weake backs. For my part, I meane to turne that cursed speaking you named into hartie praier, that it may please God to further this noble man his purpose and desire, both to this whole countries benefit, and also to the encoraging of other noble and worshipfull Gentlemen, who accompanie him in loue and good will, to do the like by his example, where they dwell. A thing so much discontinued and so farre worne out of fashion, that vnlesse by some notable man it be reduced and set vp againe, the old ancient patterns lost and gone, I feare me, it will hardly or neuer catch the right shape againe, men haue swarued so much to the new cut, wearing all on London fashion, where they neuer thinke on their poore countries, saue on quarter rent daies only.
Though you spared me on the maine which stood in your way, you thought to nick me on the bye, not set for you.
Surely you fauour me rightly; for it was my meaning to shew the dislike I had of such as weare more on their backs inone day, then their fathers did in their whole life time.
Now I dare vndertake by your waightie words, you meane such as weare more armour on their backs in one day, or are girte with more wounds and stripes then their Fathers were.
Nay rather, I speake against that excesse, where commendable Farmes which were wont to maintain & bring vp honest tennants and their children, ouer and aboue the rent, are dasht vpon one sute of apparrell together with one daies vnmeasurable expences.
Through your gentle teachings, I begin to perceaue an approoued error, in ouerdoing, as well in things that haue good purposes and intents, as also in matters grounded vppon mischiefs, carrying an outward shew of holy and religious deeds. I confesse, Monasteries and Priories were not so likely to haue bin causes hereof, as the otherdissolute houses, where refreshings were without respect or partiality. The Moncks and Abbots of my knowledge, cut large shiuers of the loafe for which they neuer sweate, to make them selues strong in the peoples fauour and opinion, or else spent their whole gettings vpon vnlawfull children. Yet notwithstanding by your fauour, you haue not attained vnto the full of my meaning and desire herein.
I confesse I haue not, for the sight of beefed beggers that thronged so thick in my way: but now I haue got past them, I will go neare to meet you on your owne bawlke. Your desire is to haue houses kept to beare the Lord of misrule company at Christmas, spending then vpon Hick and Stephan, who haue no need of it, what would maintaine a seemly family more then halfe a yeare. Such may well be called the Lord of misrule his guests, who besides excessiue ouer-eating & drinking the~selues, spoiling by misuse that they cannot deuour, leaue behind them also such vnmannerly annoyances, called bestialities, that the Nobleman and Gentleman that hath thus crammed his quoistrels, must of necessitie forsake their house and housekeeping, till a good winde blow away the vnpleasant sauours their Christmasse Poulcats leaue behind them. Thus besides excessiue cost and trouble by the fruits of this carelesse hospitalitie, their houses are left in worse case then common Innes or ostelries. If it be a sheep-shearing feast, maister Baily can entertaine you with his bill of reckonings to his Maister, of three sheapheards wages, spent on fresh cates, besides spices and Saffron pottage. So that the Nobleman & Gentleman should haue nothing come in clearly to them at any season, if your ancient patterns might be rightly obserued. I know your meaning is not to haue the Hockedame waited on by them, who for the most part let their lands to halfes, or else conuert all into rent. The entertainment one of them giues vnto another cannot be that you call so hotly vpon: for those fashions you haue a homely terme I list not to remember you of.
The money your maistership hath spent in learning and trauell, is euery penny better bestowed then other. Now I plainly see, let an ignorant man be neuer so wise, or of neuer so great experience, but if he meete with a man ofgifts and bringing vp, his presuming to know all things prooueth plaine ignorance, and meere mistaking. Once to day I tooke my selfe to know as many wayes to the Church as maister Vicar himselfe, but now I see Plowmen are no preachers. I haue a Sonne that hath cost me many a quarter of corne, on whome for this dayes worke I will bestowe one Peck of pure graine, which toucht no chaffe this many a day, to buie him more learning; and though I am not able to breed a Gentleman, I may perhaps, as well as some of my neighbors, bring vp one.
I meruaile how you stumble on the Church and the Minister: this hote weather and our long talke should rather haue put you in minde of the Butler and the Butterie. Besides I cannot bethinke me what vertue should be in your peck of pelfe, especially to alter nature; my selfe withall the proofe I could make, could neuer finde the skill to cause a barking mongrell to become a true questing Spaniel. To be plaine with you, I neuer thinke an Ape more deformed, then when he striueth by borrowed skill, to put on that which nature cannot grace: nay rather those things are most vgly, which are forced and done in spight of nature. Euery one to whome Mastership belongeth is not a Gentleman, what purchase soeuer his father maketh, vnlesse he can procure bloud to alter kinde: that you cannot giue your sonne, because you haue not attained vnto it your selfe. The notabilitie hereof proceeds from chiualrie and marshall prowesse, where for princes right, and commonweales saftie, through worthy aduentures of bloud and life, purchase is made at the dearest price and rate. Therefore as there cannot be a greater cause amongst men, then the Prince and commonwealths businesse, nor a greater matter then bloud and life, to be powred out and parted withall, of necessitie the greatest and principallest respect and regard hath euer bene had therevnto.
By your fauour sir, there are no such lawes yet made to prooue Souldiers Gentlemen: or if there be, it is left out of their stile in all that I can reade or vnderstand of their profession.
If you speake ignorantly, I am contented to helpe you ouer the stile, you seeme not able to clime, but if you play the Foxe with me, grapes are no meate for you,
Without offending you with my rude answers, let me aske you this mannerly question. Do you meane those that are begotten and borne in a Campe, to be onely Gentlemen of bloud, or how otherwise I beseech you to shew me? I haue heard this matter often debated, but neuer fully agreed vpon.
Because you haue alreadie heard it doubtfully handled, and at no time discust, it may in like sort become me to giue place to some doctor of the Ciuill law, to whose profession it especially appertaineth to know the certaintie of all worthie antiquities.
It fits me not to importune you, otherwise I should receiue a great good turne at your masterships hands thereby, for my sonne takes great delight in petegrees of Gentlemen, and hath some skill in quartering their coates. God willing he shall one day waight vpon you to better his knowledges, if it may please you to accept of hisvnworthinesse.
Bring him with you on Sonday next to dinner, where you shal be sure of a Pigge for your sonne his welcome, therein I meane to proue his skill, how he can head and shoulder the same, the iawes and eares he shall bestow vpon you after he hath quartered them. The head so spoiled, he shall charge his quadrate trencher with.
I thought I should make you merry with my mistakings, I now and then catch a word or two from my sonne, which for lack of due placing, marreth all in the making.
You shall in earnest (if you list to carry it with you) heare what I can do in your sonne his Art. The Pigs head shall be vpon a Spit couchant, the toung pendant, the braines dormant in the sauce poinant. Now for a supporter or crest, because of the quadrufoile in his bare head, there shall be a recompence made by purchase of the back ribbes and chinebone. All these thus put together, must of necessitie conclude somwhat, especially in a morning fasting.
Most of these termes my sonne hath by heart, and will talke them to a glasse window I haue, when many times it is my fortune to ouerheare him. According to your saying also he hath often confest vnto me, that his wit and memorie haue serued him best to those purposes in a morning eare he haue eaten any thing. But still I am to put you in minde of my former desire, wherein I am perswaded you are able to satisfie a much better man then my selfe.
Surely Sir, you haue spoken so darkely, that for the thick spleigh of boughes and broad leaues of this tree, I cannot discerne your meaning.
Thinke you I go about to deceiue you with darkenesse of words? If a field be said to haue eyes, a wood may likewise haue eares. But whether you heare me not, or list not to beleeue me, the likelihood hereof shall carrie me to credit the same, knowing that matters of lesse proofe and more vnlikely trueth, haue bene receiued from worse grounds and beginnings then this commeth from. But you may see how the loue I beare you hath carried me to clime vnknowne hauntes, and such difficult pathes, as there are no steppes or traces left mee to follow; therefore you may say, it is like to proue a hard iourney to a weake traueller.
Now I better remember my selfe, I haue read many stories agreeing with your worthies in their notable deedes and exploites, done by couragious and bold attempts.
I will not seeke to winne you by extremitie of speeches, but leaue you to the libertie of your owne better conceauings. To keepe whole the vnderstanding of the matter, I will come to that which shall neereliest agree with that I said before. After this principall Worthie was enthronized by others, himselfe was also addicted and disposed, for the better conseruation of all things in order, in the integritie of his iudgement and discernings, to consider with rewards and dignities such deseruers and beautified mindes, as himselfe had seene forward by ready and feruent dispositions, placing and crediting vnto them for their tryed and approoued seruices, such degree of trust and superioritie, as might both stand in stead towards a recompence of their trauailes, and also the more incourage them to go on with him in perfecting things necessarie to vphold societies and vocations, wherevnto he had lately sorted the whole people. Afterward, such ofall sorts as had defected and come short in sufficiencie, to performe matters and places committed vnto them, so as the rest receiued losse and hinderance by their fault or negligence; such iniurious deceiuers were deposed, thrust downe, and disfranchised, as persons vnfit to become the strong vertues and properties beseeming men euer after compelled to exercise weake things, and withall enioyned to liue out the rest of their dayes in the company and conuersation of women. What occasion soeuer notwithstanding vrging the vse of them, such were neuer recalled nor suffered to execute duties amongst men.
I thinke it hath bin the warmth of gentle bloud, which beating within your brest, hath thrust out this formalitie you indent your words withall: could my consent helpe towards it, you should be made a gentle maister Scriuener, for your orderly frame of words are so well suted, that as me thinketh you haue much amended the old patterne you began with in the morning. If you mistake me in sence also no worse hereafter, it shall not repent me to talke of this fashion yet a while longer with you.
Though of my selfe it soundeth not well, yet without brag be it spoken, there be Gentlemen of bloud in this countrey that sit not so high in thesubsidie booke, neither are rated in furnitures and setting out of men to the warres in sort as I am.
Had I thought your maistership would haue taken my free speeches in so ill part, which concerned onely my selfe and my ready abilitie, to forward to my power my Prince her occasions and seruices, I would haue forborne to haue vttered my minde, wherein I onely grieued, that any should exempt themselues or forbeare to extend their vttermost helpe and indeuour in such good workes. My intent was not to repine at my owne easie charges, especially to performe so necessarie a dutie. If it please you to forget my foolish speeches and scattering questions, beginning where the matter brake off, you shall fauour me; in that I haue a speciall desire to heare at the full, you hauing so notablie entred into the declaration thereof. You left at absolute vertues, which are the gifts of nature, and accompany Gentlemen from their birth.
Belike then, if the worthie progenitour had attained to the tipe of all perfections, his worthie of-spring had at the first immediately bene seasoned with that most precious liquor, according to the influence into the former vessell.
Yea vndoubtedly, but the mysterie of the perfection celestiall, which you rightly termed a most precious influence, it is too deuine to dwell vpon earth, or to be discust by mortall sence and vnderstanding: but the next vnto that omnipotencie, are Kings and Princes, because they receiue theyr blessings from God directly, without other benefit or additament whatsoeuer.
Then I pray you Sir, how to diuerse without the benefit of this generous bloud, attaine to such ripenesse as may make them worthie high place and dignitie in the word?
Through forward inclination and disposition, taken with the loue and desire to immitate such seruiceable vertues as they haue seene approoued and rewarded in others, whose more properly at the first they were, and so vpon iust cause, are both receiued and held worthie men. In the first vertuous man, I shewed you euen now, after his good speed was seene, and the way knowne, how he did great things, others were stirred vp to haue pleasure and delight in the like, yet such also as were better endued, and of a more ready motion then the rest. For all could neither be incited by example, nor forced by compulsion to needfull and concerning duties, to the pleasuring of themselues.
By this reckening, wisdome to forethinke is not the least helpe both to seeke and also to become great places attained vnto.
All my speeches haue tended to that end and purpose,Yet first I shewed you, how bold courage did rouse and waken men from out the cradle of securitie, before they were assisted by consultation: euen then also had they failed of resolution to enterprise and breake through difficulties, such also as perhaps were repugnant vnto reason, and aboue that wit could perswade to be possible, then all had fainted, and nothing had bene atcheiued. Now wit, arte, and counsell, which you spake of right now, might haue serued them to prolong their plenty, and to haue held them still in ease, to haue lestened and made away by deuise, some of their superfluous and rising numbers; but the strong vertue was first, and it preuailed to best purposes and blessings.
Now sir I beseech you, speake somewhat of the defects that were found in them that neuer came forward.
I haue promised so to do. You may imagine, that while the sunne is oppressed and surcharged with cloudes, her vertue of comforting is for the while hindered; but when she hath outwrought them, and broken thorough the black prison, her light is then cleare, and her operations effectuall. Likewise, whilest wantonnesse, belly cheare, and other entangling delights, held men back from the vse and knowledge of themselues: till I say, the maisterfull spirit had by maine force, spoiled and driuen away all impediments, they could purchase no freedome nor rest contented, vnlesse they were able also to make a through conquest of themselues, then which there could not be a greater victorie.
A faire and a vertuous generation of worthy men, fit to take example at.
I pray you sir suffer me yet to aske you this one question more, whether you thinke courage or counsell the more beneficiall vertue, to aduance and set forward actions of greatest moment?
Alas Sir, hard lodging and bad diet would be as good as a murthering piece to kill me out right. Yet for one day I could be content to see fashions amongst them with a quarter of a cold Pig, and anbottle vnder my girdle.
Nay, I can assure you, the warres and a colde stomack will neuer agree: at these yeares, you and I will pray from them that may. To martch in Armour, and to vnder the waight thereof, would breake our bones, being, as they are, cold, drie, and marrowlesse.
My sonne telleth me, it is nothing now a daies to be a souldier, for they neuer come to pitcht fields, as they were wonte in our olde English warres, when the deuision of houses was.
Is your sonne a Fencer that wayes to; I thinke he be an vniuersall man. But I pray you what warde hath he to beare of a Musket bullet? it must needs be with his legges, for his hands I know are not Pistoll proofe.
I confesse those gunnes are diuelish things, and make many men runne away that other wayes would not turne their heads. But when I said a Souldier, I meant the Generall or commander in the warres. He telleth me many times he could discharge the place himselfe, though he neuer saw an enemy in the face.
Not vnlike, but shew me I pray you, wherein the commaunders office consisteth, according to that you haue heard your sonne report.
Marrie sir, in ordering and ordaining the field, and in well lodging his campe, neare riuers and places defended from contagious noisome winds.
What shall then be the Lord Marshall his place vnder him, if his Generalship be thus imploied!
He saithsupplied both the romes himself, and made the offices one: he alwaies when he came to ioyne battels and prepare his fights, bestowed his footmen vpon hils and places of aduantage, and his horsemen in the plaines and euen valleis beneath.
If yongyour sonne were chiefe in the field, his footmen should be Astronomers or wisards, to know when they should not fight, then from the hilles to giue signes to the horsemen to be gone, and flie away together, and so your sonne his hoast should consist of a running campe. Though I was neuer worthy to beare the name of a companion in the warres, yet vnder his conduct I could be content to refuse the offer of a very good place and office.
What office is that, and why? I pray you sir let me know.
No entertainment could tempt me to be maister of his carriages, to carrie & recarrie hils and dales, windes and waters; besides I know the great librarie that hath cost you so many quarters of Corne, must also waite vpon his remoues. If that fleet vp and downe with him, well he may loose an eye with poaring vpon his, but with climing the Alpes asdid, for catching an ill humour in that sort, I dare put you in comfort and be his warrant.
May it please you sir to take a hard lodging at my house to night, for I see by the Moones leape into her waterie circle, if we sit long here, vnwholesome dewes will be sent downe vpon vs.
Not now I thanke you, I haue such businesse with my Lord that I cannot, whe~ I come into the countrey againe in winter, it is like I will bid my self vpon this warrantise.
I haue a case of some extremitie, wherein I would be glad of your worships counsell, might I be so bold to craue it.
To morrow in the morning when my Lord is gone forth againe to hunt, I wil be ready for you, and as glad of your companie as to day.
God keepe you Sir, as it becommeth me, I will waite vpon your comming abroad in the morning.
Good night neighbour.<|endoftext|>Holla Marocco, whose mare is dead, that you are thus melancoly, vp I saie, and let you and me conferre a little vppon the cause, wherby matters & dealings may seeme to be so, you know my meaning.
Whereby matters and dealinges may seeme for to be. Verie good sir, spoke like a wholesome haberdasher, and as wisely by Lady master, as he that was sworne to hiswiues friends, not to credit out his waresto anie man for the first fifteene yeeres hee was married.
And therewith mee thinkes I see him hang the hat vpon the pin againe. Wast not so Marocco? I am glad sir to heare you so pleasant in the threshold of my discourse, for I am come in purpose to debate a while and dialogue with you, and therefore haue at you after your watering. Laie out your lips and sweep your manger cleane, and summon your wits together, for I meane (by mine host leaue) to recreate my selfe awhile with your horsemanship.
And I am as like master to shew you some horse plaie as ere a nag in this parish, for tis a iade can neither whihie nor wag his taile, & you haue brought me vp to both I thanke you, and made me an vnderstanding horse, and a horse of seruice, master, and that you know.
I Marocco I know it and acknowledge it, & so must thou if thou haue so much ingenuitie, confesse my kindnes, thou art not onely but also bound to honest Bankes, for teaching thee so many odde prankes. I haue brought thee vp right te~derly, as a Bakers daughter would bring vp a Cosset by hand, & allow it bread and milke by the eie.
, master you haue the more to answere, God helpe you. For I warrant you, (though I saie it that should not saie it) I eat more prouender in foure and twentie houres, than two of the best geldings that Robin Snibor keeps, that a hires for two shillings a daie a peece.
Two shillings Marocco, nay what saist thou byhalfe a crowne, and ten groats.
Marie I say, three daies hire is worth foure such horses, saddles, and all. For a buyes them for ten pence a saddle at S. Giles one with another, and those accoutrements are sutable to his steeds.
Me thinkes such steedes should stand a man in small stead, by that he had ridde some fiue miles out of towne.
Yea bee sure, or halfe fiue miles either. And commonly the saddle fals asunder and splits in two peeces at the towns end, and one side takes his iourney towards Vxbridge, and the other towards Stanes, to stop mine Hosts cushions of the George.
Why thatsboye, for the waine-men of the West countrie, and the Carryers of Gloucester shire commonlye barter awaye their broken ware with the hostlers for pease and horsebread, and they returne them a horsebacke to Peter Pympe the patchpannell. Marocco thou knowest where I am now.
Not I truely master, vnlesse you meane that shrewde Sadler that serued you so ill the last Tearme, and as I trowe his name was not Peter, his name was Iohn Indifferent, for a wrought me thought as if a had not cared whether a had earned your money or no.
Beshrew him Marocco, a deceiued my hope, in a good part of purple veluet hose, that I purposde should haue made mee a seemely saddle.
O Maister you are to purpose, and he to dispose, of those hose then were your breeches in his hands, and sweetely he handled them as you know: here mee thinkes had you supde vp but a quarter of sack, a quart of sacke, I should haue said. See how my minde was Master Patinis vpon the bagge of Otes &c. Or had you come in but reasonably loded from the Tauerne, or taken some of the excellent Muscadine at the Horne: why, what an occupation might you apprehend to rayle horribly against these mechanicall fellowes of the Towne, that so they haue it, care not howe they come by it. Twas but a veneriall sinne in this Sadler, to nycoll you, or nicke you rather of an old peece of Veluet hose. But what thinke you by him that had the conscience to aske fourteene yeardes of Satten for a sute of Apparell, and not to put in nine of them.
Yea Marocco, as well as of him that sold it for eighteene shillings a yearde, being not worth ten.
O he gaue time Master: And then take heed of that while you liue, In space, growes grace And in prosperitie of the Satten, will swell wonderfully.
I am fall as fast in a cunning stealers hand.
A hard harte hath hee that hath such a hande to cut such large thonges of another mans lether, and lappe him selfe in a gentle mansliuery.
Tush, this is but a pettye matter to stande vpon: And yet Marocco I dare saie it and sweare it to thee, because thou art no talker: this petty matter hath pyncht neerer than euery man weenes for. I am vndone, nowe young gentleman. Well,.
Why maister of whome should you bee afraide, I am able to iustifye as much as you say. Indeed those be the young men that neuer sawe the Lyons. Young maisters and gentlemen of the carelesse cut, such as care not howe they bee cut, or of what cut they bee like, so they may haue, to follow al fashions, and then they are cut indeed, no force, so they fall into a fashion, and walke but twentie foure turnes in Paules, let it packe the next daye for the third peny. Maister M.. Byrch and greene holly, and thou be beaten boy, thank thine owne follie: He that will thrust his necke into the yoke, is worthy to be vsed like a iade. He that hath been a gentleman of faire demeanes, and will so demeane him selfe to let landes and lordeshippes flie for a little brauery, let him crye and let him lye, yea and dye to, for any pittie hee is like to haue at my handes.
Why how now Marocco. O ye are too sowre. Dareyou tell mee of my splene agaynst the Sadler, and bee so bitter against the young gallantes of our age. What man, nay horse rather, nay asse as thou art, to become odious to the flower of Englande with thy foule manners. It is as naturall for young men to be braue and amorous, as for olde men to be graue and serious. Why colte then, youle take vppon you I see? Doo you not heare what they saie that scarse vouchsafe you an answere?
Maister you mistake me, I am no such seuere horse nor sullen asse, but I can allowe a yong Gentleman his madde trickes, yea, and his merrie trickes too for a need. But master, this Latine I learned when I gambolde at Oxforde,. This is it vrgeth me thus farre, and I speake it in passion too, and wyth the action of my head and heeles, that a Mercadore, naye, a mechanicall fellowe shall go so farre into a Gentleman, and a Gentleman so farre out of himselfe & all a has, that for one or two tearmes arraie, a shall for his liues tearme, and tearme of life become beggeries bondman, and vsuries vassall,. You shall finde in an olde Tracte printed by Winkin de Woorde, this olde sayde sawe, Whats a Gentleman but his pleasure, O pleasure, what a treasure is it to take pleasure with measure.
Measure Marocco, nay, nay, they thattake vp commodities make no differencefor measure betweene a Flemishe ell and an Englishe yard.
I knowe an ell Flemish cost English Anthonie halfe a yard of the best ware he had.
That ware will neuer see ware againe, in so good sorte as it hath done, nor sit in a shower of raine on the top of Amwell hill.
Go to master, hum drum is sauce for a cunnie, you and I should doo verie ill to speake in priuate, we are so plaine.
Plaine Marocco, nay and I were as plaine as I will bee, I should crie out-right, for in this I agree with thee, and with thee the world agrees, and besides teares and commiseration on the state of Gentlemen that haue vngentlefied, why I might saie, dishonored themselues by buying and selling.
Haue they so master? Why woulde hee bee a buyer then? Why woulde hee bee a seller? This buying and selling, By all mens telling, Is gaine without swelling, To him that sels his dwelling, For his bonds cancelling.
Ho, ho, good Marocco, I see now a dozen of bread dooes as much with you, as three pipes of Tobacco taken in an odde alehouse, to a weake braine.
I am not dronke master, after my watering, that you need to challenge mee thus: I knowwhat I saie, and I saie what I knowe: To buy this measure, And this momentanie pleasure, With so much treasure, To sell seate and seizure, And repent at leasure. Go to master, he is a bad waster, that consumes his daies and houres, and reapes. Cambridge and Oxford can record: and the foule dolorous fortune of many a faire boorde, What it is? What it is to come into the clouches, For Aglets or brouches, Of these pure appearing asses, That like simple glasses Seeme that they are not, Let them storme I care not: Vnpittied might he bee, That imbases his degree, With this indignitie. I tell you master, for a truth I tell you too, I knowe a man that in this towne, had a Bible lying on his shoppe boorde, and solde but three yardes of satten vnto a Gentleman, and forswore himselfe at least three times in the coping, and yet the booke laie open before him, and hee came newe from reading of Salomons Prouerbes.
That had beene somwhat grosse in him if he had beene reading the twentith of Exodus.
No, no, his minde was on the twentith daie of the moneth following, when his moneywas due.
Tis good to haue an eie to the maine: house keeping is chargeable, and rent must bee paide, the Landlord will haue his due,, let the Tenant looke to it.
The Landlord will leade to the deuill, & the Tenant will follow after.
What else? they be relatiues: Landlord and Tenant are asand.
O master, I could relate to you of these relatiues, if it became me to speake like a commonwealths man, what an abuse is ingendered twixte the Landlord and Tenant.
Occasion of what Marocco.
Of more amisse by gis, than easily amended is, of bauderie, and beggerie, and such lyke matters, master.Crie out and complaine for the loffe of this good landlordes worship, God rest his soule, sayes T. B. wee could haue had no wrong while hee liued: so hee had had his rent at the daie, the deuill and Iohn of Comber shoulde not haue fetcht Kate L. to Bridewell, no nor all the Court whipt C. F. at the cart, Ile tell you master, come what complaint coulde haue come against Peticoate lane, Smocke Alley, Shordich, or Rotten rowe, there were champions and spokes men for this crue, other manner of felowes I wis, than you thinke for, such as sit in their sattens and riche furres, and wyth adash of a penne in a counting house, coulde doo more than the proudest plaintiefe that commenceth anie matter or sute against this sisterhoode, yea, and seale vp his letter and theyr lyps both at once, that murmure anie thing against the inhabitantes of this holy corner. Master I coulde haue shewed you the coppie of a Letter that was lost in this yarde by chaunce, written by a man of some account, so fauourably to the Treasurer of Bridewell, in the behalfe of an honest Tenaunt of his, such a Tenant, master, as had her name, and would holde so fast betweene the thighs, that shame it was for him that had anie shame, to be so shamelesse to vse anie meanes to keep her from open shame.
Thou speakest of mallice against some or other Marocco, and perhappes thou meanest that drabbe that the last daie when shee sawe thee heere doo thy trickes, sayd thou wert a deuill & I a coniurer.
Against her Master, no of mine honestie, she is but a poore whoore, to her I meane. Tush, she that I talke of can entertaine you with a duzen of tiffite taffetie girles in a morning, I, and the worst of them, when she is at the worst, shall haue a wrought wastcoate on her backe, and a lockram smocke worth three pence, as well rent behind as before, I warrant you.
Those rents by your leaue Marocco, helpe to paie the Landlords rent at the quarters end.
I master, and the Landlorde by your leaue helpes to rent some of them betweene the quarters.
Thats but a tricke of youth lad,, Euerie man may amend.
True master,, A loues a whoore as his lyfe. For hee will forbeare as long as shee will beare, and thats ka mee, and ka thee, knaue he, and queane she.
Had neede bee of exceeding patience Marocco, to forbeare as long as sheele beare, for a better bearing beast is not in all Shordich, nor Hounds-dich neither, than this beastly beast that I thinke thou meanest. But speake not so loude, for and if her landlord heard you, hee would aunswere for her.
I thinke so, has answered so long for her, that a can scarce answere for himselfe, and I speake not so loude that I feare him,, master, a heares verie badlye euerie where: and worse a will heare, and a holde on, yea master, and loose hearing and seeing to, and a vie it and see it, as a has done these duzen yeres.
Well, whats that to the purpose, these wrongs are priuate, and touch himself, and wrack not the common wealth, as thou exclaymest.
O master, then you know nothing: for vnderstand you as of Nownes, some be substantiues, some be adiectiues: so of Landlords, some of them bee couetous, and some bee lecherous, and heeis both.
Sayest mee so. Well then Marocco, whether does more harme in the commonwelth, the couetous or the lecherous Landlord.
Tush master, that question is no question. For though it bee a question betweene the couetous and the prodigall, yet is it no question betwixt the couetous and the lecherous. The lecherous Landlord hath his wench at his commandement, and is content to take ware for his money, his priuate scutcherie wounds not the commonwealth farther than that his whoore shall haue a house rent free, when his honest neighbours wife and children shall neither haue a peece of a house or a householde loafe for him. Let him passe for a farting churle, and weare his mistres fauors,rubies and precious stones on his nose, &c. And thisshall, if you will, bee the perfectest poxe that euer grewe in Shordich or Southwarke.
And there haue beene bigge inflamations, and more vnquenchable than the great fire that burnt so much blew threed on the toppe of Fishstreet hill.
But the couetous Landlord is the caterpiller of the common-wealth, hee neither feares God nor the deuill, nor so hee maye racke it out, cares not what Tenant he receiues: he is no wencher (praie God he be no bencher) hee sits warme at home, and sets downe his accounts, and saies tohimselfe, my houses goe nowe but for twentie poundes by the yeere, Ile make them all baudie houses, and they will yeeld mee twice as much. Vppon the Exchange comes to him one or two honest men to take the~ at his hands, the poore artificer or his lyke, of what trade so euer, offers him the rent it hath gone for, & sureties perhaps. Yea, saie so, good securitie, and foure pounds a yere for a house, comes Pierce Pandor, and baudie Bettrice his wife, two that I warrant you were knowen well inough what they were, I two that had beene as well carted and whipt, and couerd with durt ouer head and eares, and they forsooth will begin the world anue again, hauing a fresh wench or two that came but from the carryers that morning, though shee had tapt many a canne in long lane at Barthelmew tide. With this stocke of wenches will this Trustie Roger and his Bettrice set vp forsooth with their pamphlet pots, and stewed prunes, nine for a tester, in a sinfull saucer, and they will offer this couetous and wretched landlorde fiue poundes by the yeere, yea sixe pounds to haue his house and his countenaunce wythall. But hee that will go to the deuill for money, will admit them with fauour, and so let them haue his house, with promise of anie thing whatsoeuer in his power, yea, and if occasion serue, will write, and speak, and take paines and plaie the sutor, and beare wyth them in anie thing, so there bee anie meane to doo it, and hee to bee sure of his rent.God is his iudge hee does it for no fleshly respect, but euen of a mere worldly motion, to beare sinne out with sinne, and lecherie with couetousnesse. Let the Parish complaine, why (sayes hee) what should I doo, I haue my rent paid mee at my day. I must make money of my lande, and so let them doo their heartes out, thinkes hee, I shall haue my rent the readier. This cormorant is hee that cares not how he get it so hee haue it. This Stymphalist is he that with fiue or sixe Tenements, and the retinue thereunto belonging, infectes the aire with stench, and poisons that parish, yea and twentie parishes off with the contagion of such carrion as lies there in their bumble baths, and stinke at both ends like filthie greene elder pipes. For him and them master, such Landlordes and such Tenants. Good master wish as I wish.
Whats thy wish Marocco?
That at the quarter daie the parish would of their owne deuotion to the common wealth, bestow a banket vpon them of ale and cakes in the cage, & a hundred or two of good faggots, to consume the bodies and bones of them all and euerie mothers child, such Landlords and such Tenants as so much against conscience, receiue & deceiue, and daie by daie, and houre by houre cheat, coosen, catch, and deuour in pillage from gentlemen, prentises, and good fellowes,, euen from the outside to the inside, from the cloak to the shirt, leauing Nicol Neuerthriue neuer awench in the chamber or penie in the purse.
Marocco, Praie thy wish take effect, I wish for euerie parish so pestered with such tenants and tenements, God put into their mindes to be but at cost and charges for the faggots, for ale and cakes I were mearst, if it cost fiue markes. But how does this landlord fall into this? Why is thy mallice so great against them, when tis the baude and the whoore that make all this stirre?
O master, miserable landlords are cause of all this mischiefe. Tis he that because he will haue an vnreasonable rent, will vpholde anie villanie in his tenant: a slaue to monie, a pandor to the baud, a piller, nay a pillow & a bolster to all the roguerie committed in his houses. And yet will this filthie felow sit at his doore on a sonday in the high street and my mistres his wife by him, & there forsooth talke so saint-like of the sermon that day, and what a good peece of worke the young man made, and what a goodly gift of vtterance he had, but not the value of a pound of beefe wil a giue him, were his gift of vtterance comparable to S. Augustines, or Chrisostomes eloquence. Sweare a will and forsweare vpon the workeday, as well as anie. And if percase a sit in place of authoritie, O howe seuere will he be in all his proceedings against a yong or good fellow in anie trifling matter. Then a takes vpon him not a little: Sir (sayes hee) what did you in such an house? Wherefore came you thether? And laie the lawe and the Prophetes too,and so rate a Gentleman well descended, meerely priuiledged with a furd gowne and a nightcap: when in deede his bringing vp hath beene in beggerie and slauerie illiberally, hauing spent his time in conference with the water tankard at the Conduit, lying miserably, and for sparing of wood, loding his gowne sleeue with fuell from the haberdashers, and wearing his handes in a frostie morning by the fugitiue flames of a few wast papers, a naturall enemie to all learning and liberalitie. O master, such a churle as you and I sawe heere last daie talke with two souldiers in the yard, and put his hand in his pouch, & gaue them nere a penny.
Didst thou see that Marocco? Well, there be too many such as he, yet there is a choice number of sober citizens that haue golden mindes, and golden purses withall.
That I know well master, and to them that haue such golden mindes, I wish golden mines: master, I protest to you I speake it not to flatter, but in reproach of those money-mongers, those lease-mongers, those caniballs, that dishonour the citie wherein they dwell, but vprightly I speake it, that you may not think I raile vpon mallice against any priuate man for anie priuate quarrell: There are many that beautifie London for their good parts, who being ciuily and well brought vp, are affable to straungers, charitable to the poore, liberall to schollers, and such as Citizens should be, dutifull to their prince, and deuout to their citie.But as cockle is euer among corne, and drosse among gold, so will those foule churles cumber the best corners, and march cheek by ioul among the better many, with as great shew of deuotion and charitie as the best. From such dissembling holynesse, such double wickednesse, good Lord delyuer vs.
Tis almost supper time Marocco, I heare mine host call, you haue done pretily well for two pointes, referre the rest till another time.
As you please master, and let this be our
first lecture of the Anatomie of the world. If the
Trance holde me but till the next Tearme, where
now I haue but with a drie foote ouerleapt these
matters, I may chance of these and more leaue a
deeper print, and hauing handled a case of 
commodities, will saie somewhat further of their 
discommodities and differences, euen as the bit of
reason shall leade mee. And so I commit you to
your supper, and my selfe to my litter, for I
promise you I am not a little weary
with gambolling this
afternoone.<|endoftext|>, hold vp thy hand,
Thou art here indicted by the othes of xii. good and lawful men of the Countie of Middlesex, beforeKnight, and others which tooke the Indictment by the name oflate of London Gentleman, otherwise called, late of London Doctor of the lawe, for y=t= thou as a false traitor against the most noble and Christian Prince, Queene Elizabeth thy most gracious Soueraigne and liege Ladie, not hauing the feare of God before thine eyes, nor regarding thy due allegiance, but being seduced by theinstigation of the deuill, and intending to withdrawe and extinguish the heartie loue and due obedience, which true and faithfull Subiectes shoulde heare vnto the same our Soueraigne Ladie, diddest at Westminster in the Countie of Middlesex on the first day of Februarie, in the xxvi. yeere of her Highnesse raigne, and at diuers other times and places in the same Countie, maliciously, and trayterously conspire and compasse, not onely to depriue and depose the same our Soueraigne Ladie of her Royall estate, title and dignitie, but also to bring her highnesse to death and finall destruction, and sedition in the Realme to make, and the gouernement thereof to subuert, and the sincere religion of God established in her highnesse dominions to alter & subuert. And that, whereas thou, by thy letters sent vntoBishoppe of Rome, diddest signifie vnto the the same Bishoppe thy purposes and intentions aforesayde, and thereby diddest pray and require the same Bishoppe to giue thee absolution, that thou afterwards, that is to say, the last day of March in the xxvi. yeere aforesayde, diddest trayterously receiue letters fro~ one called, directed vnto thee, whereby the same Cardinall did signifie vnto thee, that the Bishoppe of Rome had perused thy letters, and allowed of thine intent, and that to that ende hee had absolued thee of all thy sinnes, and by the same letter did animate and stirre thee to proceede with thine enterprise, and that thereupon, thou, the last day of August in the xxvi. yeere aforesaide, at Saint Giles in the fieldes, in y=e= same Countie of Middlesex, diddest trayterously conferre with oneEsquire, vttering to him all thy wicked and trayterous deuises, and then and there diddest moue him to assist thee therin, & to ioyne with thee in those wicked treasons aforesayd, against y=e= peace of our sayd Soueraigne Ladie the Queene, her Crowne & dignity: What sayest thou, art thou guilty of these treasons whereof thou standest here indicted, or notguiltie?
Before I pleade not guiltie, or confesse my selfe guiltie, I pray you giue me leaue to speake a fewe words:
God saue the Queene Elizabeth, and God sende mee grace to discharge my duetie to her, and send you home in charitie. But touching the matters that I am indicted of, some were in one place, and some in another, and done so secretely, as none can see into them, except y=t= they had eyes like vnto God, wherefore I will not lay my blood vpon the Jurie, but doe minde to confesse the indictment. It containeth but the parts that haue bene openly redde, I pray you tel me?
, thou must answere directly to the indictment, whether thou be guiltie or not.
I doe confesse that I am guiltie of al that is therein co~tained: And further too, I desire not life, but desire to die.
If you confesse it, you must confesse it in maner and fourme as it is comprised in the Indictment.
I doe confesse it in maner and fourme as the same is set downe, and all the circumstances thereof.
These matters contained in this indictment, and confessed by this man, are of great importance: they touch the person of the Queenes most excellent Maiestie in the highest degree, the very state and weldoing of the whole common wealth, and the trueth of Gods worde established in these her Maiesties dominions, and the open demonstration of that capitall enuie of the man of Rome, that hath set him selfe against God and all godlinesse, all good Princes and good gouernment, and against good men. Wherefore, I prayyou, for the satisfaction of this great multitude, let the whole matter appeare, that euery one may see that the matter of it selfe is as bad as y=e= indictment purposeth, & as he hath confessed. Wherto in respect y=t= the Justice of y=e= Realme hath bin of late very impude~tly slau~dered, al yeelded as a thing necessarie to satisfie the world in particular, of y=t= which was but summarily comprised in y=e= indictme~t, though in the lawe, his confession serued sufficiently to haue proceeded thereupon vnto iudgement.
Before we proceede to shewe what he hath confessed, what say you,
is that which you haue confessed here true, and did you confesse it freely and willingly of your selfe, or was then any extort meanes vsed to drawe it from you? Surely
I made that confession freely without any constraint, and that is all true, and more too: for there is no treason that hath bene sithens the first yeere of the Queene any way touching religion, sauing receipt of, and perswading of others, wherein I hauenot much dealt, but I haue offended in it. And I haue also deliuered mine opinion in writing, who ought to bee successor to the crowne,
No:
If you will say any thing for the better opening to the worlde of those your foule & horrible facts, speake on: but if you meane to make any excuse of that which you haue confessed, which els would haue bene and do stand proued against you, for my part, I will not sit to heare you.
It appeareth before you my Lords, y=t= this man hath bene indicted & arraigned of seuerall most haynous and horrible treasons, and hath confessed them, which is before you of recorde: wherefore there resteth no more to be done, but for the Court to giue iudgement accordingly, which here I require in the behalfe of the Queenes Maiestie.
I pray you heare me for discharging of my conscience. I will not goe about to excuse my selfe, not to seeke to saue my life, I care not for it, you haue my confession of recorde, that is enough for my life: And I meane to vtter more, for which I were worthie to die.
I pray you heere mee, in that I am to speake to discharge my conscience.
, then doe thy duetie according to conscience, and vtter all that thou canst say concerning those thy most wicked facts.
My cause is rare, singular & vnnaturall, conceyued at, presented in generall wordes to the Pope, vndertaken at, commended & allowed of by his Holines, and was to haue bene executed in England, if it had not bene preuented. Yea, I haue committed many treasons, for I haue committed treason in being reconciled, and treason in taking absolution. There hath bene no Treason sithens the first yeere of the Queenes reigne touching religion, but that I am guiltie of (except for receiuing of, and perswading as I haue said:) And yet neuer intended to kil Queene. I appeale to her owne knowledge and to my Lorde Treasorers and Master Secretaries.
Hast thou acknowledged it so often, and so plainly in writing vnder thy hande, and heere of recorde: and nowe, when thou shouldest haue thy iudgement according to that which thou hast confessed thy selfe guiltie of, doest thou goe backe againe, and deny the effect of all? Howe can wee beleeue that thou nowe sayest?
This is absurd. Thou hast not onely confessed generally, that thou wert guilty according to the inditeme~t, which summarily, and yet in expresse woordes doeth conteyne that thou haddest trayterously compassed & intended the death and destruction of her Maiestie: but thou also saydest particularly that thou wert guilty of euery of the Treasons conteined therein, whereof the same was one in playne and expresse letter set downe, and red vnto thee. Yea, thou saydest that thou wert guilty of moe Treasons too besides these. And diddest thou not vpon thy examination voluntaryly confesse, howe thou wast moued first thereunto by mislike of thy state after thy departure out of the Realme, And that thou diddest mislike her Maiestie for that shee had done nothing for thee, Howe by wicked Papistes and Popish bookes, thou wert perswaded that it was lawfull to kill her Maiestie, Howe thou wert by reconciliation become one of that wicked sort, that helde her Maiestie for neyther lawfull Queene, nor Christian, And y=t= it was meritorious to kill her? And diddest thou not signifie that thy purpose to the Pope by letters, and receiuedst letters fro~ the Cardinall, howe he allowed of thyne intent, & excited thee to perfourme it, and thereupon diddest receiue absolution? And diddest thou not conceyue it, promise it, vow it, sweare it, and receyue the Sacrament that thou wouldest doe it? And diddest not thou thereupon affirme, that thy vowes were in heauen, and thy letters and promyses on earth to bynde thee to doe it? And that whatsoeuer her Maiestie would haue done for thee, coulde not haue remoued thee from that intention or purpose, vnlesse she would haue desisted from dealing as shee hath done with the Catholiques, as thou callest them? All this thou hast plainely confessed: and I protest before this great assembly, thou hast confessed it more playnely and in better sort, then my memory will serue me to vtter: And sayest thou now, that thou neuer mentest it?Ah
your honours knowe, howe my Confession vpon myne examination was extorted.
You sayde,
that you would proceede with rigour against me, if I would not confesse it of my selfe.
But I will tell thee,
what we saide. I spake these words, If you will willingly vtter the truth of your selfe, it may do you good, and I wish you to doe so: If you will not, wee must then proceede in ordinary course to take your examination. Whereunto you answered, that you would tell the trueth of your selfe. Was not this true?
it was wonder to see the magnanymitie of her Maiestie, which after that thou haddest opened those trayterous practises in sort as thou hast layd it downe in thy confession, was neuerthelesse such, and so farre from all feare, as that shee woulde not so much as acquaint any one of her highnespriuie Counsel with it, to his knowledge, no not vntil after this thine enterprise discouered & made manifest. And besides that which thou hast set downe vnder thine owne hande, thou diddest confesse, that thou haddest prepared two Scottish Daggers, fit for such a purpose: and those being disposed away by thee, thou diddest say that an other would serue thy turne. And with all,, diddest thou not also confesse before vs howe wonderfully thou wert appauled and perplexed vpon a suddaine at the presence of her Maiestie at Hampton Court this last Sommer, saying that thou diddest thinke thou then sawest in her, the very likenes & image of king Henry the seuenth? And that therewith, and vpon some speeches vsed by her Maiestie, thou diddest turne about and weepe bitterly to thy selfe? And yet diddest call to mynde that thy vowes were in heauen, thy letters and promises on earth, and that therefore thou diddest say with thy selfe, that there was no remedy but to do it? diddest thou not confesse this?
Sayest thou nowe, that thou diddest neuer meane to kill the Queene? diddest thou not confesse, that when thou diddest vtter this practise of trecherie to her Maiestie, that thou diddest couer it with al the skill thou haddest, and that it was done by thee, rather to get credite and accesse thereby, then for any regard thou haddest of her person? but in trueth thou diddest it, that thereby thou mightest haue better oportunitie to performe thy wicked enterprise. And wouldest thou haue runne into such feare as thou diddest confesse that thou wert in, when thou diddest vtter it, if thou haddest neuer meant it? what reason canst thou shewe for my thy selfe?
I neuer meant to kill her: I will lay my blood vpon Queeneand you, before God and the worlde:
This is but thy popish prideand ostentation, which thou wouldest haue to be told to thy fellowes of that faction, to make them belieue that thou diest for poperie, when thou diest for most horrible and dangerous treasons against her Maiestie, and thy whole countrey. For thy laying of thy blood, it must lye on thine owne head, as a iust reward of thy wickednesse. The lawes of the Realme most iustly condemne thee to die out of thine owne mouth, for the conspiring the destruction both of her Maiestie, and of vs all: therefore thy blood be vpon thee, neither her Maiestie, nor we at any time sought it, thy selfe hast spilt it.
What meanest thou by that,
looke into your studie, and into your newe bookes, and you shall finde what I meane. I protest
I knowe not what thou meanest: thou doest not well to vse such darke speaches, vnlesse thou wouldest plainely vtter what thou meanest thereby.
, you haue bene much heard, and what you meane by being setled, I knowe not, but I see you are so setled in poperie, that you cannot settle your selfe to be a good subiect. But touching that you should say to stay iudgement from being giuen against you, your speaches must be of one of these kindes, either to proue the Inditement (which you haue confessed to be true) to be insufficient in lawe, or els to pleade somewhat touching her Maiesties mercie, why Justice should not be done of you. All other speaches wherein you haue vsed great libertie, is more then by lawe you can aske. These be the matters you must looke to, what say you tothem?<|endoftext|>In this disguise, ere scarce my mourning robes, Could haue a generall note, I haue forsooke My shape, my mother, and those rich demeanes, Of which I am sole heyre: and now resolue, In this disguise of Page to follow him, Whose loue first caus'd me to assume this shape. Lord how my feminine bloud stirs at the sight Of these same breeches, me thinkes this cod-peece Should betray mee: well, I will trye the worst, Hether they say hee vsually doth come, Whom I so much affect, what makes he heere, In the skirts of, so neere the field, And at a garden house, a has some punke Vpon my life: no more heere he comes.
God saue you sir: your name vnlesse I erre, Is maister.
'Tis sweet boy.
I haue a letter for you.
From whom ist,
The inside sir will tell you; I shall see What loue he beares me now.
Th'art welcome boy. How does the faire, My noble mistresse.
I left her in health.
Shee giues thee heere good words, and for her sake, Thou shalt not want a maister, be mine for euer.
I thanke you sir: now shall I see the Punke.
Who knocks so fast? I thought 'twas you, what news,
You know my businesse well, I sing one song.
Foot, what would you haue me do, my land is gon, My credit of lesse trust then Courtiers words, To men of iudgment, and for my debts I might deserue a Knight-hood; what's to be done? The Knight my father will not once vouchsafe To call me sonne; That little land a gaue,the Lawyer swallowed at one gob For lesse then halfe the worth: and for the Citty There be so many rascals, and tall yeomen VVould hang vpon me for their maintenance, Should I but peepe or step within the gates, That I am forst onely to ease my charge, To liue here in the suburbes: or in the towne To walke in. I tell you sir, Your best retired life is an honest Punke In a thatcht house with Garlike: tell not mee, My Punk's my Punke, and noble Letchery Sticks by a man, when all his friends forsake him.
The Poxe it will, art thou so sencelesse growne, So much indeared to thy bestiall lust, That thy originall worth should lye extinct And buried in thy shame? farre be such thoughts From spirits free and noble: begin to liue. Know thy selfe, and whence thou art deriu'd, I know that competent state thy father gaue, Cannot be yet consum'd.
'Tis gon by heauen, Not a denier is left.
'Tis impossible.
Impossible zart, I haue had two suckers, Able to spend the wealthystore.
VVhat are they?
VVhy a Lawyer & a VVhore, See heere comes one, doost thinke this petti-coate, A perfu'md smock, and twice a weeke a bathe, Can be maintain'd with halfe a yeares reuenews No by heauen, wee Annuall yonger brothers, Must go to't by hole-sale, by hole-sale man These creatures are maintain'd: her very face Has cost a hundred pound.
Sir, thanke your selfe.
They keepe this whore betwixt them.
You know sir, I did inioy a quiet country life, Spotlesse and free, till you corrupted mee, And brought me to the Court, I neuer knew, VVhat sleeking, glazing, or what pressing meant, Till you preferd me to your Aunt the Lady, I knew no Iuorie teeth, no caps of heire,Nowater,, or perfumes, To helpe a Ladies breath, vntill your Aunt Learnt me the common trick.
The common trick Say you, a poxe vpon such common tricks, They will vndoe vs all.
And knowing this Art thou so wilfull blind, still to persist In ruine and defame?
VVhat should I doe? I'aue past my word to keepe this Gentlewoman, Till I can place her to her owne content. And what is a Gentleman but his word.
Why let her goe to seruice.
To seruice, Why so shee does, she is my Landeresse, And by this light, no punie Inne a Court But keepes a Landresse at his command To doe him seruice, and shall not I, ha!
Sir, you are his friend (I loue him to) Propound a course which may aduantage him, And you shall finde such reall worth in me, That rather then Ile liue his hindrance, I will assume the most penurious state The Citty yeelds, to giue me meanes of life.
Why ther's it, you heare her what she sayes, VVould not he be damnd that should forsake her, Sayes she not well, can you propound a course, To get my forfit land, from yonder roague, Parcell Lawyer, parcell Deuill, all Knaue,.
Not I.
Why so, I thought as much, You are like our Cittizens to men in need, VVhich cry 'tis pitty, a propper Gentleman Should want mony, yet not an vsuring slaue, VVill lend him a denier, to helpe his wants, VVill you lend me forty shillings.
I will.
VVhy God-amercy, there's some goodnesse in thee, Youle not repent.
I will not.
With that money I will redeeme my forfit land, and wed My Coccatrice to a man of worship, To a man of worship by this light.
But how?
Thus: in Ramme-alley lies a fellow, by name: one that professeth law, but indeedHas neither law nor conscience, a fellow That neuer saw the barre, but when his life Was cald in question for a coosenage, The Rogue is riche, to him go you, tell him That rich Sir.
How's that?
Is lately dead, and that my hopes stand faire To get his onely daughter. If I speed, And haue but meanes to steale away the wench, Tell him I reckon him my chiefest friend, To entertaine vs till our nuptiall rites May be accomplisht, and could you but procure My elder brother meete me on the way, And but associateme vnto his house, 'Tweare hit ifaith, I'de giue my cunningAn honest slit for all his tricks in lawe.
Why this shall be perform'd, take ther's my store, To friends all things are common.
Then at the court There are none foes, for all things there are common.
I will as carefully performe thy wish, As if my fortunes lay vpon th'attempt.
When shall I heere from you.
Within this houre
Let me alone for the rest, if I gull not And go beyond my open throted lawyer, For all his booke cases ofAnd; let mee Like waiting Gentlewomen be euer bound, To sit vpon my heeles, and pick rushes, Will you about this geere.
With my best speed.
Then fare you well, yole meete me.
Without faile.
Adue: now you pernicious Coccatrice, You see how I must skelder for your good, Ile bring you where you shall haue meanes to cheate, If you haue grace enough to apprehend it.
Beleeue me loue, how ere some stricter wits, Condemne all women which are prone to loue, And thinke that if their fauour fall on any, By consequence they must be naught with many, And hold a false position, that a womanFalse to her selfe, can trusty be to no man, Yet know I say, how ere my life hath lost The same which my Virginity aspyr'd, I will be true to thee, my deed shall mooue, To win from all men pitty, if not loue.
Tut, I know thee a good rascall, lets in, And on with all your neate and finest ragges. On with your cloake and saue-guard, you arrant drab, You must cheate without all conscience, filtch for thee & me. Do but thou act what I shall well contriue, Weele teach my Lawyer a new way to thriue.
Come lou'dheere let vs sit, And marke who passes; now for a wager, What colourd bear'd comes next by the window?
A black mans I thinke.
I thinke not so, I thinke a redde, for that is most in fashion, Lord how scarce is the world of propper men And gallants; sure wee neuer more shall see A good legge worne in a long silke stocking, With a long cod-peece, of all fashions That carried it ifaith, what's he goes by?
A sniueling Cittizen, he is carrying ware,
Vnto some Ladies chamber: but who's this?
I know him not, a lookes iust like a foole.
He's very braue a may be a Courtier, Whats that a reads.
Ah how light a treads For durting his silke stockings, Ile tell thee what, A witty woman may with ease distinguish, All men by their noses, as thus: your noseis louely, large and brawde, Much like a Goose, your valiant generous nose, A crooked, smooth, and a great puffing nose, Your schollers nose is very fresh and raw For want of fire in winter, and quickly smels, His choppes of mutton, in his dish of porrage. Your Puritan nose is very sharpe and long,And much like your widdows, and with ease can smell, An edefying capon some fiue streets off,
O mistris a very proper Gentleman,
And trust me so it is, I neuer saw A man that sooner could captiue my thoughts (Since I writ widdow) then this gentleman, I would a would looke vp.
Ile laugh so lowd That he may heere me.
Thats not so good.
And spake you with Maister.
I did.
Will a meete his brother.
A said a would, And I beleeued him, I tell you maister I haue done that for many of these gallants That no man in this towne would do but I.
What is that boy.
Why trust them on their words, But will you heare the newes which now supplies, The citty with discourse.
What is it wag.
This sir, they say some of our citty dames Were much desirous to see the Baboones Doe their newest tricks, went, saw them, came home, Went to bed, slept, next morning one of them, Being to shift a smock, sends downe her maide, To warme her one, meane while she gins to thinke On the Baboones tricks, and naked in her bed Begins to practise some, at last she stroue, To get her right leg ouer her head; thus: And by her actiuity she got it Crosse her shoulder: but not withall her power, Could she reduce it, at last much strugling Tumbles quite from the bed vpon the flower, The maide by this return'd with the warme smock, And seeing her mistris throwne on the ground, Trust vp like a foote-ball, exclaimes, calls helpe, Runnes downe amazd, sweares that her mistris neck Is broke; vp comes her husband and neighbours, And finding her thus trus'd, some flatly said She was bewitch, others she was possest, A third said for her pride, the Diuell had set Her face where her rumpe should stand, but at lastHer valiant husband steps me boldly to her, Helpes her; she ashamed; her husband amazed, The neighbours laughing, as none forbeare, She tells them of the fatall accident. To which one answers, that if her husband Would leaue his trade, and carry his wife about To doe this tricke in publike, she'd get more gold Then all the Baboones, Calues with two tailes, Or motions whatsoeuer.
You are a wag.
He will be gone if we neglect to stay him.
Shall I cough or sneeze.
No I ha't stand a side, Aye me my handkercher.
Mistris,
Runne, runne, I haue let my handkercher fall, Gentleman shall I intreate a curtesie?
Within my power your beauty shall command. What curtesie ist.
To stoope and take vp, My handkercher.
Your desire is performd.
Sir most hearty thankes: please you come in Your welcome shall transcend your expectation.
I accept your curtesie, ha! whats this? Assaild by feare and hope in a moment., this womanish passion fits not men, Who know the worth of freedome: shall smiles and eyes With their lasciuious glances conquer him Hath still beene Lord of his affections? Shall simpring nisenesse load-stones but to fooles, Attract a knowing spirit? it shall, it dooes, Notrising fromlap, Spreds his bright raies with more maiestique grace, Then came the glances from her quickning eye, And what of this.
By my troth I know not.
I will not enter: continued flames burne strong. I yet am free, and reason keepes her seate, Aboue all fond affections, yet is she faire.
Sir I bring you thankes for this great curtesie, And if you please to enter I dare presume, My mistrisse will affoord you gratious welcome,
How do men call your mistris.
The mans in loue.
Her name sir is Mistris, late wife To maisterMercer deceast.
I haue heard she is both rich and beautifull,
In th'eyes of such as loue her, iudge your selfe, Please you but prick forward and enter.
Now will I fall a boord the waiting maide,
Fall a boord of me doost take me for a ship?
I, and will shoote you betwixt wind and water.
Blurt maister gunner, your linstocks too short.
Foote how did she know that, dost here sweet heart, Should not the page be doing with the maid, Whilst the maister is busie with the mistris, Please you prick forwards, thou art a wench Likely to goe the way of all flesh shortly.
Whose witty knaue art thou.
At your seruice.
At mine faith, I should breetch thee.
How breetch me.
I breech thee, I haue breech'd a taler man, Then you in my time, come in and welcome.
Well I see now a ritch well-practis'd baud, May pursse more fees in a summers progresse, Then a well traded lawyer in a whole terme, Pandarisme! why't is growne a liberall science Or a new sect, and the good professors Will like the Brownist frequent grauell pits shortly, For they vse woods and obscure holes already.
Not marry a widdow.
No.
And why? Belike you thinke it base and seruant-like, To feed vpon reuersion, you hold vs widdowes, But as a pie thrust to the lower end That hath had many fingers int before, And is reseru'd for grose and hungry stomacks.
You much mistake me.
Come in faith you do: And let me tell you thats but ceremony, For though the Pye bee broken vp before, Yet sayes the prouerbe, the deeper is the sweeter. And though a capons wings and legges be caru'd, The flesh left with the rumpe I hope is sweet. I tell you sir, I haue beene woed, and sued to,By worthy Knights of faire demeanes: nay more, They haue bin out of debt, yet till this houre, I neither could endure, to be in loue Or be beloued, but proferd ware is cheape. Whats lawfull thats loathd, and things denied, Are with more stronger appetite persude: I am too yeelding.
You mistake my thoughts: But know thou wonder of this continent, By one more skild in vnknowne fate, then was, The blindProphet, It was foretold, A widdow should indanger both my life, My soule, my lands, and reputation. This checks my thoughts, and cooles th'ssentiall fire, Of sacred loue; more ardent in my brest Then speech can vtter.
A triuiall Idle ieast, Tis for a man, of your repute and note, To credit fortune-tellers, a petty rogue, That neuer saw fiue shillings in a heape, Will take vpon him to diuine mens fate, Yet neuer knowes himselfe shall dye a begger, Or be hanged vp for pilfering table-cloaths, Shirts and smocks, hanged out to dry on hedges, Tis meerely base, to trust them, or if there be, A man in whom theGod hath breath'd His true diuining fire; that can foretell, The fixt decree of fate, he likewise knowes, What is within the euerlasting booke Of Desteny decreed, cannot by wit, Or mans Inuention be disolued, or shund, Then giue thy loue free scope, imbrace and kisse, And to the distafe sisters leaue th'euent.
How powerfull are their words whom we affect, Small force shall need, to win the strongest fort, If to his state the Captaine be perfidious, I must intreate you licence my depart For some few houres.
Choose what you will of time, There lyes your way.
I will intreate her, stay,
Did you call sir.
No.
Then fare you well.
Who gins to loue, needs not a second Hell.
, makes a no stay.
Mistris.
I prythee see if hee haue left the house, Peepe close, see, but be not seene: is a gon.
No, has made a stand.
I prethee keep close.
Nay, keep you close, y'ad best
What does he now?
Now a retires.
O you much partiall gods! Why gaue you men affections, and not a power To gouerne them? what I by fate should shun, I most affect, a widdow, a widdow.
Blowes the wind there.
A ha, h'is in ifaith, Yo'aue drawne him now within your purlews mistresse.
Tut I will not loue, my rationall And better parts shall conquer blind affections, Let passion children, or weake women sway, My loue shall to my iudgment still obay.
What does he now?
H'is gon.
Gon.
A went his way, and neuer lookt behind him.
Sure he's taken.
A little sing'd or so, Each thing must haue beginning, men must prepare Before they can come on, and show their loues In pleasing sort: the man will doe in time, For loue good Mistresse is much like to waxe, The more 'tisrub'd, it sticks the faster too, Or like a bird in bird-lime, or a pit-fall, The moore a labours, still the deeper in.
Come, thou must helpe me now, I haue a trick To second this beginning, and in the nick, To strike it dead ifaith, women must woe, When men forget what Nature leads them too.
Chast,; there's that left yet, Next to my booke,, I that's the soule of lawe: that's it, that's it, For which the Buckrome bag must trudge all weathers: Though scarcely fild with one poore replication, How happy are we that we ioy the law, So freely as we doe; not bought and sold, But clearly giuen, without all base extorting,Taking but bare ten Angels for a fee, Or vpward: to this renown'd estate, Haue I by indirect and cunning meanes, In-wouen my selfe, and now can scratch it out, Thrust at a barre, and cry my Lord as lowd, As ere a lifted gowne man of them all. I neuer plead before the honor'd bench, But bench right-worshipfull of peacefull Iustices And Country-Gentlemen, and yet I'aue found Good gettings by the Masse, besides od cheates,lands, and many garboyles more, Dash.
Sir.
Is that reioynder done.
Done sir.
Haue you drawn't at length, haue you dasht it out, According to your name.
Some seauen-score sheetes.
Is the demurror drawne twixtand, And what do you say topittifull bill,
I haue drawne his answer negatiue to all.
Negatiue to all. The plaintiue sayes, That, was sonne to, And will a sweare the generall bill is false.
A will.
Then he forsweares his father, tis well, Some of our clients will go prig to hell Before our selues; has a paide all his fees.
A left them all with me.
Then trusse my points, And how thinkst thou of law?
Most reuerently, Law is the worlds great light, a second sunne, To this terrestriall Globe, by which all things Haue life and being, and without which Confusion and disorder soone would seaze The generall state of men, warres, outrages, The vlcerous deeds of peace, it curbes and cures, It is the kingdomes eye, by which shee sees The acts and thoughts of men.
The kingdomes eye, I tell thee foole, it is the kingdomes nose, By which she smels out all these rich transgressors, Nor ist of flesh, but meerely made of wax, And 'tis, within the power of vs Lawyers, To wrest this nose of waxe which way we please: Or it may be as thou saist an eye indeed.But if it be, tis sure a womans eye
Thats euer rowling.
one knocks.
Go see who tis, Stay, my chaire, and gowne, and then go see who knocks, Thus must I seeme a Lawyer which am indeed, But meerly dregs and offscum of the Law,, Tis very cleere.
God saue you sir.
The place is very pregnant, Maister; Most harty welcome sir,
You ply this geere, You are no trewant in the law, I see.
Faith some hundred bookes in folio I haue Turnd ouer to better my owne knowledge, But that is nothing for a studient.
Or a Stationer they turne them ouer too, But not as you doe gentill Maister, And what? the Law speakes profit does it not?
Faith some bad angels haunt vs now and then, But what brought you hether.
Why these small legs,
You are conceited sir.
I am in Law, But let that goe, and tell me how you doe, How doesand his louely bride.
Introth you make me blush, I should haue askt, His health of you, but tis not yet too late.
Nay good sirforbeare your quillets now.
By Heauen I deale most plaine, I saw him not, Since last I tooke his Morgage.
Sir be not nice, (Yet I must needs herein commend your loue) To let me see him; for know I know him wed, And that a stole awayheire, Therefore suspect me not I am his friend.
How, wed to ritchonely heyre, Is olddead?
Do you make it strange?
By heauen I know it not.
Then am I greeued I spake so much (but that I know you loue him) I should intreat your secresie sir, fare you well.
Nay good sir stay, if ought you can disclose Of Maistergood, let me pertake, And make me glad in knowing his good hap.
You much indeere him sir, and from your loue,I dare presume you make your selfe a fortune If his faire hopes proceed.
Say on good sir.
You will be secret.
Or be my tongue torneout.
Measure for a Lawyer, but to the point, Has stoleheyre hether a brings her As to a man on whom a may relye His life and fortunes: you hath a named Already for the Steward of his lands, To keepe his Courts, and to collect his rent, To let out Leases and to raise his fines, Nothing that may, or loue, of profit bring, But you are named the man.
I am his slaue, And bound vnto his noble curtesie, Euen with my life, I euer said a would thriue, And I protest I kept his forfeit morgage, To let him know what tis to liue in want.
I thinke no lesse, one word more in priuate.
Good Maister, shall I put you now a case.
Speake on good Maister.
Then thus it is, Suppose I am a Page, he is my Maister, My Maister goes to bed and cannot tell What money's in his hose, I ere next day Haue filcht out some, what action lyes for this.
An action boy, cald firking the Posteriors, With vs your action sildome comes in question: For that tis knowne that most of your Gallants Are sildome so well stor'd, that they forget What money's in their hose, but if they haue, There is no other helpethen sweare the page And put him to his oath.
Then fecks-law, Dost thinke that he has conscience to steale, Has not a conscience likewise to deny. Then hang him vp ifaith.
I must meet him,
Commend me to them, come when they will, My doores stand open and all within is theirs, And though Ramme-alley stinks with Cookes and Ale, Yet say ther's many a worthy lawyers chamber, Buts vpon Ram-alley, I haue still an open throte, If ought I haue which may procure his good,Bid him command, I, though it be my blood.
Is this the place you were appointed to meete him.
Sosent me word.
I find it true, That wine, good newes, and a yong holsome wench Cheere vp an old mans blood, I tell thee boy, I am right harty glad, to heare thy brother Hath got so great an heire; now were my selfe, So well bestowed I should reioyce ifaith.
I hope you shall do well.
No doubt, no doubt, A sirra has a borne the wench away. My sonne ifaith, my very sonne ifaith, When I was yong and had an able back, And wore the brissell on my vpper lippe, In goodI had as good conuayance, And could haue ferd, and ferkt y'away a wench, As soone as eare a man aliue; tut boy, I had my winks, my becks, treads on the toe, Wrings by the fingers, smyles and other quirkes, Noe Courtier like me, your Courtiers all are fooles, To that which I could doe, I could haue done it boy. Euen to a hare, and that some Ladies know,
Sir I am glad this match may reconcile, Your loue vnto my brother.
Tis more then so. Ile seeme offended still though I am glad.
Has got richheyre.
Come wench of gold, For thou shalt get me gold, besides odde ends Of siluer: weele purchase house and land, By thy bare gettings, wentch, by thy bare gettings, How saiest Lieftenant, does she not looke Like a wench newly stole from a window?
Exceeding well she carries it by, And if she can forbeare her Rampant trick, And but hold close a while twill take by.
How now you slaue? my rampant tricks you rogue, Nay feare not me my onely feare is still,Thy filthy face betrayes vs, for all men know, Thy nose stands compasse like a bow, VVhich is three quarters drawne, thy head Which is with greasy haire ore-spred, And being vncurld and black as cole, Doth show some scullion in a hole Begot thee on a Gipsie, or Thy mother was some Colliers whore: My rampant tricks you rogue, thou't be descride Before our plot be ended.
What should descry him, Vnlesse it be his nose? and as for that; Thou maist protest a was thy fathers butler, And for thy loue is likewise runne away, Nay sweet Lieftenant now forbeare to puffe, And let the brissels of thy beard grow down-ward, Reuerence my Punke and Pandarize a little, Ther's many of thy ranke that doe professe it, Yet hold it no disparagment.
I shall doe, VVhat fits an honest man.
VVhy thats enough, Foote my Father, and the goose my brother, Back you two.
Back.
Retire sweet Leiutenant, And come not on, till I shall waue you on.
Is not that he.
Tis he.
But wheres the wench.
It shalbe so, Ile cheate him thats flat.
You are well met, know yee me good sir, Belike you thinke I haue no eyes, no eares, No nose to smell, and winde out all your tricks, Y'haue stole sirheire, nay we can finde, Your wildest paths, your turnings and returnes, Your traces, squats, the mussers, formes and holes, You yongmen vse, if once our sagest wits Be set a hunting, are you now crept forth, Haue you hid your head within a suburbe hole All this while, and are you now crept forth?
'Tis a starke lye.
How?
who told you so did lye, Foote, a Gentleman cannot leaue the Citty And keepe the suburbs to take a little Phisick, But straite some slaue will say he hides his head; I hide my head within a suburbe hole,I could haue holes at Court to hide my head, Were I but so disposd.
Thou varlet knaue, T'hast stolne away Sirheire, But neuer looke for countenance from me, Carry her whether thou wilt.
Father, father, Zart will you vndoe your posterity. Will you sir vndoe your posterity? I can but kill my brother, then hang my selfe, And where is then your house, make me not dispare, Foote now I haue got a wench, worth by the yeare Two thousand pound and vpwards, to crosse my hopes: Would ere a clowne in Christendom doo't but you.
Good Father, let him leaue this thundring, And giue him grace.
Why law, my brother knowes Reason, and what an honest man should doe.
Well, where's your wife.
Shees comming here behind,
Ile giue her some-what, though I loue not thee.
My father right, I knew you could not hold Out long with a woman, but giue some-thing Worthy your gift and her acceptance father, This chaine were excellent by this good light, Shee shall giue you as good, if once her lands
Come to my fingring.
Peace knaue, whats she your wife?
That shall be sir.
And whats he.
My man.
A Ruffian knaue a is.
A Ruffian sir, By heauen, as tall a man as ere drew sword, Not being counted of the damned crew, A was her fathers Butler, his name is, Of with your Maske, now shall you finde me true. And that I am a sonne vnto a Knight, This is my father.
I am indeed faire maide, My stile is Knight: come let me kisse your lips.
That kisse shall cost your chaine.
It smacks ifaith, I must commend your choise.
Sir I haue giuen A larger venture then true modesty Will well allow, or your more grauer wit Commend.
I dare be sworne she has.
Not so. The foolish knaue ha's beene accounted wilde,And so haue I, but I am now come home, And so will he.
I must beleeue it now.
Beg his chaine wench.
Wil you cheat your father?
I by this light will I.
Nay sigh not, For you shall finde him louing and me thankfull: And were it not a scandall to my honour, To be consenting to my sonnes attempt, You should vnto my house, meane while take this, As pledge and token of my after loue: How long since dyed your father.
Some six weeks since. We cannot stay to talke, for slaues pursue, I haue a house shall lodge vs till the Priest May make vs sure.
Well sirra, loue this woman, And when you are man and wife, bring her to me, Shee shall be welcome.
I humbly thanke you sir.
I must be gone, I must a wooing too.
andspeed you, youle returne.
Instantly
Why this came cleanly off, Giue me the chaine, you little Cockatrice, Why this was luck, foote foure hundred crownes, Got at a clap, hold still your owne you whore, And we shall thriue,
Twas brauely fetcht about.
I, when will your nose and beard performe as much.
I am glad he is gon, a put me to the blush, When a did aske me of ritchdeath.
And tooke not I my q: wast not good, Did I not bring you off, you arrant drab, Without a counterbuffe? looke who comes heere, And three merry men, and three merry men, And three merry men bee wee a.
Still in this vaine, I haue done you seruice, The Lawyers house will giue you entertainment, Bountifull and free.
O my second selfe, Come let me busse thy beard, we are all made, Why actso melancholly, doost want money? Looke heer's gold, and as we passe along, Ile tell thee how I got it, not a wordBut that shee'sheyre, my brother Swallowes it with more ease, then a Dutchman Does slap-Dragons: a comes, now to my Lawyers:
Kisse my wife, good brother; shee is a wench Was borne to make vs all.
I hope no lesse, Yo'are welcome sister into these our parts, As I may say.
Thankes gentle brother.
Come now to Ram-alley. There shalt thou lye, Till I prouide a Priest,
O villany! I thinke a will gull his whole generation, I must make one, since 'tis so well begun, Ile not forsake him, till his hopes be wonne.
Then y'are friends.
We are, so please your worship.
'Tis well, I am glad, keepe your mony, for law Is like a Butlers box: while you two striue, That picks vp all your mony, you are friends,
We are so please you, both perfit friends.
Why so, Now to the next Tap-house, there drinke downe this, And by the opperation of the third pot, Quarrell againe, and come to me for law: Fare you well.
The Gods conserue your wisdom.
Why so, these are tricks of the long fifteenes, To giue counsell, and to take fees on both sides, To make 'em friends, and then to laugh at them, Why this thriues well, this is a common trick: When men haue spent a deale of mony in law, Then Lawyers make them friends: I haue a trick To go beyond all these, ifcome And bring richheyre, I say no more, But 'tis within this skonse to goe beyond them.
Here are Gentlemen in hast would speake with you.
VVhat are they?
I cannot know them sir, They are so wrapt in Cloakes.
Haue they a woman?
Yes sir, but shee's Maskt, and in her riding sute.
Goe, make hast, bring them vp with reuerence, Oh are they ifaith, has brought the wealthy heire:These stooles and cushions stand not handsomly.
Blesse thee.
Maisterwelcome.
Welcome loue, kisse this Gentlewoman,,
Your worship shall command me.
Art not weary.
Can you blame her since she has rid so hard?
You are welcome Gentlemen, -- Dash.
Sir.
A fire in the great chamber, quickly.
I that's well said, we are almost weary, But Maister, if any come to inquire For me, my brother, or this Gentlewoman, VVe are not here, nor haue you heard of vs.
Not a word sir, heere you are as safe As in your fathers house.
And he shall thanke you.
Th'art not merry loue, good maisterBid this Gentlewoman welcome: she is one Of whom you may receiue some courtesie In time.
She is most harty welcome, VVilt please you walke into another roome. VVhere is both bed and fire,
I, I, that that Good brother lead her in, Maisterand I VVill follow instantly, now Maister
It rests within your power to pleasure me, Know that this same is sirHeire, Now if she chance to question what I am, Say sonne vnto a Lord, I pray thee tell her I haue a world of land, and stand in hope To bee created Barron, for I protest I was constrain'd to sweare it forty times, And yet shee'le scarce beleeue me.
, Let me alone to set you out in length And breadth:
I prethee doo't effectually: Shat haue a quarter share by this good light, In all she has, I prethee forget not To tell her thehaue beene dancers, Tilters, and very antient Courtiers, And in request at Courtsince sir. VVith his long silke stockings was beheaded,Wilt thou do this?
Referre it to my care.
Excellent, Ile but shift my bootes, and then Goe seeke a Priest, this night I will be sure. If we be sure, it cannot be vndone, Can it Maister?
O sir not possible: You haue many Presidents and booke Cases for't, Bee you but sure and then let me alone., and Ile defend you.
Nay then hang care, come lets in.
A ha, Haue you stole her,.
It shall goe hard but I will strip you boy. You stole the wench, but I must her insoy.
Come, tell me what thou think'st, I am tickled with conceit of marriage, And whom thinkst thou (for me) the fittest husband, What saist thou to yong.
A pretty fellow. But that his back is weake.
VVhat doost thou say Tothe Lawyer?
I like that well, VVere the Rogue a Lawyer, but he is none, Hee neuer was of any Inne-of-court; But Inne of Chancery, where a was knowne, But onely for a swaggering whyfler, To keepe out rogues, and prentises, I saw him, VVhen a was stockt for stealing the cookes fees. A Lawyer I could like, for tis a thing, Vsed by you Cittizens wiues, your husbands dead; To get french hoods you straight must Lawyers wed.
What saist thou then to Nimble Sir
Faith he must hit the haire: a fellow fit, To make a pritty Cuckold. take an old man, Tis now the newest fashion, better be An old mans darling then a young mans warling, Take me the old briske knight, the foole is ritch, And will be strong enough to father children, Though not to get them.
Tis true he is the man, Yet will I beare some dozen more in hand, And make them all my gulls,
Mistris stand aside.
Youngcomes, let me alone to touch him,
This is the house.
And thats the chamber-maide.
VVhers the widdow gentle.
The VViddow sir is not to be spoken to,
Not spoke to, I must speake with her.
must you? Come you with authority, or do you come To sue her with a warrant that you must speake with her.
I would intreat it.
O you would intreat it, May not I serue your turne, may not I vnfold, Your secrets to my Mistris, loue is your sute,
It is faire creature.
And why did you fall off VVhen you perceiued my mistris was so cunning, D'you thinke she is still the same.
I doe.
VVhy so, I tooke you for a nouice: and I must thinke, You know not yet the inwardes of a woman, Doe you not know that womenare like fish, VVhich must be strooke when they are prone to bite, Or all your labours lost, but sir walke here. And Ile informe my Mistris your desires,
Maister
boy.
come not you for loue,
I do boy
And you would haue the widdow.
I would
by, I neuer saw one goe about his busines More vntowardly: why sir, do not you know, That he which would be inward with the Mistris Must make a way first through the waiting mayde? If youle know the widdowes affections Feele first the waiting Gentle-woman, do it Maister, Some halfe a dozen kisses were not lost, Vppon this Gentle-woman, for you must know, These waiting maides are to their mistresses Like Porches vnto doores, you passe the one Before you can haue entrance at the other. Or like your musterd to your peece of brawne, If youle haue one tast well you must not skorne To be dipping in the other, I tell you Maister Tis not a few mens tales which they preferre, Vnto their Mistresses in compasse of a yeare, Be ruld by me, vntrusse your selfe to her, Out with all your loue-sicke thoughtes to her,Kisse her and giue her an angell to buy pinnes, And this shall sooner winne her Mistris loue, Then all your protestations, sighes and teares,
Here they come: to her bouldly Maister, Doe, but dally not, thats the widdowes phrase,
Most worthy faire such is the power of loue, That now I come t'accept your profered grace: And with submissiue thoughtes t'entreat a pardon, For my so grosse neglect.
Thers no offence, My mind is changed.
I told you as much before,
With a hey passe with a repasse.
Deerest of women, The constant vertue of your nobler mind, Speakes in your lookes: Nor can you entertaine Both loue and hate at once.
Tis all in vaine,
You striue against the streame.
Fee the waiting maid Maister
Stand thou propitious, indeere me to my loue
Deere Mistresse turne to this Gentleman. I protest, I haue some feeling of his constant loue, Cast him not away; try his loue.
Why sir, With what audatious front can you intreat To inioy my loue, which yet not two howers since, You scornefully refus'd.
Wel fare the waiting maide.
My fate compeld me but now farewell fond feare, My soule, my life, my lands, and reputation, Ile hazard all and prize them all beneath thee.
which I shall put to triall, lend me thy eare,
Can you loue boy.
Yes.
what or whom.
My victuals
A pretty knaue, ifaith come home to night, Shalt haue a posset and candi'd Eringoes, A bed if need be to, I loue alife, To play with such Babounes as thou.
indeed? But doost thou thinke the widdow will haue my maister.
Ile tel thee then, wo't come,
I wil.
Remember
Wil you performe so much.
Or loose my bloud.
Make him subscribe it, and then I vow, By sacredeuer hallowed fire, To take thee to my bed,
Til then farewell.
Hees worthy loue whose vertues most excell.
Remember, what ist a match betwixt you Mistresse?
I haue set the foole in hope, h'as vndertooke To rid me of that fleshly Captaine. Which sweares in tauernes and all ordinaries, I am his lawfull wife: he shall allay, The fury of the Captaine, and I secure, Will laugh at the disgrace they both indure.
Open your case and I shall soone resolue you.
But will you doe it truely,
As I am honest.
This Gentleman whom I so much affect, I scarsly yet doe know, so blind is loue In thinges which most concernes it. As y'are honest, Tell me his birth, his state, and farthest hopes
He is my friend and I will speake him truely. He is by birth, sonne to a foolish Knight, His present state I thinke wil be the prison, And farthest hope to be baild out againe, By sale of al your land,
O me accurst, Has a no credit Lands and Mannors.
That lands he has lies in a faire Churchyard, And for his manners they are so rude and vile, That scarse an honest man wil keepe him company,
I am abused coosned and deceiued.
Why thats his occupation: hee will cheate, In a cloake lin'd with Veluet, a wil prate Faster then fiue Barbers, and a Taylor. Ly faster then ten Citty occupiers, Or cunning tradsmen: goes a trust In euery Tauerne, where has spent a fagot, Sweares loue to euery whoore, squires baudes, And takes vp houses for them as their husband A is a man I loue and haue done much To bring him to preferment.
Is there no trust. No honnesty in men
Faith some there is, And tis all in the hands of vs Lawyers And women: and those women which haue it. Keepe their honesty so close, that not one,Amongsta hundred is perceiued to haue it.
Good sir, may I not by law forsake him And wed another, though my word be past To be his wife.
O questionlesse you may, You haue many Presidents and booke-cases for't, Nay though you were married by a booke-case, OfYou may forsake your husband, and wed another, Prouided that some fault be in the husband: As none of them are cleare.
I am resolu'd, I will not wed him, though I beg my bread.
All that I haue is yours, and were I worthy To be your husband.
I thanke you sir, I will rather wed a most perfidious Redshanke, A noted Iewe, or some Mechanick slaue, Then let him ioy my sheets.
A comes, a comes.
Now my Virago, 'tis done, all's cock-sure, I haue a Priest will mumble vp a marriage, Without bell, booke, or candle, a nimble slaue, An honest VVelsh-man that was a Taylor, But now is made a Curate.
Nay y'are fitted.
Now maister.
VVhere's your spirit sister?
VVhat all? whats the matter? do you heere?
VVhat's the reason of this melancholly?
By heauen I know not.
Has the gudgin bit.
He has beene nibling.
Hold him to it wench, And it 'twill hit by heauen: why art so sad? Foote wench we will be married to night, VVeele sup at th'Myter, and from thence My brother and we three will to the Sauoy, VVhich done, I tell thee girle, weele hand ore head, Goe to't pell mell for a Maiden-head, Come yo'are lusty, you wenches are like bells, You giue no musick, till you feele the clapper, Comea torch, we must be gon.
Seruant.
Mistris.
VVe are vndone.
Nowforfend.
This fellow has no land; and which is worse, Hee has no credit.
How are we out-stript,Blowne vp by wit of man: Let vs be gone Home againe, home againe, our market now is done.
That were too great a scandall.
Most true, Better to wed another then to returne With scandall and defame: wed me a man Whose wealth may reconcile your mothers loue, And make the action lawfull.
But where's the man? I like your councell, could you show the man.
My selfe am he, might I but dare aspire Vnto so high a Fortune.
Mistrisse, take the man, Shall we be baffled with faire promises, Or shall we trudge, like beggers back againe, No, take this wise and vertuous man, Who should a lose his legges, his armes, his eares, His nose, and all his other members, Yet if his tongue be left 'twill get his liuing, Take me this man.
Thankes gentle maister.
'Tis impossible, this night he meanes to wed mee.
If not by law, we will with power preuent it, So you but giue consent.
Lets heere the meanes.
Ile muster vp my friends, and thus I cast it, Whilst they are busie, you and I will hence Directly to a Chappell, where a Priest Shall knit the nuptiall knot ere they persue vs.
O rare inuention, Ile act my part, A owes me thirteene pound, I say no more, But there be catch-poles: speake ist a match.
I giue my liking.
Dash.
Sir.
Get your sword And me my buckler, nay you shall know We are, Bring my cloake, you shall thether, Ile for friends, VVorship and wealth the Lawyers state attends., we must beare some braine, to, Goe runne, flye: and a farre off enquire, If that the Ladybe there, If there, know what newes, and meete me straite At the Myter doore in Fleet-streete, away, "To get rich wiues, men must not vse delay.
A hunting Sirand drye-foote to,
We old men haue our crotchets, our conundrums, Our fegares, quirks and quibibles, As wel as youth.I goe, To hunt no Buck, but prick a lusty Doe, I goe in truth a wooing.
Then ride with me, Ile bring you to my sister.
Iustice not so by her there hangs a Tale.
Tha'ts true indeed.
She has a daughter.
And what of that
I likewise haue a sonne, A villanous Boy, his father vp and downe, What should I say, these Veluet bearded boyes will still be doing, say what we old men can.
And what of this Sir, be plaine,
A nimble spirited knaue, the villaine boy, Has one tricke of his sier, has got the wench. Stolne your rich Sisters heire.
heire,
Has done the deed, has peirst the vessells head, And knowes by this the vintage,
when should this be,
As I am by my counsell well informed, This very day,
Tut it cannot be, Some ten miles hence I saw the maide last night.
Maides may be maides to night and not to morrow. Women are free and sell their maiden-heads, As men sell cloath by yard and handfull, But if you chance to see your Sister widdow, Comfort her teares and say her daughters matcht. With one that has a knocker to his father, An honest Noble Knight.
Stand close Knight, close, And marke this Captaines humor, his name is. A dreames as a walkes, and thinkes no woman
Sees him but is in loue with him.
Twere braue, If some great Lady through a window spied me, And straight should loue me, say she should send, 5000. pound vnto my Lodging,And craue my company: with that mony, I would make three seuerall cloakes, and line them With black, Crimson, and Tawny three pyl'd veluet, I would eate atOrdinary, and dice At: then would I keepe my whore, In beaten veluet, and haue two slaues to tend her.
Ha, ha, ha.
What my case of Iustices, What are you eaues-dropping, or doe you thinke, Your tawny coates with gresie facings here, Shall carry it? Sir, Know my name is, knight, thee haue I sought, To fright thee from thy wits.
Nay good Sir, Wee haue too many mad men already.
How? I tell thee Iustice, not all Thy Baylifes, Sergants, busie Constables, Defesants, warrants, or thy Mittimusses, Shall saue his throte from cutting, if he presume, To woe the widdow eclipped, Shee is my wife by oth. Therefore take heed, Let me not catch thee in the widdowes house, If I doe, Ile pick thy head vpon my sword, And pisse in thy very visnomy, beware, beware. Come there no more, a Captains word, Flies not so fierce as doth his fatall sword,
How like you this, shall we indure this thunder, Or goe no further.
We will on Sir, We will on, let me alone to touchim, I wonder how my spirit did forbeare, To strike him on the face: had this beene spoke, Within my Liberties, had dyed for it.
I was about to draw.
If you come there, Thy beard shall serue to stuffe, those balls by which I get me heat at Tenice,
Is he gon.
I would a durst a stood to this awhile, Well I shall catch him in a narrow roome, Where neither of vs can flinch; If I do, Ile make him dance a trenchmoore to my sword. Come Ile along with you to the widdow.We will not be out-braued, take my word, Weele not be wrongd while I can draw a sword.
Let the Coach stay at showlane end: be ready, Let the boote stand openand when she's in: Hurry towards Saintin the field, As if the Diuell himselfe were waggoner, Now for an arme of oake, and heart of steele, To beare away the wench, to get a wife, A gentlewoman, a maide, nay which is more, An honest maide, and which is most of all, A ritch and honest maide:, For a man to wed such a wife as this, Is to dwell in the suburbsof Heauen,
Is she so exquesite.
Sir she is ritch, And a great heire
Tis the more dangerous,
Dangerous! Lord where be those gallant sprites! The time has beene when scarse an honnest woman, Much lesse a wench could passe an Inne of court, But some of the fry would haue beene dooing, With her: I knew the day when Shreds a Taylor, Comming once late by an Inne of Chancerie; Was laid along, and mufled in his cloake, His wife tooke in, Stycht vp, turnd out againe, And he perswaded all was but in iest, Tut those braue boyes are, gone, these which are left, Are wary lads, liue poring on their bookes, And giue their lynnen to their landresses, By tayle, they now can saue their purses, I knew when euery gallant had his man, But now a tweluepeny weekely Landresse, Will serue the turne to halfe a dozen of them,
Here comes my man, what newes?
As you would wish, The Ladyis come to towne. Her horses yet are walking, and her men say, Her onely daughter, is conuayd away. Noe man knowes how: now to it master, You and your seruantare made for euer,If you but stick to it now.
Gentlemen, Now show your selues at full, and not a man, But shares a fortune with me if I speed.
Tut feare not vs, be sure you runne away, And weele performe the quarrell.
Stand close, they come,
Art sure he will be here.
Most sure.
Sir.
Beare vp the torch, and keepe your way apace Directly to the Sauoy.
Haue you a Licence, Looke to that brother before you marry, For feare the Parson loose his benifice.
Tut our Curat craues no licence, a sweares His liuing came to him by a miracle,
How by miracle?
Why a paid nothing fort, A swares that few be free from symony, But onely Welchmen, and those a sayes to, Are but mountaine Priests.
But hang him foole he lyes. Whats his reason?
His reason is this, That all their liuings are so rude and bare, That not a man, will venter his damnation By giuing mony for them: a does protest, There is but two paire of hose and shooes, In all his Parish.
Hold vp your light Sir.
Shall I be taught how to aduance my torch,
Whats the matter Leiftenant.
Your Lieftenants an asse.
How an asse; die men like dogs.
hold gentlemen.
An asse, an asse.
Hold brother hold, Lieftenant. Put vp as you are men, your wife is gone.
Gone,
Gone.
How, which way? this is some plot
Downe toward Fleete bridge.
Follow, follow, follow.
So has the wench, let vs persue a loofe, And see the euent, this will prooue good mirth, When things vnshapde shall haue a perfit birth.<|endoftext|>prethee tell me, what Planet thinkst thou gouernd at my conception, that I liue thus openly to the world?
Two Planets raind at once,thats you, Andthats, were in coniunction.
Prethee, prethee, in faith that coniunction copulatiue, is that part of speech that I liue by.
Ha, ha, to see the world, we swaggerers That liue by oathes and big-mouth'd menaces, Are now reputed for the tallest men: He that hath now a black muchato Reaching from eare to eare, or turning vp, bristling towards the eye: He that can hang two hansom tooles at his side, Go in disguisde attire, weare Iron enough, Is held a tall man and a souldier. He that with greatest grace can sweare gogs zounds, Or in a Tauerne make a drunken fray, Can cheat at Dice, swagger in bawdie houses, Weare veluet on his face, and with a grace Can face it out with asam a souldier. He that can clap his sword vpon the boord Hee's a braue man, and such a man am I.
She that with kisses can both kil & cure, That liues by loue, that sweares by nothing else But by a kisse, which is no common oath: That liues by lying, and yet oft tels truth; That takes most pleasure when she takes most paines: Shee's a good wench my boy, and such am I.
She that is past it, and praies for them that may.
Is an old Bawd as you are Mistris.
O do not name that name, do you not know Thatcould neuer endure to heare that name. But if your man would leaue vs,would read The lesson that last nightpromist you.
prethee leaue vs, we would be alone.
And will and must: if you bid me be gone,will withdraw, and draw on any he That in the worlds wide round dare cope with me. Mistris farewell, to noneneuer speake So kind a word. My salutations are, Farewell and be hangd, or in the diuels name. What they haue bene my many fraies can tell, You cannot fight, therefore to you farwell.
O this same swaggerer is the bulwark of my reputation, But Mistris, now to your lecture that you promist me.
Daughter attend, forwill tell thee now What in my yong daies I my selfe haue tried: Be rul'd by me andwill make thee rich. You God be praisde are faire, and as they say Full of good parts, you haue bene often tried To be a woman of good carriage, VVhich in my mind is very commendable.
It is indeed. Forward good mother.
And astold you, being faire,wish Sweet daughter you were as fortunate. VVhen any sutor comes to aske thy loue, Looke not into his words, but into his sleeue, If thou canst learne what language his purse speakes, Be rul'd by that, thats golden eloquence. Mony can make a slauering tongue speake plaine: If he that loues thee be deform'd and rich, Accept his loue, gold hides deformitie. Gold can make limpingwalke vpright, Make squint eyes looke strait, a crabd face looke smooth,Guilds Copernoses, makes them looke like gold: Fils ages wrinkles vp, and makes a face As old as, looke as yong as. If thou wilt arme thy selfe against all shifts, Regard all men according to their gifts. This if thou practise, thou when I am dead Wilt say old mothersoft laid thy head.
Soft who comes here? begone good Mistris, Of thy rules practise this is my first day.
God for thy passion what a beast am, To scar the bird that to the net would flie.
By your leaue Mistresse.
VVhat to do Maister?
To giue me leaue to loue you.
I had rather afford you some loue to leaue me.
would you would assoone loue me, ascould leaue you.
pray you what are you sir?
A man Ile assure you.
How shouldknow that?
Trie me by my word, forsayam a man, Or by my deed, Ile proue my selfe a man.
Are you not Maister?
Not M., but, and your seruant sweete Mistris.
Not Mistris, butand your handmaid, sweet Maister.
Thatloue you, let my face tell you: that I loue you more then ordinarily, let this kisse testifie: and that I loue you feruently and entierly, aske this gift, and see what it will answere you. My selfe, my purse, and all being wholy at your seruice.
Thattake your loue in good part, my thankes shall speak for me: thatam pleasde with your kisse, thisinterest of an other shall certifie you: and that I accept your gift, my prostrate seruice and selfe shall witnes with me. My loue, my lips, and sweet selfe, are at your seruice: wilt please you to come neare sir?
O that my wife were dead, here would I make My second choise, would she were buried, From out her graue this Marigold should grow, Which in my nuptialswold weare with pride. Die shall shee, I haue doom'd her destenie.
Tis newes M.to see you in such a place, How doth your wife?
Faith Mistrisat the point of death, And long she cannot liue, she shall not liue To trouble me in this my second choice.
I pray forbeare sir, for here comes my Loue, Good sir for this time leaue me: by this kisse You cannot aske the question at my hands I will denie you: pray you get you gone.
Farwell sweet Mistris.
Sweet adieu:
Stand to me bill, and head-peece sit thou close, I heare my Loue, my wench, my duck, my deare, Is sought by many sutors, but with this Ile keep the doore, and enter he that dare.be gone, thy twigs Ile turne to steele, These fingers that were expert in the Ierke, In steed of lashing of the trembling, Must learne pash and knock, and beate and mall, Cleaue pates, andhe that enters here Comes on his death,, is he shall taste.
Alas poore foole, the Pedants mad for loue, Thinkes me more mad that I would marry him: Hee's come to watch me with a rustie bill,To keep my friends away by force of armes, I will not see him but stand still aside, And here obserue him what he meanes to doo.
, that he that loues her best Durst offer but to tuch her in this place., Shall pash his Coxcombe such a knock, As that his soule his course shall take To, andlake. In vaine I watch in this darke hole, Would any liuing durst my manhood trie, And offer to come vp the staires this way.
O we should see you make a goodly fray.
The wench I here watch with my bill,still.let him come that dare, Death, hell, and Limbo be his share.
Wheres mistris, neuer a post here, A bar of Iron gainst which to trie my sword? Now by my beard a daintie peece of steele.
Owhat a qualme is this I feele?
Come hither, is none here but we two? When didst thou see the starueling Schoole-maister? That Rat, that shrimp, that spindleshanck, that Wren, that sheep-biter, that leane chittiface, that famine, that leane Enuy, that all bones, that bare Anatomy, that Iack a Lent, that ghost, that shadow, that Moone in the waine.
I waile in woe, I plunge in paine.
When next I finde him here Ile hang him vp Like a dried Sawsedge, in the Chimnies top: That Stock-fish, that poore Iohn, that gut of men.
O that I were at home againe.
When he comes next turne him into the streets,Now come lets dance the shaking of the sheets.
, hence boystrous bill, come gentle Rod. Had not grimstampt and star'd,had little car'd: Or if in stead of this browne bill, I had kept my mistrisstill, And he vpon an others back, His points vntrust, his breeches slack: My countenance he should not dash, For I am expert in the lash. But my sweet Lasse my loue doth flie, Which shall make me by poyson die., I will rid my life, Either by poyson, sword, or knife.
Sirra when saw you your Maister?
Faith Mistris when I last lookt vpon him.
And when was that?
When I beheld him.
And when was that?
Mary when he was in my sight, and that was yesterday, since when I saw not my maister, nor lookt on my M. nor beheld my maister, nor had any sight of my M.
Was he not at my father in lawes?
Yes mary was he.
Didst thou not intreat him to come home?
How should I mistris, he came not there to day.
Didst not thou say he was there?
True mistris he was there, but I did not tel ye whe~, He hath bin there diuers times, but not of late.
About your busines, here Ile sit and wait His comming home, though it be nere so late. Now once againe goe looke him at the Change, Or at the Church with Sir,Tis told me they vse often conference: When that is done, get you to schoole againe.
I had rather plaie the trewant at home, then goe seeke my M. at schoole: let me see what age am, some foure & twentie, and how haueprofited,was fiue yeare learning to crish Crosse from great A. and fiue yeare longer comming to F.there I stucke some three yeare before I could come to q. and so in processe of timecame to e perce e, and comperce, and tittle, thengot to a. e. i. o. u. after to our Father, and in the sixteenth yeare of my age, and the fifteenth of my going to schoole,am in good time gotten to a Nowne, by the same token there my hose went downe: thengot to a Verbe, there I began first to haue a beard: the~came to, there my M. whipt me till he fetcht the blood, and so foorth: so that now I am come the greatest scholler in the schoole: for I am bigger then two or three of them. But I am gone, farewell mistresse.
Loue none at all, they will forsweare themselues, And when you vrge them with it, their replies Are, thatlaughes at Louers periuries.
You told me of a Iest concerning that,prethee let me heare it.
That thou shalt. My mistris in an humor had protested, That aboue all the world she lou'd me best, Saying with sutors she was oft molested, And she had lodg'd her hart within my brest: And sware (but me) both by her maske & fan, She neuer would so much as name a man. Not name a man quoth I, yet be aduisde, Not loue a man but me, let it be so: You shall not think quoth she my thoughts disguisde,In flattring language, or dissembling show:say againe, andknow whatdo,will not name a man aliue but you. Into her housecame at vnaware, Her backe was to me andwas not seene,stole behind her tillhad her faire, Then with my handsclosed both her eyne, She blinded thus, beginneth to bethinke her Which of her Loues it was that did hood-winck her, First she begins to guesse & name a man Thatwell knew, but she had knowne far better. The nextneuer did suspect till than: Still of my namecould not heare a letter, Then mad, she did name, and then, Till she had reckoned vp some twentie names, At length when she had counted vp her score, As one among the rest she hit on mee:askt her if she could not recken more, And pluckt away my hands to let her see. But when she lookt back and saw me behind her She blusht, and askt if it weredid blind her? And sincesware both by her maske and fan, To trust no she tongue, that can name a man.
Your great oath hath some exceptions: But to our former purpose, yon is Mistris, We will attempt another kind of wooing, And make her hate her husband if we can.
But not a word of passion or of loue. Haue at her now to trie her patience, God saue you mistris.
You are welcome sir.
pray you wheres your husband?
Not within.
Who M.? himsaw euen nowAt mistristhe braue Curtizans.
Wrong not my husbands reputatio~ so, I neither can nor will beleeue you sir.
Poore gentlewoman how muchpittie you, Your husband is become her only guest: He lodges there, and daily diets there, He riots, reuels, and doth all things, Nay he is held the M. of misrule, Mongst a most loathed and abhorred Crew: And can you being a woman suffer this?
Sir, sir, I vnderstand you well inough, Admit my husband doth frequent that house Of such dishonest vsage,suppose He doth it but in zeale to bring them home By his good counsell, from that course of sinne: And like a Christian, seeing them astray In the broad path that to damnation leades, He vseth thither to direct their feete Into the narrow way that guides to heauen.
Was euer woman guld so palpably? But Mistristhinke you as you say?
Sir whatthinkthink, and what I say I would I could enioyne you to beleeue.
Faith mistrisI am sory for you, And in good sooth, I wish it laie in me To remedie the least part of these wrongs Your vnkind husband daily profers you.
You are deceiu'd he is not vnkind, Although he beare an outward face of hate, His hart and soule are both assured mine.
Fie mistris, take a better spirit, Be not so timerous to rehearse your wrongs,say your husband haunts bad company, Swaggerers, cheaters, wanton Curtizans.There he defiles his bodie, staines his soule, Consumes his wealth, vndoes himselfe and you, In danger of diseases, whose vilde names Are not for any honest mouthes to speake, Nor any chaste eares to receiue and heare. O he will bring that face admir'd for beautie, To be more loathed then a leaprous skin: Diuorce your selfe now whilst the clouds grow black, Prepare your selfe a shelter for the storme, Abandon his most loathed fellowship: You are yong mistris, will you loose your youth?
Tempt no more diuel, thy deformitie Hath chaung'd it selfe into an angels shape, But yetknow thee by thy course of speech: Thou gets an apple to betray poore, Whose outside beares a show of pleasant fruite, But the vilde branch on which this apple grew, Was that which drew poorefrom Paradice. Thy Syrens song could make me drowne my selfe, Butam tyed vnto the mast of truth. Admit my husband be inclin'd to vice, My vertues may in time recall him home, But if we both should desp'rate runne to sinne, We should abide certaine destruction. But hee's like one that ouer a sweet face Puts a deformed vizard for his soule, Is free from any such intents of ill: Only to try my patience, he puts on An vgly shape of black intemperance. Therefore this blot of shame which he now weares, I with my praiers will purge, wash with teares.
How lik'st thou this?
As schoole-boyes, Apes whips, as Lions Cocks, As Furies do fasting daies, and diuels crosses, As maides to haue their mariage daies put off:like it as the thingmost do loath, What wilt thou do? for shame persist no more In this extremitie of friuolous loue.see my doctrine moues no precise eares, But such as are profest inamoratos.
Oshall die.
Tush liue to laugh a little, Here's the best subiect that thy loue affords, Listen a while and heare this: hoboy speake.
As in presenti, thou loath'st the gift I sent thee,tarrie but die, for the beautious marry, Fain wolddie by a sword, but what sword shaldie by? Or by a stone, what stone?Knife I haue none to sheath in my brest, or emptie my full vaines, Here is no wal or post which I can soile with my brus'd braines. First will I therfore say 2. or 3. Creedes and Auemaries, And after goe buy a poison at the Apothecaries.
pretheebut obserue this fellow, Doest not heare him? he would die for loue, That mishapt loue thou wouldst condemne in him, I see in thee, I prethee note him well.
Were I assur'dthat I were such a Louer, I should be with my selfe quite out of loue: I prethee lets perswade him still to liue.
That were a dangerous case, perhaps the fellow In desperation would to sooth vs vp, Promise repentant recantation, And after fall into that desperate course, Both which I will preuent with policie.
O death come with thy dart, come death whe~ I bid thee,, and from this misery rid mee. She whom I lou'd, whom I lou'd, eue~ she my sweet pretie, Doth but flout & mock, & Iest, and dissimulary.
Ile fit him finely: in this paper is The Iuice of Mandrake, by a Doctor made To cast a man whose leg should be cut off, Into a deep, a cold and senceles sleepe, Of such approued operation, That who so takes it, is for twice twelue houres Breathlesse, and to all mens iudgements past all sence: This will I giue the pedant but in sport, For when tis knowne to take effect in him, The world will but esteeme it as a Iest: Besides it may be a meanes to saue his life, For being perfect poyson as it seemes, His meaning is, some couetous slaue for coyne Will sell it him, though it be held by lawe To be no better then flat felonie.
Vphold the Iest, but he hath spied vs, peace.
Gentiles God saue you, Here is a man I haue noted oft, most learned in Physick, One man he helpt of the Cough, another he heald of the tisick: And I will boord him thus:o`.
Attend me sir, I haue a simple house, But as the learnedsaith In his Epistle to, It is extremely troubled with great Ratts, I haue no mus pusse nor grey eyde Cat To hunt them out. O could your learned Art Shew me a meanes how I might poyson them:, sir.
With all my hart, I am no Rat-catcher, But if you need a poyson, here is that Will pepper both your Dogs & Rats and Cats: Nay spare your purse, I giue this in good will, And as it proues I pray you send to me, And let me know, wold you ought else with me?
, heer's that you say wil take them? A thousand thankes sweet sir, I say to you Asin his Aesops Fables said,, so farewell,.
Adiew. Come let vs goe, I long to see What the euent of this new Iest will bee.
Good morrow gentlemen, saw you not this way As you were walking, Sir?
M.as I take it.
Sir the same.
Sir I desire you more familiar loue, Would I could bid my selfe vnto your house, For I haue wisht for your acquaintance long.
Sweet M.I desire yours too: Wil you come dine with me at home to morow, You shall be welcome I assure you sir.
I feare sir I shall proue too bold a guest.
You shal be welcome if you bring your friend.
O Lord sir, we shall be too troublesome.
Nay now I will inforce a promise from you, Shall I expect you?
Yes with all my heart.
A thousand thankes. Yonders the schoolemaister. So till to morrow twentie times farewell.
I double all your farewels twentie fold.
O this acquaintance was well scrapte of me,By this my Loue to morrow I shall see.
This poyson shall by force expell,loue,hell., For my sweet louely Lasse will die.
What do I hear of poison, which sweet means Must make me a braue frolick widower? It seemes the doting foole being forlorne Hath got some compound mixture, in dispaire To end his desperate fortunes and his life: Ile get it from him, and with this make way To my wiues night, and to my Loues faire day.
In, friends farewell: I know death comes here's such a smell., father and mother,, sister and brother, And my sweet, not these drugges, Do send me to the Infernall bugges, But thy vnkindnesse, so adieu, Hob-goblins now I come to you.
Hold man I say, what wil the mad man do? I haue I got thee, thou shalt goe with me: No more of that, fie SirDestroy your selfe: If I but heare hereafter You practice such reuenge vpon your selfe, All your friends shall know that for a wench, A paltry wench, you would haue kild your selfe.
, do not name This frantick deed of mine for shame: My sweet magister not a word, Ile neither drowne me in a ford Nor giue my necke such a scope, To imbrace it with a hempen rope, Ile die no way till nature will me,And death come with his dart and kill me. If what is past you will conceale, And nothing to the world reueale, Nay assaid of yore, Ile striue to kill my selfe no more.
On that condition Ile conceale this deed, To morow pray come and dine with me: For I haue many strangers, mongst the rest, Some are desirous of your company. You will not faile me?
No in sooth, Ile try the sharpnes of my tooth, In steed of poyson, I will eate Rabets, Capons, and such meate: And so assaies, With wholesome fare prolong my daies. But Sir will Mistrisbe there?
She shall, she shall man neuer feare.
Then my spirit becomes stronger, And I will liue and stretch longer: Forsaid, and did not lie, That poysoned men do often die. But poyson henceforth Ile not eate, Whilst I can other victualls get: To morow if you make a feast, Be sure sir I will be your guest. But keep my counsell,, And till to morow sir adieu: At your Tablewill proue Ifcan eate away my loue.
Oam gladhaue thee, now deuise A way how to bestow it cunningly: It shall be thus: to morow Ile pretend A reconcilementtwixt my wife and me, And to that end I will inuite thus many:First Iustice, as the chiefe man there. My Father, old, yong, M., And M.haue bid alreadie. Then willhaue my louelytoo, Be it but to spight my wife before she die: For die she shall before to morrow night. The operation of this poyson is Not suddenly to kill, they that take it Fall in a sleepe, and then tis past recure, And this willput in her Cup to morrow.
This tis to haue such a Maister,haue sought him at the Change, at the schoole, at euery place, butcannot finde him no where. O cry mercy, my Mistris would intreat you to come home.
I cannot come to night, some vrgent busines Will all this night imploy me otherwise.
I beleeue my Mistresse would con you as much thanke to do that businesse at home as abroad.
Here take my purse, and bid my wife prouide Good cheare against to morrow, there will be Two or three strangers of my late acquaintance. Sirra goe you to Iusticehouse, Inuite him first with all solemnitie. Goe to my Fathers, and my Father in lawes, Here take this note. The rest that comewill inuite my selfe, About it with what quick dispatch thou canst.
I warrant you Maister Ile dispatch this businesse with more honestie, then youle dispatch yours. But Maister will the gentlewoman be there?
What gentlewoman?
The gentlewoman of the old house, that is as wel knowne by the colour shee laies of her chees, as anAle-house by the painting is laid of his Lettice: she that is like, Common to all men: she that is beholding to no Trade, but liues of her selfe.
Sirra be gone, or I will send you hence.
Ile go, but by this hand Ile tell my Mistris as soone as I come home, that Mistris light-heeles comes to dinner to morrow.
Sweet MistrisIle inuite my selfe: And there Ile frolick, sup, and spend the night. My Plot is currant, here tis in my hand Will make me happie in my second choyce, And I may freely chalenge as mine owne, What I am now inforc'tto seeke by stealth. Loue is not much vnlike Ambition, For in them both all lets must be remoued Twixt euery Crowne & him that would aspire, And he that will attempt to winne the same, Must plundge vp to the depth ore head & eares, And hazard drowning in that purple sea. So he that loues, must needs through blood and fire, And do all things to compasse his desire.
Come spread the Table: Is the hall well rubd, The cushions in the windowes neatly laid, The Cupboord of plate set out, the Casements stuck With Rosemary and Flowers, the Carpets brusht?
I forsooth Mistris.
Looke to the kitchen Mayd, and bid the Cooke take downe the Ouen stone, the pies be burnt: here take my keyes and giue him out more spice.
Yes forsooth Mistris.
Where's that knaue, bid him spred the cloth, Fetch the cleane diaper napkins from my chest, Set out the guilded salt, and bid the fellowMake himselfe handsome, get him a cleane band.
Indeed forsooth Mistris he is such a slouen That nothing will sit handsome about him, He had a pound of sope to scowre his face, And yet his brow lookes like the chimney stocke.
Heele be a slouen stil: Mayd take this Apron, And bring me one of Linnen, quickly Mayd.
I goe forsooth.
There was a curtsie, let me see't againe. I that was well. I feare my guests will come Ere we be readie, what a spight is this.
What's the matter?
Mistris I pray takefrom the fire, We cannot keepe his fingers from the rost.
Bid him come hither, what a knaue is that. Fie, fie, neuer out of the kitchin, Still broyling by the fire.
I hope you will not take Pipkin from the fire Till the broath be inough.
Well sirra get a Napkin and a Trencher And wait to day. So let me see my Apron.
Mistris I can tell ye one thing, my M. wench Will come home to day to dinner.
She shall be welcome if she be his guest. But heer's some of our guests are come alreadie, A Chaire for Iusticesirra.
Good morrow Mistris, you are like a good huswife, At your request I am come home, what a Chaire! Thus age seekes ease: where is your husband Mistris? What a cushion too!
pray you ease your taile Sir.
Mary and will good fellow, twentie thankes.
M.as welcom as hart can tel, or tong can think.
thank you M.,haue got many a good dish of broth by your meanes.
According to the auncientCurtesie you are welcome: according to the time and place, you are hartily welcome: when they are busied at the boord, we wil find our selues busied in the Buttrie: and so sweetaccording to our schollers phrase,.
I wil answer you with the like sweet,.
As much grace as you wil, but as little of it as you can good. But here comes more guests.
More stooles & cushions for these gentlemen.
What M. Iustice, are you here? Who would haue thought to haue met you in this place?
What say mine eyes, is Iusticehere? Mountaines may meet, and sosee may wee.
Well when men meete they meete, And when they part, they oft leaue one anothers company: So we being met, are met.
Truly you say true: And M. Iusticespeakes but reason. To heare how wisely men of lawe will speake.
Good morrow gentlemen.
What are you there.
Good morrow Mistris, and good morow all.
Ifmay be so bold in a strange place, I say good morrow, and as much to you.pray gentlemen will you sit downe? We haue bene yong like you, and if you liue Vnto our age, you will be old like vs.
Be rul'd by reason, but whose here?
, and good day To all at once, as I may say, First Maister, next old, That giues me pension by the quarter: To my good Mistresse, and the rest, That are the founders of this feast. In briefe I speake toall, That to their meate intend to fall.
Welcome Syr, o` my sonne Hath profited exceeding well with you, Sit downe, sit downe, by Mistrisleaue.
Gentlemen, welcome all, whil'st I deliuer Their priuate welcomes, Wife be it your charge, To giue this Gentlewoman entertainment.
Husband,wil: o` this is she vsurpes The precious interest of my Husbands loue: Though asam a woman, I could well Thrust such a leaud companion out of doores, Yet asam a true obedient Wife, Ide kisse her feete to do my Husbands will. You are intirely welcome Gentlewoman, Indeed you are, pray do not doubt of it.
I thank you Mistris, now by my litle honestie, It much repents me to wrong so chaste a woman.
Gentles, put ore your legges, first M. Iustice, Here you shall sit.
And here shall mistrissit by me.
Pardon me sir, she shall haue my wifes place.
Indeed you shall, for he will haue it so.
If you will needs, but I shall doo you wrong to take your place.
I by my faith you should.
That is no wrong which we impute no wro~g,pray you sit.
Gentlemen all,pray you seate your selues: What sir,know where your hart is.
Mum not a word,, peace: Come gentiles Ile be of this messe.
So, who giues thankes?
Sir that will.
pray you too it by and by, where's, Wait at the boord, let M.man Be had into the buttry, but first giue him A napkin and a trencher. Well said, Wait at your Maisters elbow, now say grace.
, sirs, Attend me now whilstsay grace. For bread and salt, for grapes and malt, For flesh and fish, and euery dish: Mutton and beefe, of all meates cheefe: For Cow-heels, chitterlings, tripes and sowse, And other meate thats in the house: For racks, for brests, for legges, for loines, For pies with raisons, and with proines: For fritters, pancakes, and for frayes, For venison pasties and minct pies: Sheephead and garlick, brawne and mustard, Wafers, spiced cakes, tart and custard, For capons, rabets, pigges and geese, For apples, carawaies and cheese: For all these and many moe,.
con you thankes, but sir, Is that your scholler? nowpromise youHe is a toward stripling of his age.
Whoforsooth, yes indeed forsootham his scholler,would you should well thinkehaue profited vnder him too, you shall heare if he shall pose me.
pray you lets heare him.
, how many Cases are there?
Mary a great many:
Well answered a great many, there are sixe, Sixe a great many, tis well answered, And which be they?
A Bow-case, a Cap-case, a Combe-case, a Lute-case, a Fidle-case, and a Candle-case.
know them all, againe well answered: Pray God my yongest boy profit no worse.
How many parsons are there?
Ile tell you as many asknow, if youle giue me leaue to reckon them.
prethee doo.
The Parson of, the Parson of, and the Parson of.
Well sir about your businesse: now willTemper the Cup my loathed wife shall drinke:
Daughter me thinkes you are exceeding sad:
Faith daughter so thou art exceeding sad:
Tis but my countenance, for my hart is mery, Mistris were you as merie as you are welcome, You should not sit so sadlie as you do.
Tis but becauseam seated in your place, Which is frequented seldome with true mirth.
The fault is neither in the place nor me.
How say you Ladie to him you last did lie by?All this is no more.
I thanke you sir, Mistris this draught shall be To him that loues both you and me.
I know your meaning.
Now to me; If she haue either loue or charitie.
Heare M. Iustice, this to your graue yeares, A mournfull draught God wot, halfe wine, halfe teares.
Let come my wench, here youngsters, to you all, You are silent, here's that will make you talke. Wenches, me thinke you sit like Puritants, Neuer a Ieast abroad to make them laugh?
Sir, since you moue speech of a Puritant, If you will giue me audience I will tell ye As good a Ieast as euer you did heare.
A Ieast, thats excellent.
Before hand lets prepare our selues to laugh, A Ieast is nothing if it be not grac'd: Now, now,pray you when begins this Ieast?
I came vnto a Puritant to wooe her, And roughly did salute her with a kisse: Away quoth she, and rudely pusht me fro her, Brother, by yea and nay I like not this, And still with amorous talke she was saluted, My artlesse speech with scripture was confuted.
Good, good indeed, the best that ere I heard.
I promise you it was exceeding good.
Oftfrequented her abroad by night, And courted her, and spake her wondrous faire, But euer somewhat did offend her sight, Either my double ruffe, or my long hayre: My skarfe was vain, my garments hung too low, My Spanish shooe was cut too broad at toe.
Ha, ha, the best that euer I heard.
I parted for that time, and came againe,Seeming to be conformd in looke and speech, My shooes were sharpe toed, and my band was plaine, Close to my thigh my metamorphis'd breech: My cloake was narrow Capte, my haire cut shorter, Off went my Skarfe, thus marcht I to the Porter.
Ha, ha, was euer heard the like?
The Porter spying me, did lead me in, Where his faire mistris sat reading on a chapter: Peace to this house quoth I, and those within, Which holy speech with admiration wrapt her, And euer asspake, and came her nie, Seeming diuine, turnd vp the white of eye.
So, so, what then, what then?
Forward, I pray forward sir.
I spake diuinely, and I call'd her sister, And by this meanes we were acquainted well: By yea and nay,will quoth, and kist her. She blusht & said that long tongu'd men would tell,seem'd to be as secret as the night, And said, on soothwould put out the light.
In sooth he would, a passing passing Ieast.
O do not sweare quoth she, yet put it out, Becausewould not haue you breake your oath.felt a bed there asgroapt about, In troath quoth, here will we rest vs both. Sweare you in troth quoth she, had you not swornehad not don't, but tooke it in foule scorne, Then you will come quoth; thoughbe loath, Ile come quoth she, be it but to keepe your oath.
Tis verie pretie, but now whens the Ieast?
O forward to the Ieast in any case.
would not for angell loose the Ieast.
Heres right the dunghil Cock that finds a pearle, To talke of wit to these, is as a manShould cast out Iewels to a heard of swine, Why in the last words did consist the Ieast.
I, in the last words? ha, ha, ha, It was an excellent admired ieast, To them that vnderstood it.
It was indeed,must for fashions sake Say as they say, but otherwise, o` God. Good M.thankes for our good cheare.
Gentleme~, welcome all, now heare me speak; One speciall cause that mou'd me lead you hither, Is for auncient grudge that hath long since Continued twixt my modest wife and me, The wrongs that I haue done her, I recant. In either hand I hold a seuerall Cup, This in the right hand, Wife I drinke to thee, This in the left hand pledge me in this draught, Burying all former hatred, so haue to thee.
The welcom'st pledge that yet I euer tooke: Were this wine poyson, or did taste like gall, The honey sweet condition of your draught, Would make it drinke like Nectar, I will pledge you, Were it the last that I should euer drinke.
Make that account; thus Gentlemen you see, Our late discord brought to a vnitie.
My heart doth tast the sweetnes of your pledge, And I am glad to see this sweete accord.
Glad quotha, theres not one amongst vs, But may be exceeding glad.
I am, I marrie am I, that I am.
The best accord that could betide their loues.
The worst accord that could betide my loue.
What rising Gentles, keep your places, Ile close vp your stomackes with a grace., That giu'st vs wine in stead of water, And from the Pond and Riuer cleere, Mak'st nappie Ale and good March Beere, That send'st vs sundry sorts of meate, And euery thing we drinke or eate, To maides, to wiues, to boyes, to men,.
So much good do ye all, and Gentlemen, Accept your welcomes better then your cheare.
Nay so we doo, Ile giue you thankes for all. Come M., you do walke our way, And M., and oldyour man, Weele be the first will straine curtesie.
God be with you all.
, Ile be the next, And man you home, how say you Lady?
I pray you do, good sir.
Syr, if it be not too much trouble to you, Let me intreat that kindnesse at your hands.
Intreat, fie, no sweete Lasse commaund., now take the vpper hand.
Come wife, this meeting was all for our sakes, I long to see the force my poyson takes.
My deare, deare husband, in exchange of hate, My loue and heart shall on your seruice waite.
So doth my loue on thee, but long no more, To her rich loue, thy seruice is too poore.
For shame no more, you had best expostulate Your loue with euery straunger, leaue these sighes, And chaunge them to familiar conference.
Trust me the vertues of youngwife, Her constancie, modest humilitie, Her patience, and admired temperance, Haue made me loue all women kinde the better.
O my mistris, my mistris, shees dead, shees gone, shees dead, shees gone.
What's that he sayes?
Out of my way, stand backsay, all ioy from earth is fled, She is this day as cold as clay, my Mistris she is dead: O Lord, my mistris, my mistris.
What mistrisdead? my soule is vanisht, And the worlds wonder from the world quite banisht: Oam sicke, my paine growes worse and worse,am quite strooke thorow with this late discourse.
What faints thou ma~? Ile lead thee hence for shame, Sound at the tydings of a womans death? Intollerable, and beyond all thought, Come my loues foole, giue me thy hand to lead, This day one body and two hearts are dead.
But now she was as well as well might be, And on the sudden dead; ioy in excesse Hath ouerrunne her poore disturbed soule. Ile after and see how Maistertakes it. His former hate far more suspitious makes it.
My M. hath left his gloues behind where he sat in his chaire, and hath sent me to fetch them, it is such an old snudge, he will not loose the dropping of his nose.
O Mistris, o`, o`, o` Mistris,mustneeds beate thee, I am mad, I am lunatike, I must fall vpon thee, my Mistris is dead.
O M., what do you meane, what do you meane M.?
O, o` Mistris, o` Mistris, o`.
O, o` God, o` God, o`.
O, I am mad, beare with me, I cannot chuse, o` death, o` Mistris, o` Mistris, o` death.
Death quotha, he hath almost made me dead with beating.
I wonder why the knaue my man stayes thus, And comes not backe, see where the villaine loyters.
O M., M., M., wonder not why I thus blow and bluster, my Mistris is dead, dead is my Mistris, and therefore hang your selues, o` my Mistris, my Mistris.
My sonnes wife dead?
My daughter.
Mistris, here comes her husband.
O here the wofuls husband comes aliue, No husband now, the wight that did vphold That name of husband is now quite orethrowne, And I am left a haplesse Widower.
Faine would I speake, if griefe would suffer me.
As Maistersayes, so say I, If griefe would let me, I would weeping die, To be thus haplesse in my aged yeares, O I would speake, but my words melt to teares.
Go in, go in, and view the sweetest Course That ere was laid vpon a mournfull roome, You cannot speake for weeping sorrowes doome.Bad newes are rife, good tidings sildome come.
What frantike humor doth thus haunt my sence, Striuing to breed destruction in my spirit? When I would sleepe, the ghost of my sweete loue, Appeares vnto me in an Angels shape, When I am wake, my phantasie presents As in a glasse, the shadow of my loue: When I would speake, her name intrudes it selfe Into the perfect ecchoes of my speech. And though my thought beget some other word, Yet will my tongue speake nothing but her name: If I do meditate it is on her, If dreame on her, or if discourse on her, I thinke her ghost doth haunt me, as in times Of former darknesse old wiues tales report,
Here comes my bitter Genius, whose aduice Directs me still in all my actions. How now, from whence come you?
Faith from the street, in which as I past by, I met the modest MistrisCourse: And after her as mourners, first her husband, Next Iustice, then old M., Old M., and youngtoo, With many other kinsfolks, neighbours, friends, And others that lament her Funerall, Her bodie is by this laid in the vault.
And in that vault my bodie I will lay, I prithee leaue me, thither is my way.
I am sure you ieast, you meane not as you say.
No, no, Ile but go to the Church and pray.
Nay then we shall be troubled with your humor.
As euer thou didst loue me, or as euerThou didst delight in my societie, By all the rights of friendship, and of loue, Let me intreat thy absence but one houre, And at the houres end I will come to thee.
Nay if you wil be foolish, and past reason, Ile wash my hands like, from thy follie, And suffer thee in these extremities.
Now it is night, & the bright lamps of heauen Are halfe burnt out, now bright Adelbora Welcomes the cheerefull Day-star to the Fast, And harmlesse stilnesse hath possest the world. This is the Church, this hollow is the Vault, Where the dead bodie of my Saint remaines, And this the Coffin that inshrines her bodie, For her bright soule is now in paradice. My comming is with no intent of sinne, Or to defile the bodie of the dead, But rather take my last farewell of her, Or languishing and dying by her side. My ayrie soule post after hers to heauen, First with this latest kisse I seale my loue. Her lips are warme, andam much deceiu'd If that she stirre not: o` this Golgotha, This place of dead mens bones is terrible, Presenting fearfull apparitions.
It is some spirit that in the Coffin lies, And makes my haire start vp an end with feare, Come to thy selfe faint heart, she sits vpright, Owould hide me, butknow not where; Tush if it be a spirit, tis a good spirit, For with her bodie liuing, ill she knew not, And with her bodie dead, ill cannot meddle.
Who am I? or where am?
O she speakes, and by her language nowknow she liues.
O who can tell me wheream become? For in this darknes I haue lost my selfe,am not dead, for I haue sence and life, How comethen in this Coffin buried?
be bold she liues, and Destinie Hath traind thee hither to redeeme her life.
Liues any mongst these dead? none but my self.
O yes, a man whose heart till now was dead, Liues and suruiues at your returne to life: Nay start not,am, one who long Hath doted on your faire perfection, And louing you more then became me well, Was hither sent by some strange prouidence, To bring you from these hollow vaults below, To be a liuer in the world againe.
vnderstand you, and I thanke the heauens, That sent you to reuiue me from this feare, And I embrace my safetie with good will.
Shake off thy sleepe, get vp betimes, go to the church and pray, And neuer feare, God wil thee heare, & keepe thee all the day. Good counsel boyes, obserue it, marke it well, This early rising, this, Is good both for your bodies and your minds. Tis not yet day, giue me my Tinder-box, Mean time vnloose your sachels & your bookes, Draw, draw, and take you to your lessons boyes.
O Lord M. whats that in the white sheete?
In the white sheete my boy,, where?
Maister,there.
O, keep vs from euill, A charme from flesh, the world, & the diuell.
O tel me not my husband was ingrate, Or that he did attempt to poyson me, Or that he laid me here, and I was dead, These are no meanes at all to win my loue.
Sweet Mistris, he bequath'd you to the earth, You promis'd him to be his wife till death, And you haue kept your promise, but now since The world, your husba~d, & your friends suppose That you are dead, grant me but one request, And I will sweare neuer to sollicite more, Your sacred thoughts to my dishonest loue.
So your demand may be no preiudise To my chast name, no wrong vnto my husband, No sute that may concern my Wedlock breach, I yeeld vnto it, but to passe the bands of modestie & chastitie, First willbequeath my selfe againe Vnto this graue, and neuer part from hence, Then taint my soule with blacke impuritie.
Take here my hand & faithful hart to gage, That I will neuer tempt you more to sinne: This my request is, since your husband doates Vpon a leaud lasciuious Curtezan, Since he hath broke the bands of your chaste bed, And like a murderer sent you to your graue, Do but go with me to my mothers house, There shall you liue in secret for a space, Onely to see the end of such leaud lust, And know the difference of a chaste wifes bed, And one whose life is in all loosenesse led.
Your mother is a vertuous Matron held,Her counsell, conference, and companie, May much auaile me, there a space Ile stay, Vpon condition as you said before, You neuer will moue your vnchaste sute more.
My faith is pawnd, o` neuer had chaste wife, A husband of so leaud and vnchast life.
Mistris I long haue seru'd you, euen since These bristled hayres vpon my graue like chin Were all vnborne: whenfirst came to you These Infant feathers of these rauens wings, Were not once begunne.
No indeed they were not.
Now in my two Muchatoes for a need, Wanting a rope, I well could hang my selfe: I prithee Mistris, for all my long seruice, For all the loue that I haue borne thee long, Do me this fauour now to marry me.
Marry come vp you blockhead, you great asse, What wouldst thou haue me marie with a diuel, But peace, no more, here comes the silly foole That we so long haue set our lime-twigs for, Be gone, and leaue me to intangle him.
What Mistris!
O good maister, where haue you bene this weeke, this moneth, this yeare? This yeare said I? where haue you bene this age? Vnto a Louer euery minute seemes time out of minde. How shouldthinke you loue me, That can indure to stay so long from me?
In faith sweet heart I saw thee yesternight.
I true, you did, but since you saw me not, at twelue a clocke you parted from my house,And now tis morning, and new strucken seuen. Seuen houres thou staidst fro~ me, why didst thou so? They are my seuen yeares Prentiship of woe.
I prithee be patient,had some occasion That did inforce me from thee yesternight.
I you are soone inforc'd, foole that I am, To dote on one that nought respecteth me: Tis but my fortune, I am borne to beare it, And euerie one shall haue their destinie.
Nay weepe not wench, thou woundst mee with thy teares.
I am a foole, and so you make me too, These teares were better kept, then spent in waste, On one that neither tenders them nor me: What remedie, but if I chance to die, Or to miscarrie with that I go withall, Ile take my death that thou art cause thereof. You told me, that when your wife was dead, You would forsake all others, and take me.
I told thee so, & I will keep my word, And for that end I came thus early to thee: I haue procur'd a licence, and this night We will be married in a lawlesse Church.
These newes reuiue me, & do somewhat ease The thought that was new gotten to my heart. But shall it be to night?
wench, to night. A sennet and odde dayes since my wife died Is past alreadie, and her timelesse death, Is but a nine daies talke, come go with me, And it shall be dispatched presently.
Nay then I see thou louest me, & I finde By this last motio~, thou art growne more kinde.
My loue and kindnesse like my age shal grow,And with the time increase, and thou shalt see, The oldergrow, the kinderwill bee.
sohope it will, but as for mine, That with my age shall day by day decline. Come, shall we goe?
With thee to the worlds end. Whose beautie most admire, and all commend.<|endoftext|>Wee are heere before 'hem, me thinkes.
All the better, we shall see 'hem come in now.
What doe you lacke, Gentlemen, what is't you lacke? a fine Horse? a Lyon? a Bull? a Beare? a Dog, or a Cat? an excellent fine? or an Instrument? what is't you lacke?
S'lid! heere'samong the beasts, with his Fiddle, and all!
Will you buy any comfortable bread, Gentlemen?
Andselling her daughters picture, in Ginger-worke!
That these people should be so ignorant to thinke vs chapmen for 'hem! doe wee looke as if wee would buy Ginger-bread? or Hobby-horses?
Why, they know no better ware then they haue, nor better customers then come. And our very being here makes vs fit to be demanded, as well as others. Wouldwould come! there were a true customer for 'hem.
How much is't? thirty shillings? who's yonder!? and, I thinke! yes, (gi' me it all) (gi' me it all) Master! Master! will you take a pipe of tabacco with vs? do not discredit me now,.
Doe not see him! he is the roaring horse-courser, pray thee let's auoyd him: turne downe this way.
S'lud, I'le see him, and roare with him, too, and hee roar'd as loud as, pray thee goe with me.
You may draw me to as likely an inconuenience, when you please, as this.
Goe to then, come along, we ha' nothing to doe, man, but to see sights, now.
Welcome Master, and Master! will you take any froth, and smoake with vs?
Yes, Sir, but you'l pardon vs, if we knew not of so much familiarity betweene vs afore.
As what, Sir?
To be so lightly inuited to smoake, and froth.
A good vapour! will you sit downe, Sir? this is oldmansion, how like you her bower? heere you may ha' your Punque, and your Pigge in state, Sir, both piping hot.
I had rather ha' my Punque, cold, Sir.
There's for me, Punque! and Pigge!
What? you Rogue.
By and by, the bottle is almost off Mistresse, here Master.
I'le part you, and your play-fellow there, i' the garded coat, an' you sunder not the sooner.
Master, you are proud (me thinkes) you doe not talke, nor drinke, are you proud?
Not of the company I am in, Sir, nor the place, I assure you.
You doe not except at the company! doe you? are you in vapours, Sir?
Nay, good Master, respect my Mistris Bower, as you call it; for the honour of our Booth, none o' your vapours, heere.
Why, you thinne leane Polcat you, and they haue a minde to be i' their vapours, must you hinder 'hem? what did you know Vermine, if they would ha' lost a cloake, or such a trifle? must you be drawing the ayre of pacification heere? while I am tormented, within, i' the fire, you Weasell?
Good Mistresse, 'twas in the behalfe of your Booth's credit, that I spoke.
Why? would my Booth ha' broake, if they had fal'ne out in't? Sir? or would their heate ha' fir'd it? in, you Rogue, and wipe the pigges, and mend the fire, that they fall not, or I'le both baste and roast you, till your eyes drop out, like 'hem. (Leaue the bottle behinde you, and be curst a while.)
Body o' the! what's this? mother o' the Bawds?
No, she's mother o' the Pigs, Sir, mother o' the Pigs!
Mother o' the, I thinke, by her firebrand.
Nay, shee is too fat to be a, sure, some walking Sow of tallow!
An inspir'd vessell of Kitchin-stuffe!
She'll make excellent geere for the Coach-makers, here in Smithfield, to anoynt wheeles and axell trees with.
I, I, Gamesters, mocke a plaine plumpe soft wench o' the Suburbs, doe, because she's iuicy and wholesome: you must ha' your thinne pinch'd ware, pent vp i' the compasse of a dogge-collar, (or 'twill not do) that lookes like a long lac'd, set vpright, and a greene feather, like fennell i' the Ioll on't.
Well said, my good; to 'hem.
Is shee your quagmire,? is this your Bogge?
We shall haue a quarrel presently.
How? Bog? Quagmire? foule vapours! hum'h!
Yes, hee that would venture for't, I assure him, might sinke into her, and be drown'd a weeke, ere any friend hee had, could find where he were.
And then he would be a fort'night weighing vp againe.
'Twere like falling into a wholeof butter: they had need be a teeme of, should draw him out.
Answer 'hem,, where's thy, now?, thy?
Hang 'hem, rotten, roguy Cheaters, I hope to see 'hem plagu'd one day (pox'd they are already, I am sure) with leane playhouse poultry, that has the boany rumpe, sticking out like the Ace of Spades, or the point of a Partizan, that euery rib of 'hem is like the tooth of a Saw: andwill so grate 'hem with their hips, & shoulders, as (take 'hem altogether) they were as good lye with a hurdle.
Out vpon her, how she drips! she's able to giue a man the sweating Sicknesse, with looking on her.
Mary looke off, with a patch o' your face; and a dosen i' your breech, though they be o' scarlet, Sir. I ha' seene as fine outsides, as either o' yours, bring lowsie linings to the Brokers, ere now, twice a weeke?
Doe you thinke there may be a fine new Cuckingstoole i' the, to be purchas'd? one large inough, I meane. I know there is a pond of capacity, for her.
For your mother, you Rascall, out you Rogue, you hedge bird, you Pimpe, you pannier-mans bastard, you.
Ha, ha, ha.
Doe you sneere, you dogs-head, you! you looke as you were begotten a' top of a Cart in haruest-time, when the whelp was hot and eager. Go, snuffe after your brothers bitch, M=rs=, that's the Liuory you weare, 'twill be out at the elbows, shortly. It's time you went to't, for the to'ther remnant.
Peace,, peace,, they'll kill the poore Whale, and make oyle of her. Pray thee goe in.
I'le see 'hem pox'd first, and pil'd, and double pil'd.
Let's away, her language growes greasier then her Pigs.
Dos't so, snotty nose? good Lord! are you sniueling? you were engendred on a she-begger, in a barne, when the bald Thrasher, your Sire, was scarce warme.
Pray thee, let's goe.
No, faith: I'le stay the end of her, now: I know shee cannot last long; I finde by her, shee wanes a pace.
Do's shee so? I'le set you gone. Gi' mee my Pig-pan hither a little. I'le scald you hence, and you will not goe.
Gentlemen, these are very strange vapours! and very idle vapours! I assure you.
You are a very serious asse, wee assure you.
Humh! Asse? and serious? nay, then pardon mee my vapour. I haue a foolish vapour, Gentlemen: any man that doe's vapour me, the Asse, Master--
What then, Master?
I doe vapour him the lye.
Faith, and to any man that vapours mee the lie, I doe vapour that.
Nay, then, vapours vpon vapours.
'Ware the pan, the pan, the pan, shee comes with the pan, Gentlemen. God blesse the woman.
Oh.
What's the matter?
Goodly woman!
Mistresse!
Curse of hell, that euer I saw these Feinds, oh! I ha' scalded my leg, my leg, my leg, my leg. I ha' lost a limb in the seruice! run for some creame and sallad oyle, quickly. Are you vnder-peering, you Baboun? rip off my hose, an' you be men, men, men.
Runne you for some creame, good mother. I'le looke to your basket.
Best sit vp i' your chaire,. Helpe, Gentlemen.
Be of a good cheere,, thou hast hindred me the currying of a couple of Stallions, here, that abus'd the goodo' Smithfield; 'twas time for 'hem to goe.
I faith, when the panne came, they had made you runne else. (this had beene a fine time for purchase, if you had ventur'd.)
Not a whit, these fellowes were too fine to carry money.
, get some helpe to carry her legge out o' the ayre; take off her shooes; body o' me, she has the Mallanders, the scratches, the crowne scabbe, and the quitter bone, i' the tother legge.
Oh! the poxe, why doe you put me in minde o' my leg, thus, to make it prick, and shoot? would you ha' me i' the Hospitall, afore my time?
Patience,, take a good heart, 'tis but a blister, as big as a Windgall; I'le take it away with the white of an egge, a little honey, and hogs grease, ha' thy pasternes well rol'd, and thou shall't pase againe by to morrow. I'le tend thy Booth, and looke to thy affaires, the while: thou shalt sit i' thy chaire, and giue directions, and shine.
These are the fruites of the bottle-ale, and tabacco! the some of the one, and the fumes of the other! Stay young man, and despise not the wisedome of these few hayres, that are growne gray in care of thee.
, stay a little. Indeede I'le heare some o' this!
Come,, come, where are you? welcome into the, Mistris.
S'light, hee will call company, you shall see, and put vs into doings presently.
Thirst not after that frothy liquor, Ale: for, who knowes, when hee openeth the stopple, what may be in the bottle? hath not a Snaile, a Spider, yea, a Neuft bin found there? thirst not after it, youth: thirst not after it.
This is a braue fellow,, let's heare him.
S'blood, how braue is he? in a garded coate? you were best trucke with him, e'en strip, and trucke presently, it will become you, why will you heare him, because he is an Asse, and may be a kinneto the?
O, good!
Neither doe thou lust after that tawney weede, tabacco.
Braue words!
Whose complexion is like the Indians that vents it!
Are they not braue words, Sister?
And who can tell, if, before the gathering, and making vp thereof, thehath not piss'd thereon?
'Heart let 'hem be braue words, as braue as they will! and they were all the braue words in a Countrey, how then? will you away yet? ha' you inough on him? Mistris, come you away, I pray you, be not you accessary. If you doe lose your Licence, or somewhat else, Sir, with listning to his fables: say,, is a witch, with all my heart, doe, say so.
Avoyd i' your sattin doublet,.
The creeping venome of which subtill serpent, as somelate writers affirme; neither the cutting of the perrillous plant, nor the drying of it, nor the lighting, or burning, can any way perssway, or asswage.
Good, i' faith! is't not Sister?
Hence it is, that the lungs of the Tabacconist are rotted, the Liuer spotted, the braine smoak'd like the backside of the Pig-womans Booth, here, and the whole body within, blacke, as her Pan, you saw e'en now, without.
A fine similitude, that, Sir! did you see the panne?
Yes, Sir.
Nay, the hole in the nose heere, of some tabacco-takers, or the third nostrill, (if I may so call it) which makes, that they can vent the tabacco out, like the Ace of clubs, or rather the Flower-de-lice, is caused from the tabacco, the meere tabacco! when the poore innocent pox, hauing nothing to doe there, is miserably, and most vnconscionably slander'd.
Who would ha' mist this, Sister?
Not any body, but.
He do's not vnderstand.
Nor you feele.
What would you haue, Sister, of a fellow that knowes nothing but a basket-hilt, and an old Fox in't? the best musique i' the, will not moue a logge.
In, to, and carry her comfort: see it told. This fellow was sent to vs by fortune, for our first fairing.
But what speake I of the diseases of the body, children of the?
That's to vs, Sister. Braue i' faith!
Harke, O, you sonnes and daughters of Smithfield! and heare what mallady it doth the minde: It causeth swearing, it causeth swaggering, it causeth snuffling, and snarling, and now and then a hurt.
He hath something of Master, mee thinkes, brother.
So mee thought, Sister, very much of my brother: And 'tis, when he speakes.
Looke into any Angle o' the towne, (the Streights, or thewhere the quarrelling lesson is read, and how doe they entertaine the time, but with bottle-ale, and tabacco? The Lecturer is o' one side, and his Pupils o' the other; But the seconds are still bottle-ale, and tabacco, for which the Lecturer reads, and the Nouices pay. Thirty pound a weeke in bottle-ale! forty in tabacco! and ten more in Ale againe. Then for a sute to drinke in, so much, and (that being slauer'd) so much for another sute, and then a third sute, and a fourth sute! and still the bottle-ale slauereth, and the tabacco stinketh!
Heart of a mad-man! are you rooted heere? willyouneuer away? what can any man finde out in this bawling fellow, to grow heere for? hee is a full handfull higher, sin' he heard him, will you fix heere? and set vp a Booth? Sir?
I will conclude briefely --
Hold your peace, you roaring Rascall, I'le runne my head i' your chaps else. You were best build a Booth, and entertaine him, make your Will, and you say the word, and him your heyre! heart, I neuer knew one taken with a mouth of a pecke, afore. By this light, I'le carry you away o' my backe, and you will not come.
Stay, stay, set mee downe: I ha' lost my purse,, O my purse! one o' my fine purses is gone.
Is't indeed, brother?
I, as I am an honest man, would I were an errant Rogue, else! a plague of all roguy, damn'd cut-purses for me.
Blesse 'hem with all my heart, with all my heart, do you see! Now, as I am no Infidell, that I know of, I am glad on't. I I am, (here's my witnesse!) doe you see, Sir? I did not tell you of his fables, I? no, no, I am a dull malt-horse, I, I know nothing. Are you not iustly seru'd i' your conscience now? speake i' your conscience. Much good doe you with all my heart, and his good heart that has it, with all my heart againe.
This fellow is very charitable, would he had a purse too! but, I must not be too bold, all at a time.
Nay,, it is not my best purse.
Not your best! death! why should it be your worst? why should it be any, indeed, at all? answer me to that, gi' mee a reason from you, why it should be any?
Nor my gold,; I ha' that yet, looke heere else, Sister.
Why so, there's all the feeling he has!
I pray you, haue a better care of that, brother.
Nay, so I will, I warrant you; let him catch this, that catch can. I would faine see him get this, looke you heere.
So, so, so, so, so, so, so, so! Very good.
I would ha' him come againe, now, and but offer at it. Sister, will you take notice of a good iest? I will put it iust where th'other was, and if we ha' good lucke, you shall see a delicate fine trap to catch the cutpurse, nibling.
Faith, and he'll trye ere you be out o' the.
Come, Mistresse, pre'thee be not melancholy for my mis-chance; sorrow wi' not keepe it, Sweet heart.
I doe not thinke on't, Sir.
'Twas but a little scuruy white money, hang it: it may hang the cutpurse, one day. I ha' gold left to gi' thee a fayring, yet, as hard as the world goes: nothing angers me, but that no body heere, look'd like a cutpurse, vnlesse 'twere.
How? I? I looke like a cutpurse? death! your Sister's a cutpurse! and your mother and father, and all your kinne were cutpurses! And here is a Rogue is the baud o' the cutpurses, whom I will beat to begin with.
Hold thy hand, childe of wrath, and heyre of anger, make it not Childermasse day in thy fury, or the feast of the French, Parent of the Massacre.
Good M=r=.
You are the! are you? the Patriarch of the cutpurses? you share, Sir, they say, let them share this with you. Are you i' your hot fit of preaching againe? I'le coole you.
Murther, murther, murther.
Nay, tish all gone, now! dish tish, phen tou vilt not be phitin call, Master Offisher, phat ish a man te better to lishen out noyshes for tee, & tou art in an oder 'orld, being very shuffishient noyshes and gallantsh too, one o' their brabblesh woud haue fed vsh all dish fortnight, but tou art so bushy about beggersh stil, tou hast no leshure to intend shentlemen, and't be.
Why, I told you,.
Come, come, you told mee a pudding,; A matter of nothing; I am sure it came to nothing! you said, let's goe to, indeede; but then you met the man with themonsters, and I could not get you from him. An old foole, not leaue seeing yet?
Why, who would ha' thought any body would ha' quarrell'd so earely? or that the ale o' thewould ha' beene vp so soone?
Phy? phat a clocke toest tou tinke it ish, man?
I cannot tell.
Tou art a vishe vatchman, i' te meane teeme.
Why? should the watch goe by the clocke, or the clock by the watch, I pray?
One should goe by another, if they did well.
Tou art right now! phen didst tou euer know, or heare of a shuffishient vatchman, but he did tell the clocke, phat bushinesse soeuer he had?
Nay, that's most true, a sufficient watchman knowes what a clocke it is.
Shleeping, or vaking! ash well as te clocke himshelfe, or te Iack dat shtrikes him!
Let's enquire of Master, orheere. Master, doe you heare, Master?
If it be a Ledderhead, tish a very tick Ledderhead, tat sho mush noish vill not perishhim.
I haue a little businesse now, good friends doe not trouble me.
Phat? because o' ty wrought neet cap, and ty pheluet sherkin, Man? phy? I haue sheene tee in ty Ledder sherkin, ere now, Mashter o' de hobby-Horses, as bushy and as stately as tou sheem'st to be.
Why, what an' you haue, Captaine? hee has his choyce of Ierkins, you may see by that, and his caps too, I assure you, when hee pleases to be either sicke, or imploy'd.
God a mercy, answer for me.
Away, be not sheen i' my company, here be shentlemen, and men of vorship.
Wee had wonderfull ill lucke, to misse this prologue o' the purse, but the best is, we shall haue fiueof him ere night: hee'le be spectacle enough! I'le answer for't.
O Creesh! Duke, how dosht tou? tou dosht not know me, I feare? I am te vishesht man, but Iustish, in all, now. Gi' me tweluepence from tee, I vill help tee to a vife vorth forty marks for't, and't be.
Away, Rogue, Pimpe away.
And shee shew tee as fine cut o'rke fort't in her shmock too, as tou cansht vishe i'faith; vilt tou haue her, vorshipfull? I vill helpe tee to her, heere, be an't be, in te pig-quarter, gi' me ty twelpence from tee,
Why, there's twelpence, pray thee wilt thou be gone?
Tou art a vorthy man, and a vorshipfull man still.
Get you gone, Rascall.
I doe meane it, man. Prinshif tou hasht need on me, tou shalt finde me heere, at, I vill see phat ale, and punque ish i' te pigshty, for tee, blesse ty good vorship.
Looke! who comes heere!
And his wife, and my widdow, her mother: the whole family.
'Slight, you must gi' hem all fairings, now!
Not I, I'le not see 'hem.
They are going a feasting. What Schole-master's that is with 'hem?
That's my Riuall, I beleeue, the Baker!
So, walke on in the middle way, fore-right, turne neyther to the right hand, nor to the left: let not your eyes be drawne aside with vanity, nor your eare with noyses.
O, I know him by that start!
What do you lack? what do you buy, pretty Mistris! a fine Hobby-Horse, to make your sonne a Tilter? a Drum to make him a Souldier? a Fiddle, to make him a Reueller? What is't you lack? Little Dogs for your Daughters? or Babies, male, or female?
Look not toward them, harken not: the place is, or the field of Smiths, the Groue of Hobbi-horses and trinkets, the wares are the wares of diuels. And the wholeis the shop of! They are hooks, and baites, very baites, that are hung out on euery side, to catch you, and to hold you as it were, by the gills; and by the nostrills, as the Fisher doth: therefore, you must not looke, nor turne toward them -- The Heathen man could stop his eares with wax, against the harlot o' the sea: Doe you the like, with your fingers against the bells of the Beast.
What flashes comes from him!
O, he has those of his ouen! a notable hot Baker 'twas, when hee ply'd the peele: hee is leading his flocke into the, now.
Rather driuing 'hem to the Pens: for he will let 'hem looke vpon nothing.
Gentlewomen, the weather's hot! whither walke you?Haue a care o' your fine veluet caps, theis dusty. Take a sweet delicate Booth, with boughs, here, i' theway, and coole your selues i' the shade: you and your friends. The best pig and bottle-ale i' the, Sir. Oldis Cooke, there you may read: the pigges head speakes it. Poore soule, shee has had a, the: but shee's prettily amended.
A delicate show-pig, little Mistris, with shweet sauce, and crackling, like de bay-leafe i' de fire, la! Tou shalt ha' de cleane side o' de table-clot and di glass vash'd with phatersh of Dame.
This's fine, verily, here be the best pigs: and shee doe's roast 'hem as well as euer she did; the Pigs head sayes.
Excellent, excellent, Mistris, with fire o'andbranches! The Oracle of the Pigs head, that, Sir.
Sonne, were you not warn'd of the vanity of the eye? haue you forgot the wholesome admonition, so soone?
Good mother, how shall we finde a pigge, if we doe not looke about for't? will it run off o' the spit, into our mouths thinke you? as in? and cry,?
No, but your mother, religiously wise, conceiueth it may offer it selfe, by other meanes, to the sense, as by way of steeme, which I thinke it doth, here in this place (Huh, huh) yes, it doth. and it were a sinne of obstinacy, great obstinacy, high and horrible obstinacy, to decline, or resist the good titillation of the famelick sense, which is the smell. Therefore be bold (huh, huh, huh) follow the sent. Enter the Tents of the vncleane, for once, and satisfie your wiues frailty. Let your fraile wife be satisfied: your zealous mother, and my suffering selfe, will also be satisfied.
Come,, as good winny here, as goe farther, and see nothing.
Wee scape so much of the other vanities, by our earely entring.
It is an aedifying consideration.
This is scuruy, that wee must come into the, and not looke on't.
, haue patience,, I'le tell you more anon.
, entertaine within there, the best pig i' the Booth; a Porklike pig. These are, o' the sincere stud, come a pigge-hunting., wait, looke to your charge.
A pigge prepare, presently, let a pigge be prepared to vs.
S'light, who be these?
Is this the good seruice,, you'ld doe me?
Why,? why,? thou'lt ha' vapours i' thy legge againe presently, pray thee go in, 't may turne to the scratches else.
Hang your vapours, they are stale, and stinke like you, are these the guests o' the game, you promis'd to fill my pit withall, to day?
I, what aile they?
Aile they? they are all sippers, sippers o' the City, they looke as they would not drinke off two penn'orth of bottle-ale amongst 'hem.
A body may read that i' their small printed ruffes.
Away, thou art a foole,, and thytoo, i' your ignorant vapours, now? hence, good guests, I say right hypocrites, good gluttons. In, and set a couple o' pigs o' the board, and halfe a dozen of the biggest bottles afore 'hem, and call, I doe not loue to heare Innocents abus'd: Fine ambling hypocrites! and a stone-puritane, with a sorrell head, and beard, good mouth'd gluttons: two to a pigge, away.
Are you sure they are such?
O' the right breed, thou shalt try 'hem by the teeth,, where's this?
Well said, braue, in, and feare the ale out o' the bottles, into the bellies of the brethren, and the sisters drinke to the cause, and pure vapours.
My Roarer is turn'd Tapster, mee thinks. Now were a fine time for thee,, to lay aboard thy widow, thou'lt neuer be Master of a better season, or place; shee that will venture her selfe into the, and a pig-boxe, will admit any assault, be assur'd of that.
I loue not enterprises of that suddennesse, though.
I'le warrant thee, then, no wife out o' the widdowes Hundred: if I had but as much Title to her, as to haue breath'd once on that streight stomacher of hers, I would now assure my selfe to carryher, yet, ere she went out of. Or she should carry me, which were the fitter sight, I confesse. But you are a modest vndertaker, by circumstances, and degrees; come, 'tis Disease in thee, not Iudgement, I should offer at all together. Looke, here's the poore foole, againe, that was stung by the waspe, ere while.
I will make no more orations, shall draw on these tragicall conclusions. And I begin now to thinke, that by a spice of collaterall Iustice,, deseru'd this beating; for I the said, was one cause (a by-cause) why the purse was lost: and my wiues brothers purse too, which they know not of yet. But I shall make very good mirth with it, at supper, (that will be the sport) and put my little friend, M=r=choler quite out of countenance. When, sitting at the vpper end o' my Table, as I vse, & drinking to my brother, and M=rs=., as I wil, my wife, for their good affectio~ to old, I deliuer to 'hem, it was I, that was cudgell'd, and shew 'hem the marks. To see what bad euents may peepe out o' the taile of good purposes! the care I had of that ciuil yong man, I tooke fancy to this morning, (and haue not left it yet) drew me to that exhortation, which drew the company, indeede, which drew the cut-purse; which drew the money; which drew my brotherhis losse; which drew onanger; which drew on my beating: a pretty gradation! And they shall ha' it i' their dish, i' faith, at night for fruit: I loue to be merry at my Table. I had thought once, at one speciall blow he ga' me, to haue reuealed my selfe? but then (I thank thee fortitude) I remembred that a wise man (and who is euer so great a part, o' the Common-wealth in himselfe) for no particular disaster ought to abandon a publike good designe. The husbandman ought not for one vnthankful yeer, to forsake the plough; The Shepheard ought not, for one scabb'd sheep, to throw by his tar-boxe; The Pilot ought not for one leake i' the poope, to quit the Helme; Nor the Alderman ought not for one custerd more, at a meale, to giue vp his cloake; The Constable ought not to breake his staffe, and forsweare the watch, for one roaring night; Nor the Piper o' the Parishto put vp his pipes, for one rainy Sunday. These are certaine knocking conclusions; out of which, I am resolu'd, come what come can, come beating, come imprisonment, come infamy, come banishment, nay, come the rack, come the hurdle, (welcome all) I will not discouer who I am, till my due time; and yet still, all shall be, as I said euer, in Iustice name, and the King's, and for the Common-wealth.
What doe's he talke to himselfe, and act so seriously? poore foole!
No matter what. Here's fresher argument, intend that.
Come, Mistresse, come Sister, heere's more fine sights, yet, i' faith. Gods'lid where's?
What doe you lacke, Gentlemen? what is't you buy? fine Rattles! Drummes? Babies? little Dogges? and Birds for Ladies? What doe you lacke?
Good honest, keepe afore, I am so afraid thou'lt lose somewhat: my heart was at my mouth, when I mist thee.
You were best buy a whip i' your hand to driue me.
Nay, doe not mistake,, thou art so apt to mistake: I would but watch the goods. Looke you now, the treble fiddle, was e'en almost like to be lost.
Pray you take heede you lose not your selfe: your best way, were e'en get vp, and ride for more surety. Buy a tokens worth of great pinnes, to fasten your selfe to my shoulder.
What doe you lacke, Gentlemen? fine purses, pouches, pincases, pipes? What is't you lacke? a paire o' smithes to wake you i' the morning? or a fine whistling bird?
, here be finer things then any we ha' bought by oddes! and more delicate horses, a great deale! good, stay, and come hither.
Will you scourse with him? you are in, you may fit your selfe with a fine easy-going street-nag, for your saddle again', doe, has he ne'er a little odde cart for you, to make a Carroch on, i' the countrey, with foure pyed hobbyhorses? why the meazills, should you stand heere, with your traine, cheaping of Dogges, Birds, and Babies? you ha' no children to bestow 'hem on? ha' you?
No, but again' I ha' children,, that's all one.
Do, do, do, do; how many shall you haue, think you? an' I were as you, I'ld buy for all my Tenants, too, they are a kind o' ciuill Sauages, that wil part with their children for rattles, pipes, and kniues. You were best buy a hatchet, or two, & truck with 'hem.
Good, hold that little tongue o' thine, and saue it a labour. I am resolute, thou know'st.
A resolute foole, you are, I know, and a very sufficient Coxcombe; with all my heart; nay you haue it, Sir, and you be angry, turd i' your teeth, twice: (if I said it not once afore) and much good doe you.
Was there euer such a selfe-affliction? and so impertinent?
Alas! his care will goe neere to cracke him, let's in, and comfort him.
Would I had beene set i' the ground, all but the head on me, and had my braines bowl'd at, or thresh'd out, when first I vnderwent this plague of a charge!
How now! almost tir'd i' your Protectorship? ouerparted? ouerparted?
Why, I cannot tell, Sir, it may be I am, dos't grieue you?
No, I sweare dos't not,: to satisfie you.
S'blood, you are fine and familiar! how long ha' wee bin acquainted, I pray you?
I thinke it may be remembred,, that? 'twas since morning sure.
Why, I hope I know't well enough, Sir, I did not aske to be told.
No? why then?
It's no matter why, you see with your eyes, now, what I said to you to day? you'll beleeue me another time?
Are you remouing the?
A pretty question! and a very ciuill one! yes faith, I ha' my lading you see; or shall haue anon, you may know whose beast I am, by my burthen. If the pannier-mans Iacke were euer better knowne by his loynes of mutton, I'le be flead, and feede dogs for him, when his time comes.
How melancholi' Mistresseis yonder! pray thee let's goe enter our selues in, with her.
Those sixe horses, friend I'le haue --
How!
And the three Iewes trumps; and halfe a dozen o' Birds, and that Drum, (I haue one Drumme already) and your Smiths; I like that deuice o' your smiths, very pretty well, and foure Halberts -- and (le' me see) that fine painted great Lady, and her three women for state, I'le haue.
No, the shop; buy the whole shop, it will be best, the shop, the shop!
If his worship please.
Yes, and keepe it during the, Bobchin.
Peace,, friend, doe not meddle with him, an'you be wise, and would shew your head aboue board: hee will sting thorow your wrought night-cap, beleeue me. A set of these Violines, I would buy too, for a delicate young noise I haue i' the countrey, that are euery one a size lesse then another, iust like your fiddles. I would faine haue a fine young Masque at my marriage, now I thinke on't: but I doe want such a number o' things. Andwill not helpe me now, and I dare not speake to him.
Will your worship buy any ginger-bread, very good bread, comfortable bread?
Ginger-bread! yes, let's see.
There's the tother sprindge?
Is this well, goody? to interrupt my market? in the midst? and call away my customers? can you answer this, at the?
Why? if his Master-ship haue a minde to buy, I hope my ware lies as open as another's; I may shew my ware, as well as you yours.
Hold your peace; I'le content you both: I'le buy vp his shop, and thy basket.
Will you i' faith?
Why should you put him from it, friend?
Cry you mercy! you'ld be sold too, would you? what's the price on you? Ierkin, and all as you stand? ha' you any qualities?
Yes, good-man angry-man, you shall finde he has qualities, if you cheapen him.
God's so, you ha' the selling of him! what are they? will they be bought for loue, or money?
No indeed, Sir.
For what then? victualls?
He scornes victuals, Sir, he has bread and butter at home, thanks be to God! and yet he will do more for a goode meale, if the toy take him i' the belly, mary then they must not set him at lower end; if they do, he'll goe away, though he fast. But put him a top o' the Table, where his place is, and hee'll doe you forty fine things. Hee has not been sent for, and sought out for nothing, at your great citty-suppers, to put downe, and, and bin laught at for his labour; he'll play you all the Puppets i' the towne ouer, and the Players, euery company, and his owne company too; he spares no body!
I' faith?
Hee was the first, Sir, that euer baited the fellow i' the beare's skin, an't like your worship: no dog euer came neer him, since. And for fine motions!
Is hee good at those too? can hee set out a Masque, trow?
O Lord, Master! sought to farre, and neere, for hisinuentions: and hee engrosses all, hee makes all the Puppets i' the.
Do'st thou (in troth) old veluet Ierkin? giue mee thy hand.
Nay, Sir, you shall see him in his veluet Ierkin, and a scarfe, too, at night, when you heare him interpret MasterMotion.
Speake no more, but shut vp shop presently, friend. I'le buy both it, and thee too, to carry downe with me, and her hamper, beside. Thy shop shall furnish out the Masque, and hers the Banquet: I cannot goe lesse, to set out any thing with credit. what's the price, at a word, o' thy whole shop, case, and all as it stands?
Sir, it stands me in sixe and twenty shillings seuen pence, halfe-peny, besides three shillings for my ground.
Well, thirty shillings will doe all, then! And what comes yours too?
Foure shillings, and eleauen pence, Sir, ground, and all, an't like your worship.
Yes, it do's like my worship very well, poore woman, that's fiue shillings more, what a Masque shall I furnish out, for forty shillings? (twenty pound scotsh) and a Banquet of Ginger-bread? there's a stately thing!Sister? and my wedding gloues too? (that I neuer thought on afore.) All my wedding gloues, Ginger-bread? O me! what a deuice will there be? to make 'hem eate their fingers ends! and delicate Brooches for the Bride-men! and all! and then I'le ha' this poesie put to 'hem:, meaning Mistresse, my wedding poesie.
I am beholden to you, Sir, and to your.
You doe not meane this, doe you? is this your first purchase?
Yes faith, and I doe not thinke,, but thou'lt say, it was the wisest Act, that euer I did in my wardship.
Like inough! I shall say any thing. I!
I Cannot beget a, with all my politicall braine, yet; myis how to fetch off this proper young man, from his debaucht company: I haue followed him all theouer, and still I finde him with this songster: And I begin shrewdly to suspect their familiarity; and the young man of a terrible taint,! with which idle disease, if he be infected, there's no hope of him, in a state-course., of him for a common-wealths-man: if hee goe to't in, once.
Yonder he is buying o' Ginger-bread: set in quickly, before he part with too much on his money.
Ballads! harke, harke! pray thee, fellow, stay a little, good, looke to the goods. What Ballads hast thou? let me see, let me see my selfe.
Why so! hee's flowne 'to another lime-bush, there he will flutter as long more; till hee ha' ne'r a feather left. Is there a vexation like this, Gentlemen? will you beleeue mee now, hereafter? shall I haue credit with you?
Yes faith, shalt thou,, and thou art worthy on't, for thou sweatest for't. I neuer saw a young Pimpe errant, and his Squire better match'd.
Faith, the sister comes after 'hem, well, too.
Nay, if you saw the Iustice her husband, my Guardian, you were fitted for the Messe, hee is such a wise one his way --
I wonder, wee see him not heere.
O! hee is too serious for this place, and yet better sport thenthe other three, I assure you, Gentlemen: where ere he is, though't be o' the Bench.
How dost thou call it!! a good iest, i' faith, I would faine see that, your Cutpurse, you talke of, that delicate handed Diuell; they say he walkes hereabout; I would see him walke, now. Looke you sister, here, here, let him come, sister, and welcome. Ballad-man, do's any cutpurses haunt hereabout? pray thee raise me one or two: beginne and shew me one.
Sir, this is a spell against 'hem, spicke and span new; and 'tis made as 'twere in mine owne person, and I sing it in mine ownedefence. But 'twill cost a penny alone, if you buy it.
No matter for the price, thou dost not know me, I see, I am an odd.
Has't a fine picture, Brother?
O Sister, doe you remember the ballads ouer the Nursery-chimney at home o' my owne pasting vp, there be braue pictures. Other manner of pictures, than these, friend.
Yet these will serue to picke the pictures out o' your pockets, you shall see.
So, I heard 'hem say. Pray thee mind him not, fellow: hee'll haue an oare in euery thing.
It was intended Sir, as if a purse should chance to be cut in my presence, now, I may be blamelesse, though: as by the sequell, will more plainely appeare.
We shall find that i' the matter. Pray thee begin.
To the tune of, Sir.
Nay, I'll put thee in tune, and all! mine owne country dance! Pray thee begin.
It is a gentle admonition, you must know, Sir, both to the purse-cutter, and the purse-bearer.
Not a word more, out o' the tune, an' thou lou'st mee:. Come, when?
Ha, ha, this chimes! good counsell at first dash.
Good!
Well said! hee were to blame that wold not i' faith.
Good i' faith, how say you,? Is there any harme i' this?
The more coxco~bes they that did it, I wusse.
God a mercy for that! why should they be more free indeede?
That againe, good Ballad-man, that againe. O rare! I would faine rubbe mine elbow now, but I dare not pull out my hand. On, I pray thee, hee that made this ballad, shall beto my.
,
Is it possible?
I' faith?
? pray thee stay a little, friend, yet, o' thy conscience,, speake, is there any harme i' this?
To tell you true, 'tis too good for you, lesse you had grace to follow it.
It doth discouer enormitie, I'le marke it more: I ha' not lik'd a paltry piece of poetry, so well a good while.
! where's this youth, now? A man must call vpon him, for his owne good, and yet hee will not appeare: looke here, here's for him; handy-dandy, which hand will he haue? On, I pray thee, with the rest, I doe heare of him, but I cannot see him, this Master, the cutpurse.
Stare-abouts,Court,Christmas,,
That was a fine fellow! I would haue him, now.
But where's their cunning, now, when they should vse it? they are all chain'd now, I warrant you.The Rat-catchers charme, are all fooles and Asses to this! A poxe on 'hem, that they will not come! that a man should haue such a desire to a thing, and want it.
'Fore God, I'ld guie halfe the, and 'twere mine, for a cutpurse for him, to saue his longing.
Looke you Sister, heere, heere, where is't now? which pocket is't in? for a wager?
I beseech you leaue your wagers, and let him end his matter, an't may be.
O, are you aedified?
Indeed hee do's interrupt him, too much: Therespoke to purpose.
Sister, I am an Asse, I cannot keepe my purse: on, on; I pray thee, friend.
Will you see sport? looke, there's a fellow gathers vp to him, marke.
Good, i' faith! o` he has lighted on the wro~g pocket.
He has it, 'fore God hee is a braue fellow; pitty hee should be detected.
An excellent ballad! an excellent ballad!
Friend, let mee ha' the first, let mee ha' the first, I pray you.
Pardon mee, Sir. First come, first seru'd; and I'le buy the whole bundle too.
That conueyance was better then all, did you see't? he has giuen the purse to the ballad-singer.
Has hee?
Sir, I cry you mercy; I'le not hinder the poore mans profit: pray you mistake me not.
Sir, I take you for an honest Gentleman; if that be mistaking, I met you to day afore: ha! humh! O God! my purse is gone, my purse, my purse, &c.
Come, doe not make a stirre, and cry your selfe an Asse, thorow theafore your time.
Why, hast thou it,? good, how come you by it? I mar'le!
I pray you seeke some other gamster, to play the foole with: you may lose it time enough, for all your.
By this good hand, gloue and all, I ha' lost it already, if thou hast it not: feele else, and Mistrishandkercher, too, out o' the tother pocket.
Why, 'tis well; very well, exceeding pretty, and well.
Are you sure you ha' lost it, Sir?
O God! yes; as I am an honest man, I had it but e'en now, at.
I hope you suspect not me, Sir.
Thee? that were a iest indeede! Dost thou thinke the Gentleman is foolish? where hadst thou hands, I pray thee? Away Asse, away.
I shall be beaten againe, if I be spi'd.
Sir, I suspect an odde fellow, yonder, is stealing away.
Brother, it is the preaching fellow! you shall suspect him. He was at your tother purse, you know! Nay, stay, Sir, and view the worke you ha' done, an' you be benefic'd at the Gallowes, and preach there, thanke your owne handy-worke.
Sir, you shall take no pride in your preferment: you shall be silenc'd quickly.
What doe you meane? sweet buds of gentility.
To ha' my peneworths out on you: Bud. No lesse then two purses a day, serue you? I thought you a simple fellow, when my manbeate you, i' the morning, and pittied you --
So did I, I'le be sworne, brother; but now I see hee is a lewd, and pernicious Enormity: (as Mastercalls him.)
Mine owne words turn'd vpon mee, like swords.
Cannot a man's purse be at quiet for you, i' the Masters pocket, but you must intice it forth, and debauch it?
Sir, Sir, keepe your debauch, and your fineto your selfe; and make as much on 'hem as you please. But gi' me this from you, i' the meane time: I beseech you, see if I can looke to this.
Why,?
Why? because you are an Asse, Sir, there's a reason the shortest way, and you will needs ha' it; now you ha' got the tricke of losing, you'ld lose your breech, an't 'twere loose. I know you, Sir, come, deliuer, you'll goe and cracke the vermine, you breed now, will you? 'tis very fine, will you ha' the truth on't? they are suchretchlesse flies as you are, that blow cutpurses abroad in euery corner; your foolish hauing of money, makes 'hem. An' there were no wiser then I, Sir, the trade should lye open for you, Sir, it should i' faith, Sir. I would teach your wit to come to your head, Sir, as well as your land to come into your hand, I assure you, Sir.
Alacke, good.
Nay, Gentlemen, neuer pitty mee, I am not worth it: Lord send me at home once, too' theagaine, if I trauell any more, call me; with all my heart.
Stay, Sir, I must haue a word with you in priuate. Doe you heare?
With me, Sir? what's your pleasure? good Sir.
Doe not deny it. You are a cutpurse, Sir, this Gentleman here, and I, saw you, nor doe we meane to detect you (though we can sufficiently informe our selues, toward the danger of concealing you) but you must doe vs a piece of seruice.
Good Gentlemen, doe not vndoe me; I am a ciuill young man, and but a beginner, indeed.
Sir, your beginning shall bring on your ending, for vs.We are no Catchpoles nor Constables. That you are to vndertake, is this; you saw the old fellow, with the blacke boxe, here?
The little old Gouernour, Sir?
That same: I see, you haue flowne him to a marke already. I would ha' you get away that boxe from him, and bring it vs.
Would you ha' the boxe and all, Sir? or onely that, that is in't? I'le get you that, and leaue him the boxe, to play with still: (which will be the harder o' the two) because I would gaine your worships good opinion of me.
He sayes well, 'tis the greater Mastry, and 'twill make the more sport when 'tis mist.
I, and 'twill be the longer a missing, to draw on the sport.
But looke you doe it now, sirrah, and keepe your word: or --
Sir, if euer I breake my word, with a Gentleman, may I neuer read word at my need. Where shall I find you?
Some-where i' the, heereabouts. Dispatch it quickly. I would faine see the carefull foole deluded! of all Beasts, I loue the serious Asse. He that takes paines to be one, and playes the foole, with the greatest diligence that can be.
Then you would not chose, Sir, but loue my Guardian, Iustice, who is answerable to that description, in euery haire of him.
So I haue heard. But how came you, Mistris, to be his Ward? or haue relation to him, at first?
Faith, through a common calamity, he bought me, Sir; and now he will marry me to his wiues brother, this wise Gentleman, that you see, or else I must pay value o' my land
S'lid, is there no deuice of disparagement? or so? talke with some crafty fellow, some picklocke o' the Law! Would I had studied a yeere longer i' the Innes of Court, and't had beene but i' your case.
I Master, are you proffering?
You'ld bring but little ayde, Sir.
(I'le looke to you i' faith, Gamester.) An vnfortunate foolishyou are falne into, Lady, I wonder you can endure 'hem.
Sir, they cannot worke their fetters off; must weare 'hem.
You see what care they haue on you, to leaue you thus.
Faith the same they haue of themselues, Sir. I cannot greatly complaine, if this were all the plea I had against 'hem.
'Tis true! but will you please to withdraw with vs, a little, and make them thinke, they haue lost you. I hope our manners ha' beene such hitherto, and our language, as will giueyou no cause, to doubt your selfe, in our company.
Sir, I will giue my selfe, no cause; I am so secure of mine owne manners, as I suspect not yours.
Looke wherecomes.
Away, I'le not be seene, by him.
No, you were not best, hee'ld tell his mother, the widdow.
Heart, what doe you meane?
Cry you mercy, is the winde there? must not the
widdow be nam'd?<|endoftext|>Sir, perswade me not: I will make a Star-Chamber matter of it, if hee were twenty Sir, he shall not abuseEsquire.
In the County of, Iustice of Peace and Coram.
I (Cosen) and.
I, andtoo; and a Gentleman borne (Master Parson) who writes himselfe, in any Bill, Warrant, Quittance, or Obligation,.
I that I doe, and haue done any time these three hundred yeeres.
All his successors (gone before him) hath don't: and all his Ancestors (that come after him) may: they may giue the dozen white Luces in their Coate.
It is an olde Coate.
The dozen white Lowses doe become an old Coat well: it agrees well passant: It is a familiar beast to man, and signifies Loue.
The Luse is the fresh-fish, the salt-fish, is an old Coate.
I may quarter (Coz).
You may, by marrying.
It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.
Not a whit.
Yes per-lady: if he ha's a quarter of your coat, there is but three Skirts for your selfe, in my simple coniectures; but that is all one: if Sirhaue committed disparagements vnto you, I am of the Church and will be glad to do my beneuolence, to make attonements and compremises betweene you.
The Councell shall heare it, it is a Riot.
It is not meet the Councell heare a Riot: there is no feare of Got in a Riot: The Councell (looke you) shall desire to heare the feare of Got, and not to heare a Riot: take your viza-ments in that.
Ha; o' my life, if I were yong againe, the sword should end it.
It is petter that friends is the sword, and end it: and there is also another deuice in my praine, which peraduenture prings goot discretions with it. There is, which is daughter to Master, which is pretty virginity.
? she has browne haire, and speakes small like a woman.
It is that ferry person for all the orld, as iust as you will desire, and seuen hundred pounds of Moneyes, and Gold, and Siluer, is her Grand-sire vpon his deathsbed, (Got deliuer to a ioyfull resurrections) giue, when she is able to ouertake seuenteene yeeres old. It were a goot motion, if we leaue our pribbles and prabbles, and desire a marriage betweene Master, and Mistris.
Did her Grand-sire leaue her seauen hundred pound?
I, and her father is make her a petter penny.
I know the young Gentlewoman, she has good gifts.
Seuen hundred pounds, and possibilities, is goot gifts.
Wel, let vs see honest M=r=: isthere?
Shall I tell you a lye? I doe despise a lyer, as I doe despise one that is false, or as I despise one that is not true: the Knight Siris there, and I beseech you be ruled by your well-willers: I will peat the doore for M=r=.. What hoa? Got-plesse your house heere.
Who's there?
Here is go't's plessing and your friend, and Iustice, and heere yong Master: that peraduentures shall tell you another tale, if matters grow to your likings.
I am glad to see your Worships well: I thanke you for my Venison Master.
Master, I am glad to see you: much good doe it your good heart: I wish'd your Venison better, it was ill killd: how doth good Mistresse? and I thank you alwaies with my heart, la: with my heart.
Sir, I thanke you.
Sir, I thanke you: by yea, and no I doe.
I am glad to see you, good Master.
How do's your fallow Greyhound, Sir, I heard say he was out-run on.
It could not be iudg'd, Sir.
You'll not confesse: you'll not confesse.
That he will not, 'tis your fault, 'tis your fault: 'tis a good dogge.
A Cur, Sir.
Sir: hee's a good dog, and a faire dog, can there be more said? he is good, and faire. Is Sirheere?
Sir, hee is within: and I would I could doe a good office betweeneyou.
It is spoke as a Christians ought to speake.
He hath wrong'd me (Master.)
Sir, he doth in some sort confesse it.
If it be confessed, it is not redressed; is not that so (M.?) he hath wrong'd me, indeed he hath, at a word he hath: beleeue me,Esquire, saith he is wronged.
Here comes Sir.
Now, Master, you'll complaine of me to the King?
Knight, you haue beaten my men, kill'd my deere, and broke open my Lodge.
But not kiss'd your Keepers daughter?
Tut, a pin: this shall be answer'd.
I will answere it strait, I haue done all this: That is now answer'd.
The Councell shall know this.
'Twere better for you if it were known in councell: you'll be laugh'd at.
; (Sir) good worts.
Good worts? good Cabidge;, I broke your head: what matter haue you against me?
Marry sir, I haue matter in my head against you, and against your cony-catching Rascalls,, and.
You Banbery Cheese.
I, it is no matter.
How now,?
I, it is no matter.
Slice, I say;: Slice, that's my humor.
Where'smy man? can you tell, Cosen?
Peace, I pray you: now let vs vnderstand: there is three Vmpires in this matter, as I vnderstand; that is, Master(Master,) & there is my selfe, (my selfe) and the three party is (lastly, and finally) mine Host of the Gater.
We three to hear it, & end it between them.
Ferry goo't, I will make a priefe of it in my note-booke, and we wil afterwards orke vpon the cause, with as great discreetly as we can.
He heares with eares.
The Teuill and his Tam: what phrase is this? he heares with eare? why, it is affectations.
, did you picke M.purse?
I, by these gloues did hee, or I would I might neuer come in mine owne great chamber againe else, of seauen groates in mill-sixpences, and twoShouelboords, that cost me two shilling and two pence a peece of: by these gloues.
Is this true,?
No, it is false, if it is a picke-purse.
Ha, thou mountaine Forreyner: Sir, and Master mine, I combat challenge of this Latine Bilboe: word of deniall in thyhere; word of denial; froth, and scum thou liest.
By these gloues, then 'twas he.
Be auis'd sir, and passe good humours: I will say marry trap with you, if you runne the nut-hooks humor on me, that is the very note of it.
By this hat, then he in the red face had it: for though I cannot remember what I did when you made me drunke, yet I am not altogether an asse.
What say you, and?
Why sir, (for my part) I say the Gentleman had drunke himselfe out of his fiue sentences.
It is his fiue sences: fie, what the ignorance is.
And being fap, sir, was (as they say) casheerd: and so conclusions past the Car-eires.
I, you spake in Latten then to: but 'tis no matter; Ile nere be drunk whilst I liue againe, but in honest, ciuill, godly company for this tricke: if I be drunke, Ile be drunke with those that haue the feare of God, and not with drunken knaues.
So got-udge me, that is a vertuousminde.
You heare all these matters deni'd, Gentlemen; you heare it.
Nay daughter, carry the wine in, wee'll drinke within.
Oh heauen: This is Mistresse.
How now Mistris?
, by my troth you are very wel met: by your leaue good Mistris.
Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome: come, we haue a hot Venison pasty to dinner; Come gentlemen, I hope we shall drinke downe all vnkindnesse.
I had rather then forty shillings I had my booke of Songs and Sonnets heere: How now, where haue you beene? I must wait on my selfe, must I? you haue not the booke of Riddles about you, haue you?
Booke of Riddles? why did you not lend it tovpon Alhallowmas last, a fortnight afore Michaelmas.
Come Coz, come Coz, we stay for you: a word with you Coz: marry this, Coz: there is as 'twere a tender, a kinde of tender, made a farre-off by Sirhere: doe you vnderstand me?
I Sir, you shall finde me reasonable; if it be so, I shall doe that that is reason.
Nay, but vnderstand me.
So I doe Sir.
Giue eare to his motions; (M=r=.) I will description the matter to you, if you be capacity of it.
Nay, I will doe as my Cozensaies: I pray you pardon me, he's a Iustice of Peace in his Countrie, simple though I stand here.
But that is not the question: the question is concerning your marriage.
I, there's the point Sir.
Marry is it: the very point of it, to Mi..
Why if it be so; I will marry her vpon any reasonable demands.
But can you affection the 'o-man, let vs command to know that of your mouth, or of your lips: for diuers Philosophers hold, that the lips is parcell of the mouth: therfore precisely, ca~ you carry your good wil to y=e= maid?
Cosen, can you loue her?
I hope sir, I will do as it shall become one that would doe reason.
Nay, got's Lords, and his Ladies, you must speake possitable, if you can carry-her your desires towards her.
That you must: Will you, (vpon good dowry) marry her?
I will doe a greater thing then that, vpon your request (Cosen) in any reason.
Nay conceiue me, conceiue mee, (sweet Coz): what I doe is to pleasure you (Coz:) can you loue the maid?
I will marry her (Sir) at your request; but if there bee no great loue in the beginning, yet Heauen may decrease it vpon better acquaintance, when wee are married, and haue more occasion to know one another: I hope vpon familiarity will grow more content: but if you say mary-her, I will mary-her, that I am freely dissolued, and dissolutely.
It is a fery discetion-answere; saue the fall is in the'ord, dissolutely; the ort is (according to our meaning) resolutely: his meaning is good.
I: I thinke my Cosen meant well.
I, or else I would I might be hang'd (la.)
Here comes faire Mistris; would I were yong for your sake, Mistris.
The dinner is on the Table, my Father desires your worships company.
I will wait on him, (faire Mistris.)
Od's plessed-wil: I wil not be abse~ce at the grace.
Wil't please your worship to come in, Sir?
No, I thank you forsooth, hartely; I am very well.
The dinner attends you, Sir.
I am not a-hungry, I thanke you, forsooth: goe, Sirha, for all you are my man, goe wait vpon my Cosen: a Iustice of peace sometime may be beholding to his friend, for a Man; I keepe but three Men, and a Boy yet, till my Mother be dead: but what though, yet I liue like a poore Gentleman borne.
I may not goe in without your worship: they will not sit till you come.
I'faith, ile eate nothing: I thanke you as much as though I did.
I pray you Sir walke in.
I had rather walke here (I thanke you) I bruiz'd my shin th'other day, with playing at Sword and Dagger with a Master of Fence (three veneys for a dish of stew'd Prunes) and by my troth, I cannot abide the smell of hot meate since. Why doe your dogs barke so? be there Beares ith' Towne?
I thinke there are, Sir, I heard them talk'd of.
I loue the sport well, but I shall as soone quarrell at it, as any man in: you are afraid if you see the Beare loose, are you not?
I indeede Sir.
That's meate and drinke to me now: I haue seeneloose, twenty times, and haue taken him by the Chaine: but (I warrant you) the women haue so cride and shrekt at it, that it past: But women indeede, cannot abide'em, they are very ill-fauour'd rough things.
Come, gentle M., come; we stay for you.
Ile eate nothing, I thanke you Sir.
By cocke and pie, you shall not choose, Sir: come, come.
Nay, pray you lead the way.
Come on, Sir.
Mistris: your selfe shall goe first.
Not I Sir, pray you keepe on.
Truely I will not goe first: truely-la: I will not doe you that wrong.
I pray you Sir.
Ile rather be vnmannerly, then troublesome: you doe your selfe wrong indeede-la.
Go your waies, and aske of Doctorhouse, which is the way; and there dwels one Mistris; which is in the manner of his Nurse; or his dry-Nurse; or his Cooke; or his Laundry; his Washer, and his Ringer.
Well Sir.
Nay, it is petter yet: giue her this letter; for it is a'oman that altogeathers acquainta~ce with Mistris; and the Letter is to desire, and require her to solicite your Masters desires, to Mistris: I pray you be gon: I will make an end of my dinner; ther's Pippins and Cheese to come.
Mineof the?
What saies my Bully Rooke? speake schollerly, and wisely.
Truely mine; I must turne away some of my followers.
Discard, (bully) casheere; let them wag; trot, trot.
I sit at ten pounds a weeke.
Thou'rt an Emperor (and) I will entertaine: he shall draw; he shall tap; said I well (bully?)
Doe so (good mine.
I haue spoke: let him follow: let me see thee froth, and hue: I am at a word: follow.
, follow him: ais a good trade: an old Cloake, makes a new Ierkin: a wither'd Seruingman, a fresh Tapster: goe, adew.
It is a life that I haue desir'd: I will thriue.
O base hungarian wight: wilt y=u= the spigot wield.
He was gotten in drink: is not the humor co~ceited?
I am glad I am so acquit of this Tinderbox: his Thefts were too open: his filching was like an vnskilfull Singer, he kept not time.
The good humor is to steale at a minutes rest.
Conuay: the wife it call: Steale? foh: a fico for the phrase.
Well sirs, I am almost out at heeles.
Why then let Kibes ensue.
There is no remedy: I must conicatch, I must shift.
Yong Rauens must haue foode.
Which of you knowof this Towne?
I ken the wight: he is of substance good.
My honest Lads, I will tell you what I am about.
Two yards, and more.
No quips now: (Indeede I am in the waste two yards about: but I am now about no waste: I am about thrift) briefely: I doe meane to make loue towife: I spie entertainment in her: shee discourses: shee carues: she giues the leere of inuitation: I can construe the action of her familier stile, & the hardest voice of her behauior (to be english'd rightly) is,.
He hath studied her will; and translated her will: out of honesty, into English.
The Anchor is deepe: will that humor passe?
Now, the report goes, she has all the rule of her husbands Purse: he hath a legend of Angels.
As many diuels entertaine: and to her Boy say I.
The humor rises: it is good: humor me the angels.
I haue writ me here a letter to her: & here another towife, who euen now gaue mee good eyes too; examind my parts with most iudicious illiads: sometimes the beame of her view, guilded my foote: sometimes my portly belly.
Then did the Sun on dung-hill shine.
I thanke thee for that humour.
O she did so course o're my exteriors with such a greedy intention, that the appetite of her eye, did seeme to scorch me vp like a burning-glasse: here's another letter to her: She beares the Purse too: She is a Region in: all gold, and bountie: I will be Cheaters to them both, and they shall be Exchequers to mee: they shall be my East and West Indies, and I will trade to them both: Goe, beare thou this Letter to Mistris; and thou this to Mistris: we will thriue (Lads) we will thriue.
Shall I Sirofbecome, And by my side weare Steele? then Lucifer take all.
I will run no base humor: here take the humor-Letter; I will keepe the hauior of reputation.
Hold Sirha, beare you these Letters tightly, Saile like my Pinnasse to these golden shores. Rogues, hence, auaunt, vanish like haile-stones; goe, Trudge; plod away ith'hoofe: seeke shelter, packe:will learne the honor of the age, French-thrift, you Rogues, my selfe, and skirted.
Let Vultures gripe thy guts: for gourd, and Fullam holds: & high and low beguiles the rich & poore, Tester ile haue in pouch when thou shalt lacke, BaseTurke.
I haue opperations, Which be humors of reuenge.
Wilt thou reuenge?
By Welkin, and her Star.
With wit, or Steele?
With both the humors, I: I will discusse the humour of this Loue to.
And I toshall eke vnfold How(varlet vile) His Doue will proue; his gold will hold, And his soft couch defile.
My humour shall not coole: I will incenseto deale with poyson: I will possesse him with yallownesse, for the reuolt of mine is dangerous: that is my true humour.
Thou art theof: I second thee: troope on.
What,, I pray thee goe to the Casement, and see if you can see my Master, Master Doctercomming: if he doe (I'faith) and finde any body in the house; here will be an old abusing of Gods patience, and the Kings English.
Ile goe watch.
Goe, and we'll haue a posset for't soone at night, (in faith) at the latter end of a Sea-cole-fire: An honest, willing, kinde fellow, as euer seruant shall come in house withall: and I warrant you, no tel-tale, nor no breede-bate: his worst fault is, that he is giuen to prayer; hee is something peeuish that way: but no body but has his fault: but let that passe., you say your name is?
I: for fault of a better.
And Masteryour Master?
I forsooth.
Do's he not weare a great round Beard, like a Glouers pairing-knife?
No forsooth: he hath but a little wee-face; with a little yellow Beard: a Caine colourd Beard.
A softly-sprighted man, is he not?
I forsooth: but he is as tall a man of his hands, as any is betweene this and his head: he hath fought with a Warrener.
How say you: oh, I should remember him: do's he not hold vp his head (as it were?) and strut in his gate?
Yes indeede do's he.
Well, heauen send, no worse fortune: Tell Master Parson, I will doe what I can for your Master:is a good girle, and I wish --
Out alas: here comes my Master.
We shall all be shent: Run in here, good young man: goe into this Closset: he will not stay long: what?: whatI say? goe, goe enquire for my Master, I doubt he be not well, that hee comes not home:
Vat is you sing? I doe not like des-toyes: pray you goe and vetch me in my Closset, vnboyteene verd; a Box, a greene-a-Box: do intend vat I speake? a greene-a-Box.
I forsooth ile fetch it you: I am glad hee went not in himselfe: if he had found the yong man he would haue bin horne-mad.
Is it this Sir?
: Vere is dat knaue?
What?
Here Sir.
You are, andyou are: Come, take-a-your Rapier, and come after my heele to the Court.
'Tis ready Sir, here in the Porch.
By my trot: I tarry too long: od's-me:: dere is some Simples in my Closset, dat I vill not for the varld I shall leaue behinde.
Ay-me, he'll finde the yong man there, & be mad.
O: vat is in my Closset? Villanie, La-roone:, my Rapier.
Good Master be content.
Wherefore shall I be content-a?
The yong man is an honest man.
What shall de honest man do in my Closset: dere is no honest man dat shall come in my Closset.
I beseech you be not so flegmaticke: heare the truth of it. He came of an errand to mee, from Parson.
Vell.
I forsooth: to desire her to --.
Peace, I pray you.
Peace-a-your tongue: speake-a-your Tale.
To desire this honest Gentlewoman (your Maid) to speake a good word to Mistris, for my Master in the way of Marriage.
This is all indeede-la: but ile nere put my finger in the fire, and neede not.
Sirsend-a you?, ballow mee some paper: tarry you a littell-a-while.
I am glad he is so quiet: if he had bin throughly moued, you should haue heard him so loud, and so melancholly: but notwithstanding man, Ile doe yoe your Master what good I can: and the very yea, & the no is, y=e= French Doctor my Master, (I may call him my Master, looke you, for I keepe his house; and I wash, ring, brew, bake, scowre, dresse meat and drinke, make the beds, and doe all my selfe.)
'Tis a great charge to come vnder one bodies hand.
Are you a-uis'd o'that? you shall finde it a great charge: and to be vp early, and down late: but notwithstanding, (to tell you in your eare, I wold haue no words of it) my Master himselfe is in loue with Mistris: but notwithstanding that I knowmind, that's neither heere nor there.
You, Iack'Nape: giue-'a this Letter to Sir, by gar it is a shallenge: I will cut his troat in de Parke, and I will teach a scuruy Iack-a-nape Priest to meddle, or make: -- you may be gon: it is not good you tarry here: by gar I will cut all his two stones: by gar, he shall not haue a stone to throw at his dogge.
Alas: he speakes but for his friend.
It is no matter'a ver dat: do not you tell-a-me dat I shall hauefor my selfe? by gar, I vill kill de Iack-Priest: and I haue appointed mine Host of de Iarteer to measure our weapon: by gar, I wil my selfe haue.
Sir, the maid loues you, and all shall bee well: We must giue folkes leaue to prate: what the good-ier.
, come to the Court with me: by gar, if I haue not, I shall turne your head out of my dore: follow my heeles,.
You shall hauehead of your owne; No, I knowmind for that: neuer a woman inknowes more ofminde then I doe, nor can doe more then I doe with her, I thanke heauen.
Who's with in there, hoa?
Who's there, I troa? Come neere the house I pray you.
How now (good woman) how dost thou?
The better that it pleases your good Worship to aske?
What newes? how do's pretty Mistris?
In truth Sir, and shee is pretty, and honest, and gentle, and one that is your friend, I can tell you that by the way, I praise heauen for it.
Shall I doe any good thinkst thou? shall I not loose my suit?
Troth Sir, all is in his hands aboue: but notwithstanding (Master)Ile be sworne on a booke shee loues you: haue not your Worship a wart aboue your eye?
Yes marry haue I, what of that?
Wel, thereby hangs a tale: good faith, it is such another; (but (I detest) an honest maid as euer broke bread: wee had an howres talke of that wart; I shall neuer laugh but in that maids company: but (indeed) shee is giuen too much to Allicholy and musing; but for you -- well -- goe too --
Well: I shall see her to day: hold, there's money for thee: Let mee haue thy voice in my behalfe: if thou seest her before me, commend me. --
Will I? I faith that wee will: And I will tell your Worship more of the Wart, the next time we haue confidence, and of other wooers.
Well, fare-well, I am in great haste now.
Fare-well to your Worship: truely an honest Gentleman: butloues himnot: for I knowminde as well as another do's: out vpon't: what haue I forgot.
What, haue scap'd Loue-letters in the holly-day-time of my beauty, and am I now a subiect for them? let me see?What aofis this? O wicked, wicked world: One that is well-nye worne to peeces with age To show himselfe a yong Gallant? What an vnwaied Behauiour hath this Flemish drunkard pickt (with The Deuills name) out of my conuersation, that he dares In this manner assay me? why, hee hath not beene thrice In my Company: what should I say to him? I was then Frugall of my mirth: (heauen forgiue mee:) why Ile Exhibit a Bill in the Parliament for the putting downe of men: how shall I be reueng'd on him? for reueng'd I will be? as sure as his guts are made of puddings.
, trust me, I was going to your house.
And trust me, I was comming to you: you looke very ill.
Nay, Ile nere beleeuethat; I haue to shew to the contrary.
'Faith but you doe in my minde.
Well: I doe then: yet I say, I could shew you to the contrary: O Mistris, giue mee some counsaile.
What's the matter, woman?
O woman: if it were not for one trifling respect, I could come to such honour.
Hang the trifle (woman) take the honour: what is it? dispence with trifles: what is it?
If I would but goe to hell, for an eternall moment, or so: I could be knighted.
What thou liest? Sir? these Knights will hacke, and so thou shouldst not alter the article of thy Gentry.
Wee burne day-light: heere, read, read: perceiue how I might bee knighted, I shall thinke the worse of fat men, as long as I haue an eye to make difference of mens liking: and yet hee would not sweare:praise womens modesty: and gaue such orderly and welbehaued reproofe to al vncomelinesse, that I would haue sworne his disposition would haue gone to the truth of his words: but they doe no more adhere and keep place together, then the hundred Psalms to the tune of Greensleeues: What tempest (I troa) threw this Whale, (with so many Tuns of oyle in his belly) a'shoare at Windsor? How shall I bee reuenged on him? I thinke the best way were, to entertaine him with hope, till the wicked fire of lust haue melted him in his owne greace: Did you euer heare the like?
Letter for letter; but that the name ofanddiffers: to thy great comfort in this mystery of ill opinions, heere's the twyn-brother of thy Letter: but let thine inherit first, for I protest mine neuer shall: I warrant he hath a thousand of these Letters, writ with blancke-space for different names (sure more): and these are of the second edition: hee will print them out of doubt: for he cares not what hee puts into the presse, when he would put vs two: I had rather be a Giantesse, and lye vnder Mount: Well; I will find you twentie lasciuious Turtles ere one chaste man.
Why this is the very same: the very hand: the very words: what doth he thinke of vs?
Nay I know not: it makes me almost readie to wrangle with mine owne honesty: Ile entertaine my selfe like one that I am not acquainted withall: for sure vnlesse hee know some straine in mee, that I know not my selfe, hee would neuer haue boorded me in this furie.
Boording, call you it? Ile bee sure to keepe him aboue decke.
So will I: if hee come vnder my hatches, Ile neuer to Sea againe: Let's bee reueng'd on him: let's appoint him a meeting: giue him a show of comfort in his Suit, and lead him on with a fine baited delay, till hee hath pawn'd his horses to mine Host of the Garter.
Nay, I wil consent to act any villany against him, that may not sully the charinesse of our honesty: oh that my husband saw this Letter: it would giue eternall food to his iealousie.
Why look where he comes; and my good man too: hee's as farre from iealousie, as I am from giuing him cause, and that (I hope) is an vnmeasurable distance.
You are the happier woman.
Let's consult together against this greasie Knight: Come hither.
Well: I hope, it be not so.
Hope is a curtall-dog in some affaires: Siraffects thy wife.
Why sir, my wife is not young.
He wooes both high and low, both rich & poor, both yong and old, one with anotherhe loues the Gally-mawfryperpend.
Loue my wife?
With liuer, burning hot: preuent: Or goe thou like Sirhe, with Ring-wood at thy heeles: O, odious is the name.
What name Sir?
The horne I say: Farewell: Take heed, haue open eye, for theeues doe foot by night. Take heed, ere sommer comes, or Cuckoo-birds do sing. Away sir Corporall: Beleeue ithe speakes sence.
I will be patient: I will find out this.
And this is true: I like not the humor of lying: hee hath wronged mee in some humors: I should haue borne the humour'd Letter to her: but I haue a sword: and it shall bite vpon my necessitie: he loues your wife; There's the short and the long: My name is Corporall: I speak, and I auouch; 'tis true: my name is: andloues your wife: adieu, I loue not the humour of bread and cheese: adieu.
The humour of it (quoth'a?) heere's a fellow frights English out of his wits.
I will seeke out.
I neuer heard such a drawling-affecting rogue.
If I doe finde it: well.
I will not beleeue such a, though the Priest o' th'Towne commended him for a true man.
'Twas a good sensible fellow: well.
How now?
Whether goe youharke you.
How now (sweet) why art thou melancholy?
I melancholy? I am not melancholy: Get you home: goe.
Faith, thou hast some crochets in thy head, Now: will you goe,?
Haue with you: you'll come to dinner? Looke who comes yonder: shee shall bee our Messenger to this paltrie Knight.
Trust me, I thought on her: shee'll fit it.
You are come to see my daughter?
I forsooth: and I pray how do's good Mistresse?
Go in with vs and see: we haue an houres talke with you.
How now Master Ford?
You heard what this knaue told me, did you not?
Yes, and you heard what the other told me?
Doe you thinke there is truth in them?
Hang 'em slaues: I doe not thinke the Knight would offer it: But these that accuse him in his intent towards our wiues, are a yoake of his discarded men: very rogues, now they be out of seruice.
Were they his men?
Marry were they.
I like it neuer the beter for that, Do's he lye at the Garter?
I marry do's he: if hee should intend this voyage toward my wife, I would turne her loose to him; and what hee gets more of her, then sharpe words, let it lye on my head.
I doe not misdoubt my wife: but I would bee loath to turne them together: a man may be too confident: I would haue nothing lye on my head: I cannot be thus satisfied.
Looke where my ranting-Host of the Garter comes: there is eyther liquor in his pate, or mony in his purse, when hee lookes so merrily: How now mine Host?
How now Bully-Rooke: thou'rt a Gentleman Caueleiro Iustice, I say.
I follow, (mine Host) I follow: Good-euen, and twenty (good Master.) Master, wil you go with vs? we haue sport in hand.
Tell him Caueleiro-Iustice: tell him Bully-Rooke.
Sir, there is a fray to be fought, betweene Sirthe Welch Priest, andthe French Doctor.
Good mine Host o'th'Garter: a word with you.
What saist thou, my Bully-Rooke?
Will you goe with vs to behold it? My merry Host hath had the measuring of their weapons; and (I thinke) hath appointed them contrary places: for (beleeue mee) I heare the Parson is no Iester: harke, I will tell you what our sport shall be.
Hast thou no suit against my Knight? my guest-Caualeire?
None, I protest: but Ile giue you a pottle of burn'd sacke, to giue me recourse to him, and tell him my name is: onely for a iest.
My hand, (Bully:) thou shalt haue egresse and regresse, (said I well?) and thy name shall be. It is a merry Knight: will you goe An-heires?
Haue with you mine Host.
I haue heard the French-man hath good skill in his Rapier.
Tut sir: I could haue told you more: In these times you stand on distance: your Passes, Stoccado's, and I know not what: 'tis the heart (Master) 'tis heere, 'tis heere: I haue seene the time with my long-sword, I would haue made you fowre tall fellowes skippe like Rattes.
Heere boyes, heere, heere: shall we wag?
Haue with you: I had rather heare them scold, then fight.
Thoughbe a secure foole, and stands so firmely on his wiues frailty; yet, I cannot put-off my opinion so easily: she was in his company athouse: and what they made there, I know not. Well, I wil looke further into't, and I haue a disguise, to sound; if I finde her honest, I loose not my labor: if she be otherwise, 'tis labour well bestowed.
I will not lend thee a penny.
Why then the world's mine Oyster, which I, with sword will open.
Not a penny: I haue beene content (Sir,) you should lay my countenance to pawne: I haue grated vpon my good friends for three Repreeues for you, and your Coach-fellow; or else you had look'd through the grate, like a Geminy of Baboones: I am damn'd in hell, for swearing to Gentlemen my friends, you were good Souldiers, and tall-fellowes. And when Mistresselost the handle of her Fan, I took't vpon mine honour thou hadst it not.
Didst not thou share? hadst thou not fifteene pence?
Reason, you roague, reason: thinkst thou Ile endanger my soule,? at a word, hang no more about mee, I am no gibbet for you: goe, a short knife, and a throng, to your Mannor of: goe, you'll not beare a Letter for mee you roague? you stand vpon your honor: why, (thou vnconfinable basenesse) it is as much as I can doe to keepe the termes of my hononor precise: I, I, I my selfe sometimes, leauing the feare of heauen onthe left hand, and hiding mine honor in my necessity, am faine to shuffle: to hedge, and to lurch, and yet, you Rogue, will en-sconce your raggs; your Cat-a-Mountaine-lookes, your red-lattice phrases, and your bold-beating-oathes, vnder the shelter of your honor? you will not doe it? you?
I doe relent: what would thou more of man?
Sir, here's a woman would speake with you.
Let her approach.
Giue your worship good morrow.
Good-morrow, good-wife.
Not so and't please your worship.
Good maid then.
Ile be sworne, As my mother was the first houre I was borne.
I doe beleeue the swearer; what with me?
Shall I vouch-safe your worship a word, or two?
Two thousand (faire woman) and ile vouchsafe thee the hearing.
There is one Mistresse, (Sir) I pray come a little neerer this waies: I my selfe dwell with M. Doctor:
Well, on; Mistresse, you say.
Your worship saies very true: I pray your worship come a little neerer this waies.
I warrant thee, no-bodie heares: mine owne people, mine owne people.
Are they so? heauen-blesse them, and make them his Seruants.
Well; Mistresse, what of her?
Why, Sir; shee's a good-creature; Lord, Lord, your Worship's a wanton: well: heauen forgiue you, and all of vs, I pray --.
Mistresse: come, Mistresse.
Marry this is the short, and the long of it: you haue brought her into such a Canaries, as 'tis wonderfull: the best Courtier of them all (when the Court lay at) could neuer haue brought her to such a Canarie: yet there has beene Knights, and Lords, and Gentlemen, with their Coaches; I warrant you Coach after Coach, letter after letter, gift after gift, smelling so sweetly; all Muske, and so rushling, I warrant you, in silke and golde, and in such alligant termes, and in such wine and suger of the best, and the fairest, that would haue wonne any womans heart: and I warrant you, they could neuer get an eye-winke of her: I had my selfe twentie Angels giuen me this morning, but I defie all Angels (in any such sort, as they say) but in the way of honesty: and I warrant you, they could neuer get her so much as sippe on a cup with the prowdest of them all, and yet there has beene Earles: nay, (which is more) Pentioners, but I warrant you all is one with her.
But what saies shee to mee? be briefe my good.
Marry, she hath receiu'd your Letter: for the which she thankes you a thousand times; and she giues you to notifie, that her husband will be absence from his house, betweene ten and eleuen.
Ten, and eleuen.
I, forsooth: and then you may come and see the picture (she sayes) that you wot of: Masterher husband will be from home: alas, the sweet woman leades an ill life with him: hee's a very iealousie-man; she leads a very frampold life with him, (good hart.)
Ten, and eleuen.Woman, commend me to her, I will not faile her.
Why, you say well: But I haue another messenger to your worship: Mistressehath her heartie commendations to you to: and let mee tell you in your eare, shee's as fartuous a ciuill modest wife, and one (I tell you) that will not misse you morning nor euening prayer, as any is in, who ere bee the other: and shee bade me tell your worship, that her husband is seldome from home, but she hopes there will come a time. I neuer knew a woman so doate vpon a man; surely I thinke you haue charmes, la: yes in truth.
Not I, I assure thee; setting the attraction of my good parts aside, I haue no other charmes.
Blessing on your heart for't.
But I pray thee tell me this: haswife, andwife acquainted each other, how they loue me?
That were a iest indeed: they haue not so little grace I hope, that were a tricke indeed: But Mistriswould desire you to send her your little Page of al loues: her husband has a maruellous infectio~ to the little Page: and truely Masteris an honest man: neuer a wife inleades a better life then she do's: doe what shee will, say what she will, take all, pay all, goe to bed when she list, rise when she list, all is as she will: and truly she deserues it; for if there be a kinde woman in, she is one: you must send her your Page, no remedie.
Why, I will.
Nay, but doe so then, and looke you, hee may come and goe betweene you both: and in any case haue a nay-word, that you may know one anothers minde, and the Boy neuer neede to vnderstand any thing; for 'tis not good that children should know any wickednes: olde folkes you know, haue discretion, as they say, and know the world.
Farethee-well, commend mee to them both: there's my purse, I am yet thy debter: Boy, goe along with this woman, this newes distracts me.
This Puncke is one ofCarriers, Clap on more sailes, pursue: vp with your fights: Giue fire: she is my prize, or Ocean whelme them all.
Saist thou so (old) go thy waies: Ile make more of thy olde body then I haue done: will they yet looke after thee? wilt thou after the expence of so much money, be now a gainer? good Body, I thanke thee: let them say 'tis grossely done, so it bee fairely done, no matter.
Sir, there's one Masterbelow would faine speake with you, and be acquainted with you; and hath sent your worship a mornings draught of Sacke.
is his name?
I Sir.
Call him in: suchare welcome to mee, that ore'flowes such liquor: ah ha, Mistresseand Mistresse, haue I encompass'd you? goe to,.
'Blesse you sir.
And you sir: would you speake with me?
I make bold, to presse, with so little preparation vpon you.
You'r welcome, what's your will? giue vs leaue Drawer.
Sir, I am a Gentleman that haue spent much, my name is.
Good Master, I desire more acquaintance of you.
Good Sir, I sue for yours: not to charge you, for I must let you vnderstand, I thinke my selfe inbetter plight for a Lender, then you are: the which hath something emboldned me to this vnseason'd intrusion: for they say, if money goe before, all waies doe lye open.
Money is a good Souldier (Sir) and will on.
Troth, and I haue a bag of money heere troubles me: if you will helpe to beare it (Sir) take all, or halfe, for easing me of the carriage.
Sir, I know not how I may deserue to bee your Porter.
I will tell you sir, if you will giue mee the hearing.
Speake (good Master) I shall be glad to be your Seruant.
Sir, I heare you are a Scholler: (I will be briefe with you) and you haue been a man long knowne to me, though I had neuer so good means as desire, to make my selfe acquainted with you. I shall discouer a thing to you, wherein I must very much lay open mine owne imperfection: but (good Sir) as you haue one eye vpon my follies, as you heare them vnfolded, turne another into the Register of your owne, that I may passe with a reproofe the easier, sith you your selfe know how easie it is to be such an offender.
Very well Sir, proceed.
There is a Gentlewoman in this Towne, her husbands name is.
Well Sir.
I haue long lou'd her, and I protest to you, bestowed much on her: followed her with a doating obseruance: Ingross'd opportunities to meete her: fee'd euery slight occasion that could but nigardly giue mee sight of her: not only bought many presents to giue her, but haue giuen largely to many, to know what shee would haue giuen: briefly, I haue pursu'd her, as Loue hath pursued mee, which hath beene on the wing of all occasions: but whatsoeuer I haue merited, either in my minde, or in my meanes, meede I am sure I haue receiued none, vnlesse Experience be a Iewell, that I haue purchased at an infinite rate, and that hath taught mee to say this,
Haue you receiu'd no promise of satisfaction at her hands?
Neuer.
Haue you importun'd her to such a purpose?
Neuer.
Of what qualitie was your loue then?
Like a fair house, built on another mans ground, so that I haue lost my edifice, by mistaking the place, where I erected it.
To what purpose haue you vnfolded this to me?
When I haue told you that, I haue told you all: Some say, that though she appeare honest to mee, yet in other places shee enlargeth her mirth so farre, that there is shrewd construction made of her. Now (Sir) here is the heart of my purpose: you are a gentleman of excellent breeding, admirable discourse, of great admittance, authenticke in your place and person, generally allow'd for your many war-like, court-like, and learned preparations.
O Sir.
Beleeue it, for you know it: there is money, spend it, spend it, spend more; spend all I haue, onelygiue me so much of your time in enchange of it, as to lay an amiable siege to the honesty of thiswife: vse your Art of wooing; win her to consent to you: if any man may, you may as soone as any.
Would it apply well to the vehemency of your affection that I should win what you would enioy? Methinkes you prescribe to your selfe very preposterously.
O, vnderstand my drift: she dwells so securely on the excellency of her honor, that the folly of my soule dares not present it selfe: shee is too bright to be look'd against. Now, could I come to her with any detection in my hand; my desires had instance and argument to commend themselues, I could driue her then from the ward of her purity, her reputation, her marriage-vow, and a thousand other her defences, which now are too-too strongly embattaild against me: what say you too't, Sir?
Master, I will first make bold with your money: next, giue mee your hand: and last, as I am a gentleman, you shall, if you will, enioywife.
O good Sir.
I say you shall.
Want no money (Sir) you shall want none.
Want no(Master) you shall want none: I shall be with her (I may tell you) by her owne appointment, euen as you came in to me, her assistant, or goe-betweene, parted from me: I say I shall be with her betweene ten and eleuen: for at that time the iealious-rascally-knaue her husband will be forth: come you to me at night, you shall know how I speed.
I am blest in your acquaintance: do you knowSir?
Hang him (poore Cuckoldly knaue) I know him not: yet I wrong him to call him poore: They say the iealous wittolly-knaue hath masses of money, for the which his wife seemes to me well-fauourd: I will vse her as the key of the Cuckoldly-rogues Coffer, & ther's my haruest-home.
I would you knew, sir, that you might auoid him, if you saw him.
Hang him, mechanicall-salt-butter rogue; I wil stare him out of his wits: I will awe-him with my cudgell: it shall hang like a Meteor ore the Cuckolds horns: Master, thou shalt know, I will predominate ouer the pezant, and thou shalt lye with his wife. Come to me soone at night:a knaue, and I will aggrauate his stile: thou (Master) shalt know him for knaue, and Cuckold. Come to me soone at night.
What a damn'd Epicurian-Rascall is this? my heart is ready to cracke with impatience: who saies this is improuident iealousie? my wife hath sent to him, the howre is fixt, the match is made: would any man haue thought this? see the hell of hauing a false woman: my bed shall be abus'd, my Coffers ransack'd, my reputation gnawne at, and I shall not onely receiue this villanous wrong, but stand vnder the adoption of abhominable termes, and by him that does mee this wrong: Termes, names:sounds well:, well:, well: yet they are Diuels additions, the names of fiends: But Cuckold, Wittoll, Cuckold? The Diuell himselfe hath not such a name.is an Asse, a secure Asse; hee will trust his wife, hee will not be iealous: I will rather trust awith my butter, Parsonthewith my Cheese, anwith my Aqua-vitae-bottle, or a Theefe walke my ambling gelding, then my wife with her selfe. Then she plots, then sheeruminates, then shee deuises: and what they thinke in their hearts they may effect; they will breake their hearts but they will effect. Heauen bee prais'd for my iealousie: eleuen o'clocke the howre, I will preuent this, detect my wife, bee reueng'd on, and laugh at. I will about it, better three houres too soone, then a mynute too late: fie, fie, fie: Cuckold, Cuckold, Cuckold.
Sir.
Vat is the clocke,.
'Tis past the howre (Sir) that Sirpromis'd to meet.
By gar, he has saue his soule, dat he is no-come: hee has pray his Pible well, dat he is no-come: by garhe is dead already, if he be come.
Hee is wise Sir: hee knew your worship would kill him if he came.
By gar, de herring is no dead, so as I vill kill him: take your Rapier,I vill tell you how I vill kill him.
Alas sir, I cannot fence.
Villanie, take your Rapier.
Forbeare: heer's company.
'Blesse thee, bully-Doctor.
'Saue you M=r=. Doctor.
Now good M=r=. Doctor.
'Giue you good-morrow, sir.
Vat be all you one, two, tree, fowre, come for?
To see thee fight, to see thee foigne, to see thee trauerse, to see thee heere, to see thee there, to see thee passe thy puncto, thy stock, thy reuerse, thy distance, thy montant: Is he dead, my Ethiopian? Is he dead, my Francisco? ha Bully? what saies my? my? my heart of Elder? ha? is he dead bully-Stale? is he dead?
By gar, he is de Coward-Iack-Priest of de vorld: he is not show his face.
Thou art a Castalion-king-Vrinall:of(my Boy)
I pray you beare witnesse, that me haue stay, sixe or seuen, two tree howres for him, and hee is nocome.
He is the wiser man (M. Doctor) heis a curer of soules, and you a curer of bodies: if you should fight, you goe against the haire of your professions: is it not true, Master?
Master; you haue your selfe beene a great fighter, though now a man of peace.
Body-kins M., though I now be old, and of the peace; if I see a sword out, my finger itches to make one: though wee are Iustices, and Doctors, and Church-men (M.) wee haue some salt of our youth in vs, we are the sons of women (M..)
'Tis true, M=r=..
It wil be found so, (M.) M. Doctor, I am come to fetch you home: I am sworn of the peace: you haue show'd your selfe a wise Physician, and Sirhath showne himselfe a wise and patient Churchman: you must goe with me, M. Doctor.
Pardon, Guest-Iustice; a Mounseur Mocke-water.
Mock-vater? vat is dat?
Mock-water, in our English tongue, is Valour (Bully.)
By gar, then I haue as much Mock-vater as de Englishman: scuruy-Iack-dog-Priest: by gar, mee vill cut his eares.
He will Clapper-claw thee tightly (Bully.)
Clapper-de-claw? vat is dat?
That is, he will make thee amends.
By-gar, me doe looke hee shall clapper-de-claw me, for by-gar, me vill haue it.
And I will prouoke him to't, or let him wag.
Me tanck you for dat.
And moreouer, (Bully) but first, M=r=. Ghuest, and M., & eeke Caualeiro, goe you through the Towne to.
Siris there, is he?
He is there, see what humor he is in: and I will bring the Doctor about by the Fields: will it doe well?
We will doe it.
Adieu, good M. Doctor.
By-gar, me vill kill de Priest, for he speake for a Iack-an-Ape to.
Let him die: sheath thy impatience: throw cold water on thy Choller: goe about the fields with mee through, I will bring thee where Mistrisis, at a Farm-house a Feasting: and thou shalt wooe her: Cride-game, said I well?
By-gar, mee dancke you vor dat: by gar I loue you: and I shall procure 'a you de good Guest: de Earle, de Knight, de Lords, de Gentlemen, my patients.
For the which, I will be thy aduersary toward: said I well?
By-gar, 'tis good: vell said.
Let vs wag then.
Come at my heeles,.<|endoftext|>Boy, bear the Torch faire: Now am I armd to fight with a Wind-mill, and to take the wall of an Emperor: Much drinke, no money: A heauyhead, and a light paire of heeles.
O, stand man?
I weare an excellent creature to make Punk of, I should downe with the least touch of a knaues finger, thou hast made a good night of this: What hast won Franke?
A matter of nothing, some hundred pounds.
This is the hel of al gamsters, I thinke when they are at play, the boord eates vp the money: For if there be fiue hundred pound lost, theres neuer but a hundred pounds wonne. Boy, takethe wall of any man, and yet by light, such deedes of darknes may not be.
What dost meane by that?
To saue charge, and walke like a Fury with a fire-brande in my hand, euery one goes by the light, & weel go by the smoke.
Boy, keepe the Wall: I will not budge for any man, by these Thumbs, and the paring of the Nayles shal stick in thy teeth not for a world.
Whose this, young Scarborrow?
The man that the Mare rid on.
Is this the reuerence that you owe to me?
You should haue brought me vp better.
That vice should thus transforme man to a beast.
Go to, your names Lorde, Ile talke with you when your out a debt and ha better cloaths.
I pitty thee euen with my very soule.
Pitty ith thy throat, I can drinke Muscadine and Egges, and Muld-sack, do you heare: you put a peece of turnd stuffe vpon me, but I wil --
What will you do Sir?
Pisse in thy way, and thats no slander.
Your sober blood wil teach you otherwise.
My honoured Lord, your happily wel met,
Ill met to see your Nephew in this case, More like a brute Beast, then a Gentleman.
Fie Nephew, shame you not thus to transform your self?
Can your nose smell a Torch.
Be not so wilde, it is thine Vnckle Scarborrow.
Why then tis the more likely tis my Fathers brother.
Shame to our name, to make thy selfe a Beast, Thy body worthy borne, and thy youths brest Tyld in due time for better discipline.
Thy selfe new married to a Noble house, Rich in possessions, and Posterity, Which should cal home thy vnstaid affections.
Where thou makst havock.
Ryot, spoyle, and wast.
Of what thy father left.
And liuest disgracst.
Ile send you shorter to heauen, then you came to the earth, do you Catechize? Do you Catechize?
Hold, hold, do you draw vpon your vnckle?
Pox of that Lord, Weele meet at Miter, where weele sup downe sorrow, We are drunke to night, and so weele be to morrow.
Why now I see: what I hard of, I beleeu'd not, Your kinsman liues.
Like to a swine.
A perfecthee feeds on draffe, And wallowes in the mire, to make men laugh, I pitty him.
No pitties fit for him.
Yet weele aduise him.
He is my kinsman.
Being in the pit where many do fall in, We wil both comfort him, and counsel him.
What shal we do now Butler?
A man had better lyne a good handsome payre of gallows before his time, then be born to do these sucklings good, their mothers milke not wrung out of their nose yet, they knowe no more how to behaue themselues in this honest and needeful calling of Purse-taking, then I do to peece stockings.
This way, This way, this way.
Sfut what shal we do now?
See if they do not quake like a trembling-Asp-leafe, and look more miserable then one of the wicked Elders picturd in the painted cloth, should they but come to the credit to be arraind for their valor, before a worshipfull bench, their very lookes woulde hang em, and they were indighted but for stealing of Egs.
Follow, follow, this way follow.
Butler.
Honest Butler.
Squat hart squat, creepe mee into these Bushes,lye me as close to the ground as you would do to a wench.
How good Butler, show vs how.
By the Moone patronesse of all purse-takers, who woulde be troubled with such Changelings, squat hart squat.
Thus Butler.
I so suckling, so, sturre not nowe, If the peering Rogues chance to goe ouer you, yet sturre not younger Brothers call you em, and haue no more forecast, I am ashamd of you, these are such whose fathers had neede leaue them money, euen to make them ready withall, for by this hiltes, they haue not wit to butten theyr sleeues without teaching, close, squat close. Now if the lot of hanging do fall to my share, so, then the Fathers old man drops for his young maisters. If it chance it chances, and when it chaunces, heauen and the Sheriffe send me a good rope, I wold not go vp the lather twice for any thing, in the meane time preuentions, honest preuentions do well, off with my skin, so you on the ground, and I to this tree to escape the Gallows.
Follow, follow, follow.
Do follow, if I do not deceiue you, Ile bid a poxe of this wit, and hang with a good grace.
Vp to this wood they tooke, search neare my friendes, I am this morne robd of three hundred pound.
I am sorry there was not foure to hae made euen money now by the Deuils hornes, tis Sir Iohn Harcop.
Leaue not a bush vnbeate, nor tree vnsearcht, as sure as I was robd the theeues went this way.
Theirs Nobody I perceiue but may lie at sometime for one of them climbd this wayes.
Stand, I heare a voice, and heres an Owle in an Iuy bush.
You lie, tis an old Seruingman in a Nut-tree.
Sirrah, sir, what make you in that tree.
Gathring of Nuts, that such fools as you are may cracke the shels, and I eat the kernels.
What fellowes that?
Sir Iohn Harcop, my Noble Knight, I am gladde of your good health, you beare your Age faier, you keep a good house, I ha fed at your boord, and bin drunke in your buttery.
But sirha: what made you in that tree? My man and I at foot of yonder hill Were by three knaues robd of three hundred pound.
A shrewd losse berlady sir, but your good worship may now see the fruit of being miserable: You will ride but with one man to saue hors-meat and mans meat at your Inne at night, & lose three hundred pound in a morning.
Sirha, I say I ha lost three hundred pound.
And I say sir, I wish all miserable knights might bee serued so: For had you kept halfe a dozen tall fellowes, as a man of your coat should do, they woulde haue helpt now to keep your money.
But tell me sir, why lurkt you in that tree?
Mary, I will tell you sir, Comming to the top of the hill where you (Right worshipfull) wer robd at the bottome, & seeing some a scuffling together, my mind strait gaue me ther were knaues abroad. Now sir, I knowing my selfe to be olde, tough, and vnwieldy, not being able to doe as I would, as muche as to say, Rescue you (right Worshipfull,) I like an honest man, one of the Kings liege people, and a good subiect
A sayes well Sir. Got me vp to the top of that tree: The tree (if it could speake) would beare me witnesse, that there I might see which way the knaues tooke, then to tell you of it, and you right worshipfullie to send hue to cry after em.
Was it so.
Nay twas so sir.
Nay then I tell thee they tooke into this wood.
And I tell thee (setting thy worsh. knighthood aside) he lyes in his throat that saies so: Had not one of them a white Frocke? Did they not bind your worships knighthoode by the thumbs? then fagoted you and the fool your man, back to back.
He sayes true.
Why then so truly, came not they into this wood, but tooke ouer the Lawnes, & left Winno steeple on the left hand.
It may be so, by this they are out of reach, Well, farewell it.
Ride with more men, good knight.
It shall teach me wit.
So, If this bee not playd a weapon beyonde a Schollers Prize, let me be hist at. Now to the next. Come out you Hedghogs?
O Butler, thou deserust to be chronicled for this.
Do not bely me, If I had my right I deserue to be hanged fort. But come, Downe with your dust, our mornings purchase.
Heer tis, Thou hast playd well, Thou deserust two shares in it.
Three hundred pound: A pretty breakfast: Many a ma~ workes harde all his daies and neuer sees halfe the money. But come, Tho it be badly got, it shalbe better bestowd. But do ye heare Galants, I ha not taught you this trade to get your liuings by. Vse it not, for if you doe, though I scapt by the Nut tree, be sure youle speed by the Rope: But for your paynes at this tyme, Theres a hundred pounds for you, how you shall bestow it, Ile giue you instructions. But do you heare, Looke you goe not to your Gilles, your Punkes, and your Cock-tricks with it, If I hear you do: as I am an honest theefe, tho I helpt you now out of the Bryers, Ile be a meanes yet to helpe you to the Gallowes. How the rest shall be employd I haue determined, and by the way Ile make you acquainted with it. To steale is bad, but taken where is store, The faults the lesse, being don to helpe the pore
Sure I ha sed my prayers, and liud vertuously a late, that this good fortunes befalne me. Looke Gallants: I am sent for to come downe to my Fathers buriall.
But dust meane to goe?
Troth no, Ile go down to take possession of his land, let the cu~try bury him & the wil: Ile stay here a while, to saue charg at his funerall.
And how dost feel thy selfe Franke, now thy father is dead?
As I did before, with my hands, how should I feel my selfe else? But Ile tell you newes Gallants.
Whats that? Dost meane now to serue God?
Faith partly, for I intend shortly to goe to Church, and from thence do faithfull seruice to one woman.
Good, I ha met my flesh-hooks together.
What, Dost meane to be marryed?
I Mungrell, Marryed.
Thats a bayt for me.
I will now be honestly marryed.
Its impossible, for thou hast bin a whoremayster this seauen yeare.
Tis no matter, I will now marry, And to som honest woman to, and so from hence her vertues shall be a countenance to my vices.
What shall she be, prethee?
No Lady, no widdow, nor no waiting gentlewoman, for vnder protection Ladyes may larde their husbands heads, Widdows will Woodcocks make, & chambermayds of serui~gme~ learn that, theyle ner forsake.
Who wilt thou wed then, prethe?
To any mayd, so she be fayr: To any mayd, so she be rich To any mayd so she be young: and to any mayde
So she be honest.
Faith, its no great matter for her honestye, for in these dayes, thats a Dowrie out of request.
From these Crabes will I gather sweetnesse: wherin Ile imitate the Bee, that sucks her hony, not from the sweetest flowers, but Timb the bitterest: So these hauing beene the meanes to begger my mayster, shalbe the helpes to releeue his brothers and sister.
To whom shall I now be a suter?
Faire fall ye Gallants.
Nay, and she be fayre she shall fall sure enough., how Ist good Butler.
Wil you be made gallants?
I, but not willingly Cuckolds, tho we are now talking about wiues.
Let your wiues agree of that after, will you first be richly married?
How Butler: richly married?
Rich in beauty, rich in purse, riche in vertue, riche in all things. But, Ile say nothing, I know of two or three rich heyres. But, my fiddlestick cannot play without Rozen: Auant.
Butler.
Dost not know me Butler?
For Kex, dryde Kex, that in summer ha bin so liberal to fodder other mens cattle, and scarce haue inough to keepe your owne in Winter. Mine are precious Cabinets, and must haue pretious Iewels put into them, and I know you to bemerchants of Stockfish, and not men for my market: Then vanish.
Come, ye old mad-cap you, what need all this? Cannot a man ha bin a little whoore-mayster in his youth, but you must vpbraide him with it, and tell him of his defects, which when he is maried, his wife shall finde in him? Why my fathers dead man now, who by his death has left me the better part of a thousand a yeare.
Tut, she of Lancashire has fifteen hundred.
Let me haue her then, good Butler.
And then shee the bright beauty of Leystershire, has a thousand, nay thirteen hundred a yeare, at least.
Or let me haue her, honest Butler.
Besides, she the most delicate, sweet countenanst, blacke browd gentlewoman in Northamptonshire, in substance equals the best of em.
Let me haue her then.
Or I.
Or I, good Butler.
You were best play the partes of right fooles, and most despera~te whore-maysters, and go together by the eares for the~ ere ye see them. But they are the moste rare featurd, well faced, excellent spoke, rare qualited, vertuous, and worthy to be admired gentlewoman,
And rich Butler?
(I that must be one, tho they want all the rest) And rich Gallants, as are from the vtmost parts of, to these present confines of Europe.
And wilt thou helpe vs to them Butler?
Faith, tis to be doubted, for pretious pearle will hardly be bought without pretiousstones, and I think theres scarse one indifferent one to be found, betwixt you three: yet since there is some hope ye may proue honest, as by the death of your fathersFathers youare proued rich, walke seuerally, for I knowing you all three to be couetous Tug-muttons will not trust you with the sight of each others beawty but will seuerally, talke with you, and since you haue deignd in this needfull portion of wedlocke to bee ruld by mee Butler, will most bountifully prouide wiues for you generally.
Why that honestly said.
Why so, and now first to your Sir Knight
Godamercy.
You see this couple of abhominable Woodcocks heare.
A pox on them, absolute Coxcomes.
You heard me tel them, I had Intelligence to giue of three Gentlewomen.
True.
Now indeed SirI ha but the performance of one.
Good.
And her I doe intende for you, onely for you.
Honest Butler.
Now sir, shee being but lately come to this towne, and so neerely watcht by the iealous eyes of her friends, she being a Rich heyre, least she should be stolne away by some disolute Prodigal, or desperat estated spend-thrift, as you ha bin Sir.
O but thats past Butler.
True I knowt, & intend now but to make vse of them, flatter with them with hopefull promises, and make them needefull instruments.
To helpe me to the wench,
You ha hit it which thus must be effected, first by keeping close your purpose.
Good.
Also concealing from them, the lodging beauty and riches of your new, but admirable Mistris.
Excellent.
Of which your following happines, if they should know either in enuy of your good, or hope of their owne aduancement theyd make our labours knowne to the gentlewomans Vncles, and so our benefit be frustrate.
Admirable Butler.
Which done, als but this, being as you shal be brought into hir company, and by mypraising your vertues you get possession of her Loue, one morning step to the tower, or to make al sure, hier some stipendary prieste for money: for Money in these dayes, what wil not be done, and what will not a man do for a rich wife, and with him make no more ado but marrie hir in hir lodging and being married, lie with her and spare not.
Do they not see vs, do they not see vs, let mee kisse thee, let me kisse thee Butler, let but this be done, and all the benefit requitall and happines I can promise thee fort, shall be this, Ile be thy rich maister, and thou shalt carry my purse.
Enough, meet me at her lodging some half an houre hence: harke she lies.
I hate.
Faile not.
Will I liue.
I wil but shift of these two Rhinoceros,
Wigens, wingens, a couple of guls.
With some discourse of hope to wiue them two, and be with you straight.
Blest day, my loue shal be thy cushion honest Butler.
So now to my tother Gallants.
O Butler, we ha bin in passion at thy tediousnes,
Why looke you. I had al this talke for your good.
Hadst.
For you know the knight is but a scuruy-proud-prating-Prodigall, licentious vnnecessary.
An Asse, an Asse, an Asse.
Now you heard me tel him I had three Wenches in store,
And he would ha had them al would he.
Heare me, tho he may liue to be an Oxe, he had not now so much of the Goat in him, but onely hopes for one of the three when indeed I ha but two, and knowing you to bee men of more vertue, and deerer in my respect intend them to be yours.
We shal honor thee.
But how Butler.
I am now going to their place of residence, scituate in the choisest place in the Citty, and at the signe of the Wolfe iust against Gold-smiths-rowwhere you shal meet me, but ask not for me, only walk too and fro and to auoid suspition you may spende some conference withthe Shop-keepers wiues, they haue seats built a purpose for such familiar entertainment, where froma bay window which is opposite, I wil make you knowne to your desired beauties, commende the good parts you haue.
Bith masse mine are very few.
And win a kind of desire, as women are soone wonne to make you bee beloued where you shall firste kisse, then Woe, at length Wed, and at last bed my Noble harts.
O Butler.
Wenches bona robes, blessed beauties, without colour or counterfet: Away, put on your best Cloaths, get you to the Barbers, Curle vp your haire, walke with the best strouts you can, you shal see more at the Window, and I ha vowd to make you.
Wilt thou.
Both Fooles, and Ile want of my wit but Ile doot.
We wil liue together as felowes.
As Brothers.
As arrant knaues if I keepe you company, O, the most wretched season of this time, These men like Fish, do swim within one streame, Yet theyd eat one another, making no Conscience To drinke with them theyd poyson, no offence, Betwixt their thoughts and actions haue controle, But headlong run, like an vnbiacst Bowle, Yet I will throw them on, but like to him, At play knowes how to loose, and when to win.
Butler.
O, are you come. And fit as I appointed: so, tis wel, you knowe your kues, and haue instructions howe to beare your selues: Al, as is fit, play but your part, your states from hence are firme.
What shal I tearme this creature not a man.
Hees not of mortals temper but hees one, Made all of goodnes, tho of flesh and bone, O Brother, brother, but for that honest man, As neere to misery had bin our breath, As where the thundring pellet strikes is death,
I, my shift of shirts and change of cloths knowt.
Well tel of him, like bels whose musick rings One Coronation day for ioy of Kings, That hath preseru'd their steeples not like towles, That summons liuing tears for the dead soules.
Gods preciousSir, the hel Sir, euen as you had new kist, and were about to court her, if her Vncles be not come.
A plague on thee, spit out.
But tis no matter Sir, stay you heere in this vpper chamber, & Ile stay beneath with her, tis ten to one you shal hear them talke now, of the greatnes of her possessions, the care they haue to see her well bestowed, the admirablenes of her vertues, all which for all their comming, shall be but happines ordained for you, & by my meanes be your inheritance.
Then thou't shift them away, and keepe from the sighte of them.
Haue I not promist to make you.
Thou hast.
Go to then, rest heere with patience, and be confident in my trust, onely in my absence, you may praise God for the blessednes you haue to come, and say your prayers if you will, Ile but prepare her hart for entertainement of your loue, dismisse them, for your free accesse, and returne straight.
Honest-blest-natural-friend, thou dealest with mee like a Brother: Butler,
Sure heauen hath reserued this man to weare Grey-hairs to do me good, now wil I listen, listen close, and sucke in her Vncles words with a reioycing eare,
As we were saying Brother, Where shal we find a husband for my Neece.
Marry she shal find one heere tho you little knowt, thanks,Thankes honest Butler.
She is left rich in Money, Plate, and Iewels.
Comfort, comfort to my soule.
Hath all her manner houses richly furnished.
Good, good, Ile find imployment for them.
Speake loud enough that he may heare you.
I take her state to be about a thousand pound a yeare,
And that which my father, hath left me, will make it about fifteene, hundred admirable.
In debtto no man, then must our natural care be, As she is wealthy to see her married well.
And that she shall be as well as the priest can, hee shall not, Leaue out a word ont.
I thinke she has.
What a Gods name.
About foure thousand pound in her great chest.
And Ile find a vent fort I hope.
Shee is vertuous, and she is faire.
And she were foule, being rich, I would be glad of her.
Pisht, pisht.
Come, weele go visit her, but with this care, That to no spend-thrift we do marry her.
You may chance be deceiued old gray-beardes, heares hee will spend some of it, thankes, thankes, honest Butler, now doe I see the happines of my future estate, I walke me as to morrow, being the day after my marriage, with my fourteene men in Liuerie cloakes after me, and step to the wall in some cheefe streete of the Citty, tho I ha no occasion to vse it, that the Shop-keepers may take notice how many followers stand bare to mee, and yet in thys latter age, the keeping of men being not in request, I will turne my aforesaid fourteen into two Pages and two Coaches, I wil get me selfe into grace at Court, runne head-long into debt, and then looke scuruily vpon the Citty, I wil walke you into the presence in the afternoone hauing put on a richer sute, then I wore in the morning, and call boy or sirrah, I wil ha the grace of some great Lady though I pay fort, and at the next Triumphes runne a Tilte, that when I runne my course, though I breake not my launce: she may whisper to her selfe, looking vppon my Iewel, wel run my knightI will now keepe great horses, scorning to haue a Queane to keep me, indeede I will practise all the Gallantry in vse, for by a Wyfe comes all my happines.
Now sir, you ha heard her Vnckles, and how do you lyke them.
O But. they ha made good thy words, & I am rauisht with the~.
And hauing seen & kist the gentlewo. how do you like hir?
O Butler beyonde discourse, shee's a Paragon for a Prince, then a fit Implement for a Gentleman, beyond my Element.
Well then, since you like her, and by my meanes, she shall like you, nothing rests now but to haue you married.
True Butler, but withall to haue her portion.
Tut, thats sure yours when you are maried once, for tis hirs by Inheritance, but do you loue her?
O, with my soule.
Ha you sworne as much.
To thee, to her, and ha cald heauen to witnes.
How shall I know that.
Butler, heere I protest, make vowes Irreuocable.
Vpon your knees.
Vpon my knees, with my hart, and soule I loue her.
Will liue with her.
Will liue with her.
Marry her and maintaine her.
Marry her and maintaine hir.
For her forsake al other women.
Nay for her forsweare all other women.
In al degrees of Loue.
In all degrees of Loue, either to Court, kisse, giue priuate fauours, or vse priuate meanes, Ile doe nothing that married men being close whoremaisters do, so I may haue her.
And yet you hauing bin an open whoremaister, I will not beleeue you til I hear you sweare as much in the way of contract to her selfe, and call me to bee a witnesse.
By heauen, by earth, by Hell, by all that man can sweare, I will, so I may haue her.
Enough. Thus at first sight, rash men to women sweare, When such oaths broke, heauen greeues and sheds a teare: But shees come, ply her, ply her.
Kind Mistres, as I protested, so againe I vow. Ifaith I loue you.
And I am not Sir so vncharitable, To hate the man that loues me.
Loue me then, The which loues you as Angels loues good men, Who wish them to liue with them euer, In that high blisse whom hell cannot disseuer.
Ile steale away and leaue them, so wise men do, Whom they would match, let them ha leaue to wo.
Mistris I knowyour worth is beyond my desert, yet by my praising of your virtues, I woulde not haue you as women vse to do, become proud.
None of my affections are prides children, nor a kin to them
Can you loue me then?
I can, for I loue al the world, but am in loue with none.
Yet be in loue with me, let your affections Combine with mine, and let our soules Like Turtles haue a mutual Simpathy, Who loue so well, that they together die, Such is my life, who couets to expire, If it should loose your loue.
May I beleeue you?
Introth you may, Your lifes my life, your death my dying day.
Sir the commendations I haue receiued from Butler of your byrth and worth, together with the Iudgement of mine owne eie, bids me beleeue and loue you.
O seale it with a kisse, Blest hower my life had neuer ioy till this.
Here about is the house sure.
We cannot mistake it, for heres the signe of the Wolfe and the Bay-window.
What so close? Tis well, I ha shifted away your Vncles Mistris, but see the spight Sir Francis, if yon same couple of Smel-smockes, Wentloe and Bartley, ha not sented after vs.
A poxe on em, what shall we do then Butler?
What but be married straight man.
I but how Butler.
Tut, I neuer faile at a dead lift, for to perfect your blisse, I haue prouided you a Priest.
Where, prethe Butler where?
Where? But beneath in her Chamber. I ha fild his hands with Coine, and he shall tye you fast with wordes, he shall close your hands in one, and then doe clap your selfe into her sheetes and spare not.
O sweete.
Downe, downe, tis the onely way for you to get vp. Thus in this taske, for others good I toyle, And she kinde Gentlewoman weds her selfe, Hauing bin scarcely woed, and ere her thoughts, Haue learnd to loue him, that being her husband, She may releeue her, brothers in their wantes, She marries him to helpe her nearest kin, I make the match, and hope it is no sinne.
Sfut it is scuruy Walking, for vs so neare the two Counters, would he would come once?
Masse hees yonder: Now Butler.
O Gallants are you here, I ha done wonders for you commended you to the Gentlewomen, who hauing taken note of your good legs, and good faces, haue a liking to you, meet me beneath.
Happy Butler.
They are yours, and you are theirs, meet me beneath I say. By this they are wed, I and perhaps haue bedded.
Now followes whether knowing shee is poore, Heele swear he lou'd her as he swore before.
Ho Sirrha, who would ha thought it, I perceiue now a woman may be a maid, be married, and loose her maiden-head, and all in halfe and an hower, and how doest like me now wench.
As doth befit your seruant and your wife, That owe you loue and duty al my life.
And there shal be no Loue lost, nor seruice neither, Ile do thee seruice at boord, and thou shalt do me seruice a bed: Nowe must I as youngmarried men vse to do, kisse my portion out of my yong wife. Thou art my sweet Rogue, my Lambe, my Pigsny, my play-fellow, my pretty pretty any thing, come a busse prethee, so tis my kind hart, and wats thou what now?
Not till you tel me Sir,
I ha got thee with Childe in my Conscience, and lyke a kind Husbande, methinkes I breede it for thee. For I am alreadie sicke at my stomacke and long extremely. Now must thou bee my helpful Physition, and prouide for me.
Euen to my blood, Whats mine is yours, to gaine your peace or good.
What a kind soule is this, could a man haue found a greater content in a wife, if he should ha sought thorough the worlde for her: Prethy hart as I said, I long, and in good troth I do, and methinkes thy first childe wil bee borne without a nose, if I loose my longing, tis but for a trifle too, yet methinkes it wil do me no good vnlesse thou effect it for me. I could take thy keyes my selfe, go into thy Closet, and read ouer the deeds and euidences of thy Land, & in reading ouer them, reioice I had such blest fortune to haue so fayre a wife with so much endowment, and then open thy Chests, and suruey thy Plate, Iewels, Treasure. But a pox ont, al will doe me no good, vnlesse thou effect it for me.
Sir I wil shew you al the wealth I haue, Of Coyne, of Iewels, or Possessions,
Good gentle hart, Ile giue thee another busse for that, for that giue thee a new gowne to morrow morning, by this hand do thou but dreame what stuffe and what Fashion thou wilt haue it on to night.
The land I can endow you with, is my Loue, The riches I possesse for you is loue, A Treasure greater then is Land or Gold, It cannot be forfeited, and it shal neare be sold.
Loue I know that, and Ile answer thee loue for. Loue in abundance: but come prethee come, lets see these deedes andeuidences, this Mony, Plate, and Iewels, wilt ha thy Childe borne without a nose, if thou beest so carelesse, spare not, why my little frappet you, I heard thy Vnckles talk of thy riches, that thou hadst hundreds a yeare, seuerall Lord-ships, Mannours Houses, Thousands of poundes in your great Chests, Iewels, Plate, and Ringes in your little Box.
And for that riches you did marry me.
Troth I did, as now adaies Batchelers do sware I lou'd thee but indeed married thee for thy wealth.
Sir I beseech you, say not your oths were such, So like falce coyne, being put vnto the touch, Who beare a flourish in the outward show, Of a true stampe, but truely are not so, You swore me loue, I gaue the like to you, Then as a ship being wedded to the sea, Dus either sayle or sinke, euen so must I, You being the hauen to which my hopes must flie.
True Chucke I am thy hauen, and harbor too, And like a ship I took thee, who brings home Treasure As thou to me, the Marchant-venturer.
What riches I am ballast with are yours.
Thats kindly saide now,
If but with sand, as I am but with earth, Being your right of right, you must receiue me, I ha no other lading but my Loue, Which in abundance I willrender you, If other fraught you do expect my store, Ile pay you teares, my riches, are no more.
Howes this? howes this? I hope you do but Iest,
I am Sister to decaied Scarborrow.
Ha.
Whose substance your Inticements did consume.
Worse then an Ague.
Which as you did beleeue so they supposed, Twas fitter for your selfe then for another, To keepe the sister, had vndone the brother.
I am guld by this hand. An old Coni catcher, and beguild; where the pox now are my two Coaches, choise of houses, seuerallsutes, a plague on them, and I knowe not what: Doe you heare Puppet, do you thinke you shal not be damned for this, to Cosen a Gentleman of his hopes, and compell your selfe into Matrimony with a man, whether hee wil or no with you, I ha made a fayre match yfaith, wil any man buy my commodity out of my hand, as God saue me he shall haue her for halfe the money she cost me.
O, ha we met you Sir.
What, turnd Micher, steale a wife, and not make your old friends acquainted with it.
A pox on her, I would you had her.
Wel, God giue you Ioy, we can heare of your good fortune, now tis done, tho we could not be acquainted with it aforehand.
As that you haue two thousand pound a yeare.
Two or three mannor houses.
A wife, faire, rich, and vertuous.
Pretty infaith, very pretty.
Store of Gold.
Plate in abundance.
Better, better, better.
And so many Oxen, that their hornes are able to store al the Cuckolds in your Country.
Do not make me mad good Gentlemen, do not make me mad, I could be made a Cuckold with more patience, then indure this.
Foe we shal haue you turne proud now, grow respectles of your Ancient acquaintance, why Butler told vs of it: Who was the maker of the match for you?
A pox of his furtheraunce, Gentlemen as you are Christians, vex me no more, that I am married I confesse, a plague of the Fates, that wedding and hanging comes by desteny, but for the riches she has brought, beare witnes how Ile rewarde her.
Sir.
Whore, I and Iade, Witch, Ilfacst, stinking-breath, crooked-nose, worse then the Deuill, and a plague on thee that euer I saw thee.
A Comedy, a Comedy.
Whats the meaning of all this, is this the maske after thy marriage.
O Gentlemen, I am vndone, I am vndone, for I am marryed, I that could not abide a Woman, but to make her a whore, hated all Shee-creatures, fayre and poore, swore I would neuer marry but to one that was rich, and to be thus cunnicacht. Who do you thinke this is Gentlemen?
Why your wife, Who should it be else?
Thats my misfortune, that marrying her in hope she was rich, she prooues to be the beggerly Sister to the more beggerly Scarborrow.
How?
Ha, ha, ha.
I, you may laugh, but she shall cry as well as I for't,
Nay, do not weepe.
He dus but counterfeit now to delude vs, he has all her portion of Land, Coyne, Plate, Iewels: and now dissembles thus least we should borrow some Mony of him.
And you be kinde Gentlemen lend me some, for hauing payd the Priest, I ha not so much left in the world, as will higher me a horse to carry me away from her.
But art thou thus guld infaith.
Are you sure you ha eyes in your head.
Why then, By her brothers setting one in my conscience, who knowing thee now to ha somewhat to take to, by the death of thy father, and that hee hath spent her portion, and his owne possessions, hath laid this plot, for thee to marry her, and so he to be rid of her himselfe.
Nay, thats without question, but Ile be reuenged of em both, for you Minxe. Nay Sfut, giue em me, or Ile kicke else.
Good, sweete.
Sweete with a poxe, you stinke in my nose, giue me your Iewels? Nay Bracelets too.
O me, most miserable.
Out of my sight, I and out of my doores, for now, whats within this house is mine, and for your brother He made this match, in hope to do you good, And I weare this for which, shall draw his bloud.
A braue resolution.
In which wele second thee.
Away, whore, Out of my doores whore.
O greefe, that pouerty should ha that power to teare Men from themselues, tho they wed, bed, and sweare.
How now sister.
Vndone, vndone.
Why Mistris, how ist? how ist?
My husband has forsooke me.
O periury.
Has taine my Iewels, and my Bracelets from me.
Vengeance, I playd the theefe for the mony that bought em.
Left me distrest, and thrust mee forth a doores.
Damnation on him, I will heere no more, But for his wrong reuenge me on my brother, Degenerate, and was the cause of all, He spent our portion, and Ile see his fall.
O but Brother.
Perswade me not. All hopes are shipwract, miserie comes on, The comfort we did looke from him is frustrate, All meanes, all maintenance, but griefe is gone. And all shall end by his destruction.
Ile follow and preuent, what in this heat may happen, His want makes sharpe his sword, to greates the ill, If that one brother should another kill.
And what will you do Mistris?
Ile sit me downe, sigh loude in stead of wordes, And wound my selfe with griefe as they with swords. And for the sustenance that I should eate, Ile feed on griefe, tis woes best rellisht meate.
Good hart I pitty you, You shall not be so cruell to your selfe, I haue the poore Seruingmans allowance, Twelue pence adaye to buy me sustenance, One meale aday Ile eate, the totherfast, To giue your wantes reliefe. And Mistris Be this some comfort to your miseries, Ile ha thin cheekes, eare you shall ha wet eyes.
What is prodigallity? Faith like a Brush That weares himselfe to florish others cloathes, And hauing worne his hart euen to the stump, Hees throwne away like a deformed lump. Oh such am I, I ha spent all the wealth My ancestors did purchase, made others braue In shape and riches, and my selfe a knaue. For tho my wealth raisd some to paint their doore, Tis shut against me, saying I am but poore: Nay, euen the greatest arme, whose hand hath grast, My presence to the eye of Maiesty, shrinkes back, His fingers cluch, and like to lead, They are heauy to raise vp my state, being dead. By which I find, spendthriftes, and such am I, Like strumpets florish, but are foule within, And they like Snakes, know when to cast their skin.
Turne, draw, and dye, I come to kill thee.
Whats he that speakes? Like sicknesse: Oh ist you, Sleepe still, you cannot mooue me, fare you well.
Thinke not my fury slakes so, or my bloud Can coole it selfe to temper by refusall, Turne or thou dyest.
Away.
I do not wish to kill thee like a slaue, That taps men in their cups, and broch their harts, Eare with a warning peece they haue wakt their eares, I would not like to powder shoote thee downe, To a flat graue, ere thou hast thought to frowne: I am no Coward, but in manly tearmes, And fayrest oppositions vow to kill thee.
From whence proceedes this heat.
From sparkles bred by thee, that like a villain.
Ha.
Ile hallow it in thine eares till thy soule quake to heare it, That like a villain hast vndone thy brothers.
Would thou wert not so neere me: yet farewell.
By nature, and her lawes make vs a kinne,As neere as are these hands, or sin to sinne. Draw and defend thy selfe, or Ile forget Thou art a man.
Would thou were not my Brother?
I disclaime them.
Are wee not off-spring of one parent wretch.
I do forget it, pardon me the dead, I should deny the paines you bid for me. My blood growes hot for vengeance, thou hast spent My liues reuenewes that our parents purchast.
O do not wracke me with remembrance ont.
Thou hast made my life a Begger in this world, And I will make thee bankrout of thy breath: Thou hast bin so bad, the best I can giue, Thou art a Deuill, not with men to liue.
Then take a Deuils payment.
Hees here, draw Gentlemen.
Die Scarborrow.
Girt round with death.
How set vpon by three, Sfut feare not Brother, you Cowards, three to one, slaues, worse then Fensers that wear long weapons. You shall be fought withall, you shall be fought withall.
Brother I thanke you, for you now haue bin A patron of my life, forget the sinne I pray you, which my loose and wastfull houres, Hath made against your Fortunes, I repent em, And wish I could new ioynt and strength your hopes, Tho with indifferent ruine of mine owne. I haue a many sinnes, the thought of which Like finisht Needles pricke me to the soule, But find your wronges, to haue the sharpest point. If penitence your losses might repayre, You should be rich in wealth, and I in care.
I do beleeue you Sir, but I must tell you,Euils the which are gainst an other done, Repentance makes no satisfaction To him that feeles the smart. Our father sir, Left in your trust my portion: you ha spent it, And suffered me (whilst you in ryots house, A drunken Tauerne, spild my maintainance Perhaps vpon the ground with ouerflowne cups, Like birds in hardest winter halfe starud, to flie) And picke vp any food, least I should die.
I prethee let vs be at peace together.
At peace for what? For spending my inheritance, By yonder sun that euery soule has life by, As sure as thou hast life Ile fight with thee.
Ide not be moou'd vntoot.
Ile kill thee then, wert thou now claspt Within thy mother, wife, or childrens armes.
Wouldst homicide? art so degenerat? Then let my blood grow hot.
For it shall coole.
To kill rather then bee kild is manhoods rule.
Stay let not your wraths meet.
Hart, what makst thou here?
Say who are you, or you, are you not one, That scarce can make a fit distinction Betwixt each other. Are you not Brothers?
I renounce him.
Shalt not need.
Giue way.
Haue at thee,
Who sturs, which of you both hath strength within his arm To wound his owne brest, whose so desperate, To dam himselfe by killing of himselfe, Are you not both one flesh?
Hart, giue me way.
Be not a bar betwixt vs, or by my sword Ile mete thy graue out.
O do, for Gods sake do?Tis happy death, if I may die and you Not murther one another. O do but harken, When dus the Sunne and Moone borne in one frame Contend, but they breed Earthquakes in mens harts: When any starre prodigiously appeares, Tels it not fall of kings or fatall yeares. And then if Brothers fight, what may men thinke, Sinne growes so high, tis time the world should sinke.
My hart growes coole againe, I wish it not.
Stop not my fury, or by my life I sweare, I will reueale the robbery we ha done, And take reuenge on thee, That hinders me to take reuenge on him.
I yeild to that, but neare consent to this, I shall then die as mine owne sinne affords, Fall by the law, not by my Brothers swords.
Then by that light that guids me here I vow, Ile straight to Sir Iohn Harcop, and make knowne We were the two that robd him.
Prethy do.
Sin has his shame, and thou shalt ha thy due.
Thus haue I shewne the nature of a Brother, Tho you haue prou'd vnnaturall to me. Hees gone in heate to publish out the theft, Which want and your vnkindnes forcst vs to, If now I die that death and publicke shame, Is a Corsiue to your soule, blot to your name.
O tis too true, theres not a thought I thinke, But must pertake thy greefes, and drinke A rellish of thy sorrow and misfortune. With waight of others teares I am ore borne, That scarse amto hold vp mine owne, And al to good for me. A happy Creature In my Cradle, and haue made my selfe The common curse of mankind by my life, Vndone my Brothers, made them theeues for bread, And begot pretty children to liue beggers, O Conscience, how thou are stung to thinke vpont,My Brothers vnto shame must yeeld their blood, My Babes at others stirrops beg their food, Or else turne theeuesto, and be choakt fort, Die a Dogs death, be percht vpon a tree, Hang betwixt heauen and earth, as fit for neither, The curse of heauen thats due to reprobates, Discends vpon my Brothers, and my children, And I am parent to it, I, I am parent to it.
Where are you Sir?
Why starest thou, whats thy hast?
Heeres felowes swarme like flies to speake with you.
What are they?
Snakes I thinke Sir, for they come with stinges in theyr mouths, and their tongues are turnd to teeth to: They claw Villanously, they haue eate vp your honest name, and honourable reputation by railing against you, and now they come to deuoure your possessions.
In playner Euargy, what are they, speake?
Mantichoras, monstrous beastes, enemies to mankinde, that ha double rowes of teeth in their mouthes. They are Vsurers, they come yawning for mony, & the Sheriffe with them, is come to serue an extent vppon your Lande, and then cease on your bodie by force of execution, they ha begirt the house round.
So that the roofe our Auncestors did build For their sonnes comfort, and their wiues for Charity, I dare not to looke out.
Besides Sir, heres your poore children.
Poore children they are indeede.
Come with fire and water: teares in their eies, and burning greefe in their harts, and desire to speake with you.
Heape sorrow vpon sorrow? Tell me, are My brothers gone to execution? For what I did, for euery haynous sin, Sits on his soule by whom it did begin. And so did theirs by me. Tell me withall, My children carry moysture in their eyes, Whose speaking drops, say father, thus must weAske our reliefe, or die with infamy, For you ha made vs beggers. Yet when thy tale has kild me to giue my passage comfort from this stage, Say all was done by inforst marriage: My graue will then be welcome.
What shall we do sir?
Do as the deuill dus, hate panther-mankind, And yet I lie: for deuils sinners loue, When men hate men, tho good like some aboue.
Your wifes come in sir.
Thou lyest, I ha not a wife. None can be cald, True man and wife, but those whom heauen instald. Say,
O my deere husband?
You are very welcome, peace: wele ha complement. Who are you Gentlewoman.
Sir your distressed wife, and these your children.
Mine? Where, how begot: Proue me by certaine instance thats deuine, That I should call them lawful, or thee mine.
Were we not marryed sir?
No, tho we heard the words of Ceremonie, But had hands knit as fellons that weare fetters Forst vpon them. For tell me woman, Did ere my Loue with sighs intreat thee mine, Did euer I in willing conference, Speake words, made halfe with teares that I did loue thee. Or was I euer But glad to see thee as al Louers are. No, no, thou knowst I was not.
O me.
The mores the pitty.
But when I came to Church, I did there stand All water, whose forcst breach had drownd my Land, Are you my wife, or these my children? Why tis impossible, for like the skies, Without the sunnes light, so looke al your eies, Darke, Clowdy, thicke, and ful of heauines,Within my Country there was hope to see Me and my yssue to be like our fathers, Vpholders of our Country, al our life, Which should ha bin, if I had wed a wife. Where now, As dropping leaues in Autume you looke al, And I that should vphold you like to fal,
Twas, nor, shal be my fault, Heauen bear me witnes.
Thou lyest? strumpet thou lyest?
O Sir.
Peace sawcie Iacke, strumpet I say thou lyest, For wife of mine thou art not, and these thy Basterds Whom I begot of thee, with this vnrest, That Bastards borne, are borne not to be Blest
One me poure al your wrath, but not on them.
On thee, and them, fortis the end of lust, To scourge it selfe, heauen lingring to be iust: Harlot.
Husband.
Bastardes.
Father.
What hart not pitties this?
Euen in your Cradle, you were accurst of heauen, Thou an Adulteresse in thy married armes. And they that made the match, bawds to thy lust: I, now you hang the heade, shouldst ha done so before, Then these had not bin Bastards, thou a whore.
I cannot brookt no longer, Sir you doe not well in this?
Ha slaue.
Tis not the aime of gentry to bring forth, Such harsh vnrellisht fruit vnto their wiues, And to their pretty pretty children by my troth.
How rascall.
Sir I must tel you, your progenitors Two of the which these yeares were seruant to, Had not such mists before their vnderstanding, Thus to behaue themselues.
And youle controule me sir.
I, I, will.
You rogue.
I, tis I, will tel you tis vngently done Thus to defame your wife, abuse your children, Wrong them, you wrong your selfe, are they not yours?
Pretty, pretty Impudence infaith.
Her whom your are bound to loue, to raile against, These whom you are bound to keepe, to spurne like dogs, And you were not my maister, I would tell you.
What slaue.
Put vp your Bird-spit, tut I feare it not, In doing deeds so base, so vild as these, Tis but a Kna, kna, kna.
Roge.
Tut howsoeuer, tis a dishonest part, And in defence of these I throwoff duty
Good Butler.
Peace honest Mistris, I will say you are wronged, Proue it vpon him euen in his blood, his bones, His guts, his Maw, his Throat, his Intrals.
You runnagate of threescore,
Tis better then a knaue of three and twenty.
Patience be my Buckler, As not to file my hands in villaines blood, You knaue Slaue-trencher-groome Who is your maister?
You if you were a maister.
Off with your coate then, get you forth a dores.
My cote sir.
I your coat slaue?
Sfut when you hate, tis but a thred-bare coat, And there tis for you: know that I scorne To weare his Liuery is so worthy borne, And liue so base a life, old as I am, Ile rather be a begger then your man, And theres your seruice for you.
Away, out of my doore: Away. So, now your Champions gone, Minx thou hadst better ha gone quick vnto thy graue.
O me, that am no cause of it.
Then haue subornd that slaue to lift his hands against me.
O me, what shall become of me?
Ile teach you tricks for this, ha you a companion.
My hart not suffer me to leaue my honest Mistris and hir pretty children.
Ile marke thee for a strumpet, and thy Bastards.
What will you do to them Sir.
The Deuill in thy shape come backe againe.
No, but an honest seruant Sir wil take this cote, And weare it with this sword to sauegard these, And pitty them, and I am wo for you, But will not suffer The husband Viper-like to pray on them That loue him, and haue cherisht him as these, As they haue you.
Slaue.
I will not humour you, Fight with you, and loose my life or these Shal tast your wrong whom you are bound to loue.
Out of my doores slaue.
I will not, but wil stay and weare this coat, And do you seruice whether you will or no. Ile weare this sword to, and be Champion, To fight for her in spight of any man.
You shall. You shall be my maister Sir.
No, I desire it not, Ile pay you duty euen vpon my knee, But loose my life, ere these opprest Ile see.
Yes goodman slaue, you shal be master, Lie with my wife, and get more Bastards, do, do ,do.
O me.
Turnes the world vpside downe, that men orebeare theyr Maisters, It dus, it dus. For euen as Iudas sold his Maister Christ, Men buy and sell their wiues at highest price, What wil you giue me? what wil you giue me? what wil you giue me?O, Mistris, My soule weeps, tho mine eyes be dry, To see his fall and your aduersity, Some meanes I haue left, which Ile releeue you with, Into your chamber, and if comfort be a kin To such great greefe, comfort your children.
I thanke thee Butler, heauen when he please, Send death vnto the troubled a blest ease.<|endoftext|>What, is it so broad day? God send vs the light of Heauen.Hoe! who is in the inner Chamber? how now Maidens, heere you not? are you deafe?
I am heere Madam.
Why doe you suffer me to sleepe so long? I am ashamed of my selfe truely,
I came heather soft and faire, once or twice, to see if you were awaked, and seeing you a sleepe I durst not awake you, but it is not so late as you thinke.
What is it a clocke?
it is but halfe an houre past seauen.
what is it so farre day? Oh God! I went to bed yesternight so timely, thinking to rise this morning, at y=e= farthest at 6. a clock: now I verifie in me the graue speeches of that great Philosopher the Emperorspeaking of the vnsatiablenes of mankinde, when he said (among other things) the more I sleep, the more I would sleep. Go too go too, draw the windowe Curtaines: call my Page, let him bring some wood to my Chamber doore, make a fier quickly that I may rise.
Page where are you? what are you not readye? I thinke you must hauea Chamberlaine.
How now? what haue you seene this morning? hath your Louer broken promise with you? how sharp you are! how wel you play the Mistresse? my Lady could not chide better, what ayleth you?
I crye you mercye sir, haue I offended you? one may not speake to you, but with reuerence, you haue forgotten your last beating, you haue great need that my Lady remember you, it is so long since shee made you be whipped: will it please you to fetch some wood? bring some faggots and billets, forget not a bauen, and see that it be drye, for the faggots are too greene, lay them at the Chamber doore, & come not in the chamber vntil my Lady be vp, or that you be called, hasten you.
O God! how long you make me tarrye! kindle the fire quickly, warme my smocke, and giue it me. Where is Ioly? call her:
she commeth Madame Mistresse Iolye, My Ladye calleth you in great hast:
Good Lord! what shall I doe? she will chide me, I pray thee sweet heart, help me a little to put on my gowne, giue me that Rebato as it is, I will pin it anone, I haue not leysure to doe it now: I cannotfinde my Kertle nor my aprone, I giue you great thankes, I will an other time, doe so much for you.
Mend that same a little, that hangeth behinde you.
I am well enough I will dresse my selfe better anone. let me goe, I heare my Ladye call.
Will you keepe me heere all the day? where be all my thinges? goe fetch my cloathes: bring my petty-coate bodyes: I meane my damask quilt bodies with whale bones, what lace doe you giue me heere? this lace is too shorte, the tagges are broken, I cannot lace my selfe with it, take it away, I will haue that of greene silke: when shall I haue my vnder coate? giue me my peticoate of wroughtCrimson veluet with siluer fringe: why doe you not giue me my night gowne? for I take colde: where be my stockens? giue me some cleane sockes, I will haue no woorsted hosen, showe me my Carnation silke stockins: where laide you last night my garters? take away these slippers, giue me my veluet pantofles; send for the shoomaker that he may haue againe these turn-ouer shooes, for they be too high Put on my white pumpes: let them vp I will none of them: Giue me rather my Spanish leather shooes, for I will walketo day, This shooing-horne hurteth me, Can you not put them on with the furre? Tye the strings with a strong double knot, for feare they vntye them-selues: Iolye, come dresse my head, set the Table further from the fire, it is too neere. Put my chayre in his place, Why doe you not set my great looking glasse on the table? It is too high, set the supporter lower, Vndoe my night attire: Why doe you not call the Page to warme the rubbers? let him be called: heere sirra warme that, and take heed you burne it not. I praye you Iolye rubbe well my head, for it is very full of dandrife, are not my combes in the case? Where is my Iuorye combe? Combe mee with the boren combe: Giue me first my combing cloth, otherwise you will fill me full of haires, the haires will fall vpon my cloathes, Combe backe-ward, O God! you combe too harde, you scratch me, you pull out my hayres, can you not vntangle them softly with your handes before you put the combe to it?
will it please you to rise vp a little Madame? For your haires are so long, that they trayle on the ground
My daughter Fleurimonde is like me in that,hath she not faire haires, what say you of it?
Truly Madame she hath the fayrest, the longest flaxen-couler haires that one can see, there needeth no curling of them, for they are curled of themselues, In truth she hath the fayrest head of haires that euer I sawe.
I like her the better for it, it is a thing verye comely for a woman, and assaith, It is an Ornament vnto her, but whilst we prattle, we forget that the time goeth away: go too, I am combed enough. Page, take the combe-brushes, and make cleane my combes, take heed you doe not make them cleane with those that I vse to my head: take a quill to take away the filth from them, and then put them in the case, that none be missing: go too, make an end of dressing my head.
What doth it please you to weare to day Madame? will it please you to weare your haires onely, or els to haue your French whood?
giue me my whood, for me thinketh it is some-what colde, and I haue a rewme which is falne on the left side of my head, But tarrye, what weather is it?
Truely Madame it seemeth that this day will be the fayrest day that hath bene this great while.
I perceiue that you would haue me to take another attyre, and for to please you, I am content of it, but if I be sicke thereby, I will laye the blame on you.
Noe with the grace of God Madame.
Set vp then my French whood and my Border of Rubies, giue me an other head attyre: take the key of my closet, and goe fetch my long boxe where I set my Iewels (for to haue them out) that I vse to weare on my head, what is become of my wyer? where is the haire cap? haue you any ribans to make knots? where be the laces for to binde my haires? go too Page giue me some water to wash, where's my muske ball? giue me rather my paste of Almonds, for it scoureth better: where is my piece of Scarlet to wipe my face? giue me that napkin: now set on my Carkenet of precious stones: call my Taylor to bring my gowne, not the close one, but my open gowne of white Sattin layd on with buttons of Pearle. Prudence, giue me my bracelets of Aggathes Shall I haue no vardingale? you remember nothing, you haue a Coneyes memorye, you lose it in running, go too you head-braine fellowe, Page hear you? you doe but playe the foole, doe you not see that I want my buske? what is become of the buske-poynt?
what dooth itplease you to haue Madame, a ruffe band or a Rebato?
Let me see that ruffe, How is it that the supporter is so soyled? I knowe not for what you are fit, that you cannot so much as to keep my cloathes cleane: I beleeue that the meanest woman in this towne, hath her apparel in better order then I haue: take it away giue me my Rebato of cut-worke edged, is not the wyer after the same sorte as the other? It is great wonder if it be any thing better, Me think it is now time that you should knowe how to serue. Is there no small pinnes for my Cuffes? Looke in the pinne-cushen. Pinne that with a blacke pinne, giue me my girdle and see that all the furniture be at it: looke if my Cizers, the pincers, the pen-knife, the knife to close Letters, with the bodkin, the ear-picker and my Seale, be in the case: where is my pursse to weare vpon my gowne? and see that my siluer Comfet box be full of Comfets: haue I a cleane handkercher? I will haue no Muffe, for it is not colde, but shall I haue no gloues? Bring my maske and my fanne, Help me to put on my Chayne of pearles. Page come hether, goe to my Ladye of, haue me most humblye commended vnto her, & tell her that if she haueno greater busines, if it pleaseth her to take the paines to come & dyne with vs, & bring with her, her Sister Mistresse, they shall be most hartilie welcome, and whome so euer it shall please them to bring w=t=them, & we will do something this after noone for to recreate vs and passe the time: goe your wayes, bring me an answer forth-with: and you Prudence set vp all my night-geare, put them in the cushen cloath dresse my chamber, & then goe aske Mistresse(my Daughters Mistresse) if they be readye? Bid her bring with her to me in the gallerie,&with their worke. Iolye come with me, carye with you my prayer-booke and my Psalter, first goe to the boyes chamber, see if they be readie: come againe by and by, to the end that I be not alone, you shall finde me in the gallerie.
Who knocketh there?
It is I M. Clemence,
Come in, the doore is not locked nor bolted.
God giue you good morrowe Gentle-women: good morrowe Mistresse Clemence:
And to you also Prudence, what newes? doe you bring vs anye newes? is my Mother vp?
Vp! she is alreadie in the gallery, she hath sent me to knowe if you were readie, She biddeth you you three to come to her, and that yo bring your worke with you
Did not I tell you so? in truth it grieueth me verye much to see you so sluggish. I haue called you an houre before you began to rise, you will force me in the end to complaine to my Ladye your mother: it is a thing vndecent and vnwholsome, for young people to lye a bed so long: go too mistresse Charlot, your eldest sister is readie, are not you so yet?
I pray youdoe not tell my mother and you shall see that heer-after we shalbe more dilligent, not-with-standing I am readie doe you not remember the Prouerbe which my Brother tolde vs the other day, that to rise early is not the best chance but to breake-fast is the surest thing? Sister where be our workes? I forgot my needle case, take the silke, the bottome of threed, the cruel is not vntwyned it is all one, let vs goe when you please, but tary a little, I haue not my siluer thimble, it is within my worke-boxe.
I Beseech you Mother pray to God to blesse me and giue me your blessing, if it pleaseth you.
I pray the strong Almightie God to increase his graces in you, and to blesse you. I meruaile verie much that French-men (which bring vp and teach their Children so well) doe not make them to aske their parentes blessing (I meane their fathers and mothers) seeing that it is a thing that hathhath bene vsed by the holy Patriarches,And also thatsaith, that the blessing of the father, doth strengthen the houses of the children, and that the mothers cursse doth roote out the foundation thereof: What say you to it mistresse Clemence?
Madame, y=e= fathers & mothers in France doe not neglect to pray to God for their Children, and although they vse not the outward Cerimonie, yet they doe blesse them, and without doubt, God heareth their Prayers, and maketh the children to prosper.
But yet a thing is of small value, if it be not worth the asking: And although it is the part of fathers & mothers (truely Christians) to haue care of their childrens education, and to pray zealously for them, and also to prouide them necessary thinges for this temporall life, (Otherwise they should be worse then Infidels and the fowles of the ayre) Yet it is the childrens duetye to require it in all humblenes: but enough of that. If French-men doe amisse therein, we neglect (it may be) manye other good customes w=c=they do obserue. Now Fleurimond, haue you prayed to God to day?
Yes forsooth mother.
It is well done, for (assaith in the first verse of the first of his Quadrins)God first of all, then honour father and mother: which agreethvery well with this sentence: Set God before, then let vs care for our selues. which is as much to say, that the first care we ought to haue, is to serue God, and then after to care for transitorie thinges, but note well that which I tell you: Go too Charlote, where is your minde? fixe my Instruction in your memorye. I say that so soone as one doth awake, yea euen at the breake of day, we must praise God, according to an other Quadrin of that honorable and learned personage before-named: which followeth. At peepe of day, rise and praise God, Let this first worke appeere: At night leaue worke, and praise God to, And thus spend all the yeere. So that we ought to begin and end the day, yea our yeeres, by one same thing: that is, to serue and praise God. When you haue some more knowledge in the french tongue, I will that your Master make you to learne by heart,Quadrins, for they be full of erudition and rich sentences. I pray you Mist. Clemence, and I doe charge you, aboue allthings, that you stir them to the seruice of God. Youth is bound to haue in reuerence their Maisters.and all those which teach them to good, for they are to them as second fathers and mothers: yeathe great did preferre his Maisterto his Father Phillip, in as much that he had receiued but life of his father, & of, he had the meanes and knowledge to liue wel, for there is one same resemblance betweene the not being, & the euill being, sauing that, that which is not, getteth no euill fame, and is not in danger of eternall torment, but he which hath a bad being, or is wicked, is subiect to both:Therefore it is a good conclusion, that it were better to be vnborne then vntaught vertuously and Christianly. I put to your iudgement how much they shall haue one day to answere that haue charge of those young impes, which in steed to prop them & keep straight, leaue them to take such foldes as they list, so that when they haue taken growth, it is easier to breake them, or vnroot them altogether, then to redresse the~: I say not this for you, mistresse Clemence, for we haue made choise of you, as of one which hath both sufficiencie and will, to discharge faithfully your duetie.And I hope that we shall not be found faultie for our Iudgement therein. Fleurimond, showe me your worke: is this your Cut-work? me thinketh that there is somewhat amisse: I espie a fault in it, the edge is reasonablie well made: is this your net-worke? see how she frowneth! if I begin with you I will make you leaue that frowning: & you Charlote where is your work? are your tapistrie cushens ended?
I haue but one cushen to do. I lacke silke, I know not what is become of y=e= cushen canuas all my golde and siluer is done, I want more blacke yarne, I haue not enough of blewe cruell.
Aske some of the Steward or of the purs-bearer: but you mistres Clemence buye some your selfe, for you knowe better the price of such things then they: I pray you let the~ haue what is fit for them, to the end they lose no time, for time lost is neuer recouered. At what houres do your Maisters come?
Our dauncing Maister commeth about nine a clocke: our singing Master, and he that teacheth vs to play on the virginalles, at tenne: he that teacheth vs on the Lute and the Violl de Gambo, at foure a clocke in the after noone: and our French Mastercommeth commonly betweene seauen and eight a clocke in the morning.
It is then time that you goe studie your lessons, to the end you may say them well when he commeth: haue you broken your fast to day?
Yes Mother.
Now goe in Gods name, whome I praye to fill you with his graces. I goe to the Nurces chamber, to see your brethren.
God giue you good morrowe Gentlewomen.
And to you also Sir, How doe you to day?
Well at your commaundement: And you, how is it with you this morning?
Very well thanks be to God: What is it a clocke? it seemeth that you come some what later then you were wont:
Pardon me Mistresse, it is but halfe an houre past seauen: Now can you say your lessons?
Truly Sir without lying,we cannot say them verye well, it is best to speake the truth, for though we should say otherwise, you will see the contrarye, and then we should commit a double faulte.
Go too, let vs see what you can doe: where be your bookes?
Sister Charlote, I pray you goe fetch our bookes, bring our French Garden, and all our other bookes.
I cannot finde them, where did you set them yesterday?
Good God! what a short memorie you haue? did you not carye them your selfe into our Closet?
You say true, they are vpon the table, I will goe fetch them: holde, heere they be all. Sir will it please you sit downe at the tables end? my Sister shall sit on the other side, and I heere, to th'end you may heare vs the better: heere is a Chayre and a cushen, giue me a stoole:
God be with you then my good faire Cosins, seeing that you goe to excercise your French, I will be gone, for feare I hinder you.
No forsooth you shall not let vs at all, goe not awaye for that, the Gentle-women are glad of your companye, you shall help them to say their lessons, at least you may iudge how well they pronounce and learne:Will it please you to take your place by them? now in the name of God let vs begin. Mistres Fleurimond read first, speake somewhat lowder, to th'end I may heare if you pronounce well: say that worde againe. Wherefore do you sound that? Doe you not knowe that it must be left? well, it is well said, read with more facilitie, without taking such paines: doe not haste so much: do you not hurt your stomacke against the boord? Holde your booke higher, or els set it on a cushen: well, you haue read enough, Construe me that, what is that? do you vnderstand that? tell me the signification in English,
Truly Sir I cannot tell it, I vnderstand it not, I beseech you tell it me, and I will remember it against an other time.
Giueme your paper and I will write it, to th'end you forget it not. This paper sinckes: The Incke is too white: your penne is naught.
I pray you Sir mend it me.
Giue me then your penknife, for I cannot cut it with my fingers.
You cannot doe it without your fingers.
You say true, nor without penknife neither. This penknife cutteth nothing, I goe to whet it: now I finde the penne good,trye if it be good for you.
It is too small: it writes somewhat too bigge,
Truly Cousin, you tryumph: In hearing you speake, one would take you for a French-woman, you speake it so well. Go too little Cousin Charlet, let vs heare how daintily you speake: can you speake French?
Not yet verye well:
How call you in french, my great gra~father my great gra~mother, My granfather, my granmother, my grandchilde (both man & woman) my father, my mother, my sonne, my daughter, my brother, my Sister, my vnkle, my aunt, my nephew, My neese, my cousin germaine, my she cousin germaine, my gossip, my she gossip, My Godson my Goddaughter, my Godfather, My Godmother, my cousin germaine remooued, My she cousin germaine remoued, my sonne in law (that hath maried my daught.) my daughter in lawe (y=t= hath maried my sonne) My father in lawe, my mother in lawe, My stepfather, my stepmother. My sonne in law (that is my wifes or husbands sonne), My daughter in lawe (of the same degree,) My brother in lawe, my sister in lawe, My kinsmen, my kinswomen, my friendes, My she friends, my friend, my she friend, My allyedsme~, my allyeds-wome~, my neighbor, my she neighbor, my neighbors, my she neighborsa Midwife, a woman keeper, A man seruant, A woman seruant, The seruing men, the seruing women:
Truly I knowe not, I pray you speake English, for truely I vnderstand you not, I haue not practised it so long as my Sister, I doe but begin to learne.
Ther is beginning in all thinges: You cannot goe vp to your chamber but you must passe the first step, and so from step to step, you come in the end to the height of it.
mistres Charlote, will it please you to read?
When it pleaseth you Sir, I am readie to read.
And I to heare you: begin, for the time tarieth not for vs, Say that againe: doe not force your voyce, onely obserue your rules, and read as though you should read english: doe you not see that this worde endeth byfeminine? & th'other word following beginneth by a vowell? why doe you sound that, then? Mistres Fleurimond, heare her read, and tell her when she misseth, that will proffit you as much as if you should read your selfe, for by the teaching of an other, one doth instruct himselfe. I shall see also thereby, how youremember your rules: doe you not see that she hath missed there?
Sister, doe not pronounce, in this worde, not, in this worde, but rather as if it were written, and,
You did note that very well.
God giue you good morowe MasterDoe not stirre, keepe your place, How doe your Scholers learne? All by leisure, not making ouer-much haste, They be full of conscience, They will not take too much for their money, But we knowe you are an honest man, and therefore our trust is, that you will set them forward, as much as you can.
Verily Madame, You haue no cause to reprooue them of negligence, for (though I speake it before them) it is no flattery to say the truth: yea it is as badly done to neglect prayse where it is due (seeing it is to a good spirit, a sting to pricke him forward to doe good) as shame to praise where praise is not deserued, They take as much paine as any other Gentlewomen that I know, and therfore I assure you (and beseech you to beleeue me, for I would tell you if it were otherwise) that there wanteth no diligence in them.
So it is for all that, that I was not so long a learning as Fleurimonde, and yet I speake it reasonably well, It might serue my turne at need.
Madame you speake it naturally well, and truly I reioyce my selfe very much also, for that Mistres Fleurimond speaks it so well, although that the prayses therof ought to be attributed rather to her good spirite, then to my sufficiencie in teaching.
You would praise him that hath taught me.
Both you and he deserue great prayses.
Well, good MasterI goe where I thought before to goe.
Gentlewomen, haue I giuen you newe lessons?
Yea sir.
And you Mistris Fleurimonde, Haue I showed you that which you haue to write out of English into French?
Yea sir.
Mistris Charlotte, haue you declined your verbes?
Yea sir.
Then we haue done all for this day, and so I will take my leaue from you, and bid you farewell vntill we meete againe.
God be with you sir vntil to morow, But I pray you to come to morowe, somwhat timelyer (if you can) because I beleeue that my mother will goe forth,and we shall goe with her.
Well Gentlewomen, I will come as soone as I may.
Is this he which teacheth you to speake French?
Yes, doe you not see it? how doe you like him? is he not sufficient to teach?
I can finde no faulte in it.
I beleeue you, but yet what say you of him?
I beleeue he did neuer Traffike in the East countries, nor was euer a silke Merchant.
I vnderstand you well, it is because he is so plainely cloathed:
Doth he not feare that your cloathes should marre his? Me thinketh that some gallant fellowe and braue withall, would be fitter to teach Gentlewomen of so good a house, and of such qualityes as you are.
Cousen, you deceiue your selfe, It is not the weed y=t=maketh the monke, all they that are clothed with silke and are braue, are not alwaies the most sufficient; often-times more learning is found in one meanely apparailed, then in them that haue but an outward brauerie: would to God you would speak to him, he wold tel you wel enough that though he be in Canuas, yet he is no Sonne to a wind-mil. My mother hath folowed the counsaile of Esope, she hath not so much regarded the outward showe, asthe spirit, and hath chosen vs, rather, a Man of vnderstanding without silke, then a silken man without vnderstanding: otherwise, some horse-keeper that neuer did any thing els then dresse his horses, might haue bene sufficient to teach vs. Truly tis a vice which beareth to much sway in our time, that one doth respect more the gilding of the body, then the riches of the minde. So that one be brauely apparailed, it booteth not: one passeth euery where. Indeed I held you for a man of better iudgement, But what? you followe the vulgar.
Truely Cousin you are well worthy to haue a good and sufficient Master, He which you haue, is infinitely beholding vnto you, for the good opinio~ you haue of him, but I hope you will not take in euill parte that which I haue said.
Wel, wel, I forgiue you, condicionally that heerafter you beare more respect to the vertue of the persons (if you can iudge therof) the~ to their magnifical swagering.
Will it please you to co~maund me any seruice?
No Cousin, I will not presume to commaund, but I pray you that we may haue your Company at dinner.
You shall excuse me for this day, therefore I bid you farwell.
I am sureyou will not goe before you take your leaue of my mother.
where is my Lady? I know not where to goe finde her.
Sister Charlote, I pray you goe tell my mother that my Cousin of Petit-sence, will be gone, you shall finde her in the Nurces chamber, or with my bretheren.
Well Sister I goe, but keepe him then vntill I come againe, I will not tarye.
You are come againe very soone, what saith she?
Cousin, she hath charged me not onely to pray you, but also to lay her commaundement, that you goe not vntill she hath spoken with you.
Well, then I dare not disobey, Seeing that it is her pleasure.
Good morrowe Nurce.
God giue you good morrowe Madame.
How now, how doth the childe?
He is fayre and plumpe, and doth very wel thanks be to God, sauing y=t=he hath bin somwhat waiward the last night.
Hath he so?what shold aile him? it may be he hath some tooth a growing, is he in his cradle? see if he sleepeth,
He is full awaken Madame.
He is not yet made readie is he?
No Madame, I haue let him sleepe all this morning.
Vnswaddle him, vndoe his swadling bands, giue him his breakefast whilst I am heere, make his pappe, take away that fierbrand w=c=smoketh for it will taste of the smoke, where is his little spoone? wash him before me, haue you cleane water?my little hart!God blesse thee, Rub the crowne of his head, wash his eares, and put some fine clout behinde them, to thend to keepe them drye and cleane, wash his face: Lift vp a little his haires, Is not that same durt that I see vpon his forehead? his browes are very round, What hath he vpon his ey-lids? me thinks that his eyes are some what watrish, make the~ cleane: how quick is his ey-ball, hath he not a pimple vpon his nose? his little cheekes are wet, I beleeue you did leaue him alone to crye and weepe: picke his nosthrils, wipe his mouth and his lips, How many teeth hath he? his gummes be sore, Showe me his tongue, let me see the pallet of his mouth, he hath a prettie chin, What a faire necke he hath! pull off his shirty=u=art prety & fat my litle darling, wash his armepits: what ayleth his elboe?what an arme he hath! his hand-wrist is very small: open his right hand: the palme of his left hand is all on water, did he sweat? how he spreadeth his small fingers! his thumbe and little finger are Flea-bitten, for the blacke spots are there yet, is there any Fleas in your Chamber? pare his nayles, for feare he scratch him selfe when his armes be free, put a linnen vpon his breast, His nauill is red, is it sore?let him pisse, ah little knaue, you will showe that you haue a yarde: his littlepurse is not flaggish, it is a signe that he is in health. His knees are very round, he hath a worme at the right knee, see if he hath none on the left, lay him on his belly, that I may see his backe. His shoulders are euen, I cannot see his ribbes, Turne him from the one side to the other, that I may see him on both sides, His little buttockes are fleshie, he is so well fed, that I can see no bones of his, his skin is so white and cleere, that the veynes are seene: Oh! what little mans thighes be these? he will haue good legges, wash the calues of his legges vpwards: wipe his shinnes, he hath rubbed one foote against the other,for his anckle bone is fleyed, See how he beateth with his heeles, doe you kicke sirha? you haue not washed the insides nor the soles of his feete, Forget not to make cleane his toes, the great toe and all, now swadle him againe,But first put on his biggin and his little band with an edge, where is his little petticote? giue him his coate of changeable taffata, and his sattin sleeues: Where is his bibbe? let him haue his gathered Aprone with stringes, and hang a Muckinder to it: you need not yet to giue him his Corall with the small golden chayne, for I beleeue it is better to let him sleepe vntill the after noone, giue him some sucke, I pray you take heed to wipe well the nipple of your dugge before you put it in his mouth, for feare that there be any haire or other thing which may hurt him. You mayd, goe fetch the childes cradle, make his bed, where is his pillowe? seeke a cleane pillow-bere, Set on the couerlet, now put him in his cradle and rocke him till he sleepe, but bring him to me first that I may kisse him: God send thee good rest my little boykin. I pray you good Nurce haue a care of him.
Dout not of it Madame with the grace of God.
Well then, God be with you till anon.
Open the doore here: How now Children what doe you? You holde your bookes, it is well done.
I beseech you Madame giue me your blessing if it pleaseth you:
My Children, Seeing it hath pleased God (the onely giuer of all good) who might haue made me some bace creature and of no dignitie, to call me to that degree: I am a Lady to all, but mother specially to my Children, therefore the sweetest and most pleasant name that they can giue me, is to call me Mother. I pray God to heap his blessings on you: haue you saluted your Father to day?
Yes Mother.
Where is your Master?
He is in his studie Mother.
Rene, goe tell him that I am heere.
Master my mother is in our chamber, and she would speake with you.
God giue you good morrowe Madame.
Good morrowe Master Champ-porte-aduis, I come to visit you this Morning, and am very glad to finde your Schollers so well employed as to their Bookes, as I perceiue you doe not keep them idle, wherefore I like you the better, For there is nothing more hurtfull, not onely to youth, but also to all sortes of persons, then idlenes, for it is the inuenter and mother of all euils. You knowe wherefore they are put to your charge, which is, not onely to teach them in the Grammer & the Latin tongue, but also to bring them vp in good maners, and to aduise them of their duties, and therefore I dout not but that the first thing you make them to do, is to pray to God: come hether Guy, haue you said your prayers this morning?
Yes Mother.
And you also Rene?
Yes Mother, so soone as we are risen and haue put on our cloathes, and that we haue washed, our Master maketh vs to say prayers, and to read a Chapter in the Bible, to repeat some Sentences out of Cicero or some other good Author, Then we goe to breake-fast, hauing broken fast we studie our lessons, as you haue found vs.
Go too, read me this Chapter: softe, read leysurely,You make too much haste: doe you not knowe that haste makes waste?
I haue done Mother, I am at the end of the Chapter.
You haue read, but it is not enough to read. They that be wise, doe read for their Instruction, & not for the sound of wordes onely, you are passed your A, B, C. that one giueth to little Children for to learne to pronounce and sound the wordes, You must be better then Parrots, which doe pronounce some wordes as well as we doe, and yet are neuer the wiser for want of intellgence: Haue you remembred and do you vnderstand y=t=which you haue read? Otherwise you are no better then a Parrot. I remember I haue heard your Master tell you once, this Latin Sentence:. Which is as much to say (as I take it) To read and not vnderstand, is an vnprofitable thing: therefore haue regarde when you read, to conceiue your reading, to make profit by it, otherwise you read in vaine and doe nothing but lose time.Master Champorte-aduis, it seemeth vnto me, that they which haue youth vnder their gouernment, ought to doe as the good Phisitions, that sound the bodies of their Pacients: and if they finde them in danger to fall into some sicknes, doeminister vnto them preseruatiues to preuent it. In like sorte the parents and masters ought to search diligently, if their Children be adicted to any vice, to free them fro~ the same, euen from their youth, before they be ouermuch rooted in them. I pray you to tell me the truth) for I am not any of those foolish mothers, which will neuer beleue any imperfections of children, but like the she Ape, It seems vnto them that they be aboue al other faire and perfect) doe you finde any bad inclination in mine?
In truth Madame, I see them not giuen to any lewd vice, somtimes there is a litle iealousie, specially when I praise one of them, for hauing said his lesson better then the other, but not that they enter into any variance for it.
O, if there be but an Emulation who shall doe best, it is not to be reproued, for it is generositie, but if one be enuious of the others good, that proceedeth from a bad nature, and therefor that spot is intollerable. Guy and Rene, come neere to me, which of you write best?
It is my brother Mother.
Holde then Guy, there is an Inke-horne gilt, furnished of all things necessarie, that I giue you, to thendto encourage you to learne the better.
I most humbly thanke you Mother, truely it is faire.
Rene what say you of your Brothers Inke-horne? are you sorye for it?
Truely mother I am not sorye that he hath it, neuertheles if I had the like I would be the gladder: beleue me that I enuye him not, but I hope that (euen as he excelleth me in writing) I will excell him shortly in some other matter, and then you will giue me also something as good as it or better.
Well, I shall see (God willing) how you will profit, notwithstanding you ought to be as glad of your brothers good, as of your owne, if I thought that you should enuie him for it, I would cause you to be whipt very soundly, for you must knowe, that there is nothing more absurd, nor blockish then enuye. Doe you lose any thing of the good that an other hath? it did not belong vnto you, nor you were not possesser of it, You haue then neuer a whit the lesse, wherfore should you grieue at it then? the enuious Man doth harme to none but himselfe, For (as the rust eateth yron, so) Enuie eateth the enuious men, and you shall neuer see any but fooles, that are enuious of an others happines.
But Madame,I had forgotten to tell you that your sonne Guy is somwhat slowe to rise in the morning, for one must call him three or foure times before he come out of his bed, I haue thought good to tell it you before his face, specially at this time, to the end it may please you to take the paine to tell him his lesson, as well as to his yonger brother.
Is it true? truly M. Champorte-aduis, the greatest faulte is in you, it is but a benumming of the limbes that he hath, which you ought to supply, in annointing him w=t= the iuice of Birch, which is excellent for such a cure, & if you apply it but twice or thrice, You shall see a meruailous operation, But if your medicine be not of force, let me knowe it, & I will make him such a morning song, y=t=it wil awake him in all diligence & hasten him more then a good pace. Come hether freind, I am ashamd to hear that w=c=I hear of you, that you are so childish as not to knowe yet, not only that which is dece~t for you, but also wholsom for the body & the mind. Ther is nothing y=t=drieth more the limbes, nor dulleth more the spirit, then ouermuch sleepe, besides the wrong that you doe to your reputation, if you continue in it, & that it comes to y=e=knowlege of others. The wisest that euer was of Kings, giueth small wormes to be masters of sluggards, sending them to the schooleof the Pismire. The Lacedemonians and Athenians, iudged idlenes and slugish rest, to be a thing worthy of punishment, as enormious vices: and said that it ought to be had in horror and shame:
Lady and Mother, I cannot but yeilde to your inuincible reasons, knowing that which you say proceedeth from a deere care that you haue of my good, and from a true motherly loue that you beare me: One thing I craue of you, that you be not offended with me, and heerafter I wil wholy submit my self to euery reasonable thing, so that with the grace of God, you will be contented therwith.
God graunt it: You haue almost attayned to the age of nyne yeeres, at least to eight and a halfe, and seing that you knowe your dutie, if you neglect it you deserue greater punishment then he which through ignorance doth it not. Think not that the nobilitie of your Ancesters doth free you to doe all that you list, contrarywise, it bindeth you more to followe vertue, for euen as there is no estimation made of a Iade, though he haue a couragious Gennet to his Sire, Euen so the nobilitie endeth in him which forsaketh her steppes. What is it that raysed vp in eminent honors, so manypersonages issued from meane Parents, as one Marcus Actilius Regulus, which was not borne of noble linage: Or as one Seruius Tullius, and many others, but vertue: which consisteth not in idlenes & sluggishnes, but in actiuity & vigila~cy: Contrarywise, what hath annihilated & spotted the memory of so many others, that tooke their being from generous and haughty spirits, whose memorie is, neuertheles perminent, for it is no reason that the vertue of the father, should be obscured by y=e=vnworthines of the sonne, but y=t=euery one be honored for his owne merrits) but to haue swarued from the actes of true noblenes As one Domitian (the memory of whome stinketh yet for his enormious vices) though he had for Father, Vespasian and Titus: For Brother, memoryes of vertue: I say then, That whosoeuer will participate of the honor and nobilitie of his Parents, he must Propagate the same by vertue, and not onely to followe the French Etimologie of this wordeorwhich commeth ofor, or of Curtesie and affable bountifulnes, but one must also abstaine himselfe from vices, to be the vtter ennimy thereof, & maintaine the right and Iustice (Queene of all vertues.)But alas! (for the most part of the nobilitieof this day, this worde, may well be turned intoorin stede of(hurt none)For we doe relye so much vpon a Title (all mustie) of ancientrye of our predecessors, that we haue no care to reuiue their memorye by our vertues, the which (rather) we darken and burye (as much as lyeth in vs) by our vices and tyrannies y=t=we vse towards those who we ought to defend and keep fro~ wrongs & iniuries. Euery one then of sound iudgement, may well knowe, that it is not enough to be issued from noble and vertuous predecessors: and also that he which buildeth, or is the beginner of his house, deserueth as much praise, as he which pulleth it downe doth shame: it seemed good vnto me my deere children (although that your great youth affoordeth you no Capacitie as yet, (wholy to comprehend my wordes) to giue you this instruction, trusting that heer-after, God will enable you with his grace, to conceiue and followe it, to his glory, to your praise, and ioy of vs all your parents and friendes. Come hether both of you, doe you weare your cloathes Gentle-men like? Where is your hat-band? And you, where is the cipres of yours? Haue you taken cleane shirts this morning?Your bands be not cleane. Why haue you taken your wast-coates? Is it so colde? button your Dublet, are you not ashamed to be so vntrussed? where is your Ierkin? for this morning is somewhat colde: And you also, take your coate. are you vngirt? Boy Neuf-a-bien, heare you? you do nothing but play tricks there, Goe fetch your Masters siluer hatched Daggers, you haue not brushed their breeches, Bring the brushes and brush them before me, Lord God how dustie they are! they are full of dust, what stockins haue you? your silke stockins or your wosted hose? put on your garters embroidred with siluer, for it may be that yee shall goe foorth with me, where are yourCuffes and your falles? haue you cleane handkerchers? Take your perfumed gloues that are lyned, Put on your gownes vntill we goe, and then you shall take your cloakes lyned with Taffata, and your Rapiers with siluer hiltes. Tye your shooe-stringes. Well, take your bootes, your boot-hosen, and your gilt spurres. Ri. Neuf-a-bien, haue you made cleane their shooes to day?
Yea Madame.
Truely so it seemes, come hether you brasen-facte lyer, art thou not ashamed to affirme so apparant a lye before me? The myre and durt sticke on them yet. Seest thou not that they are all durtie?Truely I will teach you how to lye, or rather how you should not lye. I will not leaue such a vice vnpunished. M. Cha~-port-aduis, I wil haue him to be whipt soundly before his Masters, And (as it is said) to beat the dog before the lyon for an example vnto them. There is nothing more bace then lying, and euery one that is wise will abhorre it. It is written in the Prouerbes of Salomo~, that the righteous man hateth lyes. The Sonne of Sirach saith also in these wordes, Vse not any lying at all, for the vse thereof commeth neuer to good.He which will be beleeued, ought neuer to lye, for a lyer is neuer beleeued, Yea, if it happen that sometimes he saith true, it shall be taken still for a lye. It behoueth then that euery one which will get a good reputation shun this vice as it were a mad dogge, For whosoeuer is once bitten with it, findeth it incurable. But I heare some body knocke at the doore, Rene, see who it is.
It is Mistris Ioly, mother, w=c=bringeth word, that my Lady of Beau-seiour and Mistris Du Pont-gaillard, and some others be come.
They are welcome, I must then be gone.
Madame de Beau-seiour, I thinke my selfe so much beholding vnto you, for the curtesie you haue done me, to haue taken such paine, as to come see vs, and which is more, to haue brought Mistris Du Pont-galliard your Sister (whose companye is as agreeable vnto me, as of any Gentlewoman that I know) that I know not how to be able to acknowledge it, but (without greater or more formall Cerimonies) you are most hartily welcome, and yee also Gentlemen.
We must humblie thanke you Madame, you haue more cause to finde vs faultie, forcomming so late, though we come timely enough for to dine.
How late? It is but tenne a clocke.
Pardon me Madame, It was halfe an houre past tenne, before we came out of our house.
For all that, it is not yet eleuen a clocke, nor dinner time, For the Butler hath not yet couered the table. and therefore if you think it good, we may make a turne in the Exchange, It is not farre hence, for I must buye a silke waste-coate which I haue lost in play to M. De sur-amont, against a veluet Muffe.
We are at your commaundement, let vs goe where it pleaseth you.
Page, bid the Coach-man put his horsses to the Carosse. Iolye, speake to the Butler to lay the table-cloath, and that all be readie when we come againe. Giue me my maske, and goe fetch my Fanne. Now let vs goe in Gods name. Who shall we haue to be our gentleman vsher? for mine is sicke.
My Neuewe Du vault-l'amour, Madame, if it pleaseth you to accept his seruice.
But if it pleaseth him to showe vs so much curtesie, as to take the paineto accompany vs, for we can haue no better. Go too Coach-man, why doe we tarrye? driue your horsses.
Madame, what doth it please you to haue? would ye haue any faire linnen cloath? Mistris, see what I haue, and I will showe you the fayrest linnen cloath in London, if you doe not like it, you may leaue it, You shall bestowe nothing but he looking on, The payne shall be ours to showe them you.
Into what Shop shall we goe?
Madame, will it please you to enter into this Shop? This Maid doth inuite vs to it by her tongue, which she hath as free, as any that euer I heard.
Yet she is scarce worthy your loue, though she be reasonable fine & prettie, but seeing that youaffect her, we will see with what she will furnish vs for your sake. Now my friend, haue you any faire holland?
Yes forsooth Madame, and the fairest lawne that euer you handled:
thou speakst a proud word, what knowest thou, what lawne I haue ha~dled? it may be that I haue had better then any that is in all thy shop.
I doe not say to the contrary Madame, but so it is notwithstanding, that I haue as good & as faire as euer was made.
Well, well, you doe but your duetie, but God knoweth how largely you will speake, when you shall be for your selfe, seeing that you praise so highly your masters Marchandise: otherwise Ciceroes saying in his Offices, is of no authoritie, but you learne your trade, for to liue thereby heerafter. How sell you the Ell of this Cambricke?
I knowe you haue so good Iudgement in linnen cloath, that I dare not showe you any for good, vnlesse it were so: there needes no replye to such a Lady as you are, you may say your pleasure, the Cambricke will cost you twentie shillings the Ell.
Truly it lacketh no price: And if thinges be so much worth as those whichsell them, doe make them to be: your Cambricke is very good, for you holde it at a good price, But yet I will not giue so much tho.
How much will it please you to giue then Madame? to the end that I may haue your Custome?
I will giue you fifteene shillings, If you will take my money make shorte, for I haue other busines then to tarye heere,
Truely Madame I would be verye sorie to denye you if I could giue it at that price, but in truth I cannot, vnles I should lose by it.
I will giue you sixteen, and not one halfepeny more. Mistris Du Pont-galliard, is it not enough?
Me thinketh it Madame that you offer too much, as for me, I would not giue so much.
Let vs goe then to the shop on the other side.
Shall we giue it her at that price Mistris?
Showe me the marke of it. Yes call them backe.
Madame, if you finde any better, I am content to giue you mine for nothing.
Let it be as good as it will, yet you shall not haue of me a penye more for it, for I haue offred too much alreadie.
Madame, I am content tolose in it, of the price that I sell it to others, in hope that you will buye of vs when you shall haue need: how many Elles will it please you to haue?
Halfe a dossen Elles.
Go too Attire-gaine, where is the Ells?
Make good measure. Master Du vault-l'amour, I pray you to buye for me yonder wastcoate that I see in that other shop, for if I cheapen it, they will ouer price it me by the halfe, As for you, they knowe you haue better skill in it. Ioly pay for this cloath. Now, are you payed and contented?
Yes Madame. I most humbly thanke you. Beleeue me you haue bestowed your money very well, and you haue good cheap Will you buye no shirts, ruffes, Falling bandes, handkerchers, night-coyfes, Falles, sockes, edged lace, Boote-hosen wrought, Or any other thing that we haue? All is at your commaundement.
Not for this time I thanke you, farewell my she friend.
Madame, God haue you in his keeping.
Page goe see if the Coach be ready,
Runne quickly. Coach-man we must alight
in Cheapside, at the Mercers and Gold-smiths.<|endoftext|>Trulie Cousen I am sorie that you should thus vpo~ a pievish conceite of yours bring your self into this vn-necessarie trouble for a trifle and matter of nothing as it were.
If you be sorie indeed as you pretende, then you might haue let me alone, and not haue caused your Apparitor to serue me (as he did) with Citation, for assure your selfe if you had not troubled me, I would never haue troubled my selfe about this trifle you speake of.
Nay I must not do so, I must deale indifferentlie you know, and not be partiall though you be mykinswoman. Th'information being against you as well as others, & your name being prese~ted to me by the church Wardens with other women moe, if I should leaue you out and proceed against them, I should not doe that which were fitting for my place and office, you know I am sworne to doe iustice.
Indeed your office and place afoordes much iustice, if it be well observed, as ordinarie iustice as Billinsgate doeth loue & friendship for a boxe of th'eare: you are sworne you saye, and will not that oath of yours alow you to shew as much favor and kindnesse to your kinswoman in a trifle, as to a stranger that is no kinne to you in a matter of weight?
O I knowe where you are now, I thought where you would bee straight, I knew I should heare of it, you meane mistresBut in good faith your Minister did her wrong, neither had he anie law to warranthim to doe that he vrged her vnto: I co~fesse she made a fault before she was maried, but the man you know made her amendes, and I doe not heare but that they liue orderly and well nowe: notwithstandinge all which your hotte spirited Minister (of spight & malice as it is thought) would haue put them both to open penance, if I had not stucke close to them.
Mercifull Christ, what neede anie witnesse to be produced against you, when your owne mouth doeth so apparantlie co~demne you? The gentlewoman you confesse made a fault: and what was that fault but simple Fornicatio~ at the least? For the which our Minister would haue done that which belonged vnto him, if you would haue lett him, and that whiche I take it (by your leaue) the Booke of common Prayer it selfe doeth warrant him to doe, and you by your owne confession withstoode him in that good purpose of his. Nowe surely (my goodkinsman) this is a sinne amongest others that you must repent of, otherwise it wilbe woe with you. And I pray you tel me one thing: Mistres A. B. is a straunger to you and I am your kinswoman, her fault (cover it & shadow it as you will) was vncleannesse at the least, and that which you trouble mee for, is but a Ceremonie, & as your self confesse, a matter of no moment. What warrant haue you then so stiflie to stande with her in her sinne, and to deale thus sharplie with me and others in a thing indifferent, or a matter of nothing?
Well gentle kinswoman, seeing you are so snappish & over-busying your self in other folkes matters that apperteine not vnto you, I pray you let me heare now how handsomely you can answere for your selfe.
With whose matters did I medle I pray you, did not you first name mistresse A. B. your selfe?
All is one for that, I know you meant her when you said, that myoath might as well alow me to shew fauour to my kinswoman in a trifle, as to a stra~ger in a matter of weight.
Well be it so then: if your conscience did accuse you, looke you to that: But what haue you now to say to me, and what is the cause why you haue sent for me?
You neede not aske, you know it well enough I am sure. It is for your foolish nicenesse in this trifling matter of Churching. And I pray you in good sadnesse, what reason haue you why you refuse to be Churched?
If it be as you say a trifle, the more to blame you to trouble your friends in so trifling a cause: But what doe you meane by Churching? Doe you meane that which is sett downe in the Booke?
Iust, I meane that and none other: For law will not warrant vs to presse you to any other?
No. nor I thinke to that neither if it be well examined: But seeing you meanethat kinde of Churching, The reason in a woord why I refuse it is this: Because I would be loth to shew my selfe either Iew or Papist.
Why will thankesgiuing to God after Childbirth make you a Iew or a Papist?
No: Thankesgiuing will not: But this manner of thankesgiving that you would haue me to obserue is in trueth no thankesgiving at all, but a meere Iewish or Popish Purifying.
How doe you proove it to be no thankesgiuing?
By the verie first institution of it: For the Papistes that were the woorshipfull founders and devisers of it, and knew best their own meaning, did in the instituting of it, giue it this title:. Whereby it is manifest that their very drift and intent in th'institution was only for a Purification or Purging, and therefore no thankesgiving: Secondly, there is no onewoord, matter or forme of thankesgiuing in the whole order of it as it is set downe in the booke: and therefore it can not be that it was ordayned for Thankesgivinge, though in the title thereof it be absurdlie so called.
But why doe you tearme it a Iewish or a Popish Purifying?
It is Iewish in 2 respectes: First in that the woman after she hath brought foorth a childe, is held vncleane (as vnder the Law) till such time as she hath shewed her selfe in the Temple. Secondlie in that shee is commanded to offer her accustomed offeringes, which is drawen & deriued from the Lamb and young Pigeons vnder the Law. Popish it is in 3 respectes: First in that it was instituted and devised by the Papistes, apishlie imitating the Iewes, and bringing in one kinde of Purifying in steade of another. Secondly in that the woman is commaunded to come as neare the communion table, as in the time of popery they came to the high Altar. Lastlie, inregard of the Popish offeringe, to weete the Chrisome: For she is commaunded to offer th'accustomed offeringes, which is sett downe to be the Chrisome, In which regard you may as iustlie trouble me and cal me hither for not offering the Chrisome, as for not being purifyed, and as good law you haue for th'one as th'other, whiche makes me thinke (as I sayed before) that you haue no law amongest you (but onelie the lawlesse law of your will and pleasure) to compell any woman to be Churched.
Well, wee will talke of that another time: but I would to God, yee foolish women would medle with that whiche belongs vnto you, and which is within the co~passe of your owne element, and not take vppon you the decision and interpretation of the law, which ye vndersta~d not. But I pray you tell me one thinge, what if the Church now would institute and ordeyne a solemneof women, would you not beepurified?
No indeed would I not: For if I should, I should then either with the Iewes denie Christ to be come in the fleshe to giue an end to those shadowes which were figures of the purifying and washing away of our sinnes by his bloud, or els with the Papistes I must denie the bloudshead and sufferings of Christ to be th'only and alone sufficient purgation of sinne, and therefore it is that we must haue a supply and be farther holpen by some Church Ceremonie, or outward forme of Prayers out of the mouth of some shaveling or Priest.
Yea, but see now I pray you how you are deceyved in the heate of your zeale, looke in the booke there is no such matter ofas you speake of, but onelie of.
Trust me, you say true, I had almost forgotten that it speaketh not a woord indeed of Purifying. But what a iugling & blearing of th'eis of the simple is this amongstyou. May we not heerein say of you & your fellowes, that yee are the most perillous instrumentes, and dangerous impostors that euer Sathan raysed vp for th'advancement and restoring againe of Poperie.
Why so I pray you my good kinswoman? What neede all this heate among friendes? You imagine belike you are amo~g your scolding dames and pratling huswiues at home?
No good Maister Chauncelor, I know I thanke God where I am, neither am I any whitte distempered at all: But that whiche I haue sayed, I may truly and lawfullie say againe: In which regard well fare the Papistes say I, for they shall rise vp in iudgement against you, who like good fellowes yet in playne and open tearmes, euen bare faced, as it were, doe seeke to seduce vs, and to drawe vs to their false and idolatrous woorship and service in Poperie, as namelie by their Masse, Mattens, Ensong, Purification, and other such like:Whereas you much more dangerously and euen vnder a maske or visard as it were, and not vnlike to him that transformeth him selfe into an Angell of light, doe goe about to drawe and allure vs to the selfe same false worship & service but by cleanlier names and honester titles, as to their Purification by the title and name of Thankesgiving, that is, to a Iewish Ceremonie that should be abolished, vnder the pretence & colour of a seruice of God that should be continued.
But I pray you Cousen Puritane, is there no difference betwixt that in Poperie and ours?
The difference (as I haue bene tolde by learned men) is onely in this, That theirs is in Latin & yours in English, otherwise you proper Thankesgiuing which yee call Churching, is even the very same woord for woord (excepting only the Title, wherin (as I saye) yee iuggle and walke a little more covertly then they) with their Purification in Poperie. And can the changingof a name or title alter the thing it selfe or make it of another nature? If yee haue that gift and power amongst you, then yee may as well bring vs in the Masse vnder the name and title of a Communion: and so he that refuseth to goe to Masse, you may serue him with a Citatio~ for not comming to the Communion, as in the like case you doe now by vs, you trouble vs and call vs in questio~ for denying of Thankesgiuing, because we refuse to be Purified.
In good faith it is more the~ I haue considered of, whether that in Poperie be so neare agreeing to ours as you speak of, I beleeue your leaders haue mis-informed you. But howsoeuer it be and howsoeuer the Papistes doe holde and account of it, it makes no great matter. The Church you see now holdeth it for no other then a meere, which is very decentand requisite for euerie woman after so great deliuerance.
What if the Church should holde ourLadies Psalter to be Davids Psalter, or th'AueMarie for a Prayer? Should I therefore take and vse th'one for Davids Psalter, and th'other for a Prayer? I know the Lord is to be thanked for all his mercies, much more for so great a blessing as Childbirth is: But as we are to giue God thankes, and are therevnto tyed and bound in duetie and allegeance: so are we still to doe the same according to the pleasure of him that commaundeth, and after the square and rule of his ordinance, and not after the preceptes, phansies and inventions of men, especiallie after the prescription of the man of Synne, that is after the manner of the superstitious and idolatrous Papistes.
But in faith doe you not thinke it a decent thing, that after so great an escape, and for the birth of a babe into the worlde, there should bee Thanksgiving? or would you haue no differencebetwixt reasonable creatures and beastes, but that itshould bee left indifferent to vnrulie men to accompanie with their wives at their pleasures, without regard of their weaknes and vncleannesse?
You aske me wonderfull strange things: First, whether it be not a decent thing vpon such a deliuerance and the birth of a Babe into the worlde, there should not bee Thankesgiving. Secondlie, whether it should bee left indifferent for men to playe the beastes with their wives. Vnto which I aunswere, that the manner of Churching that you thus trouble vs for, doeth not redresse anie of these inconveniences: There being in it in trueth no maner of Thanksgiving at all, but onelie a speach or superscription of a Thankesgiving. Secondlie,whereas by the law of God, to touch a woman in the time of her separation and vncleanesse, should bee death, what punishment haue you prouided for this so great and haynous enormitie? Or howe doeth your Churching of women restrainea carnall and licentious appetite from executing his villenous and beastlie desire? Hath he not his full swindge and libertie to doe what he list for all that? So that yee complaine of dangers, disorders, & inconveniences, and yet leaue them still as you found them without cure or redresse, neuer caring for anie thing so your ydle Ceremonie may be kept.
A man may easelie smell (gentle Cousen) where you haue bene at schoole, yet I haue talked in my daies with some of your own crew, and they haue held it for a thing indifferent at the least, and haue not bene halfe so hotte in it as you, and therefore for the loue I beare you, I would wishe you to haue some regard of modestie and womanhood. For yea faith when you haue saide andwrangled all that you can, it will be found a most decent thing.
A decent thing? What talke you of decencie? I tell you I hold it for more then aDecent thing, even for a religious thing, and a part of my bounden duetie, if it bee (as you say) a Thankesgiving and a service of God. But I pray you tell me, because you wish me to haue a regard of modestie and womanhood, haue you had any information of any misbehaviour against me, either in my speach, company, or cariage of my selfe, if you haue, I shall thanke you as my good kinsman to admonish me of it.
By my trouth no: if it were not for this odde pievishnesse of yours, (whereby you trouble both your selfe and your friendes more then needs) I doe not (so God helpe me) knowe or heare any thinge by you that deserveth reproofe: and therefore I am the willinger to pull you out of it if I could.
It were well indeed if I could be pulled from my faultes and you from your swearing. But when your friend or kinsman doeth any thing or refrayneth from anie thing of conscience (as I may safelieprotest vnto you in this case I doe) Then the way and meanes to set me straight (if I be awry) is as I take it, the sacred Scripturs and woord of God, which if you bring, or any good reason out of it for proofe and warrant of this your Churching, woe and double woe to me if I subscribe not to it.
Whop: here is a revell and adoe with, my kinswoman you say, refrayneth of: But fro~ what doeth shee refrayne? forsooth from Thankesgiving to God: Is not this pretie stuffe, or is not this a warme Conscience?
Not so: Deceyue not your selfe, nor triumph not before the victorie, your kinswoman thanketh God she hath bene better taught then so. It is not from Thankesgiuing to God (as you would haue it) that she refrayneth of Conscience, but onely from Iewish or Popish Purifying shadowed and varnished over with a colour or shewe of Thankesgiving. Thus shee tolde you once before, and this shee telleth you againe andagaine. But I pray you let me aske you one thing.
What is that?
Is not Thankesgiving a service of God?
Yes: I hope no man doubtes of that.
What meane you then to harpe so much vpon Decencie and modestie? Would you haue vs serue God for Dece~cie? Sometimes againe you saye that Churching is a thing indifferent, a trifle, and a matter of nothing, and yet you will needes haue it to be a Thankesgiving to God. Howe can this hang togeather then, that one & the same thing should be a matter of Dece~cie, of indifferencie, or a trifle of no moment, & yet a seruice of God? Is the seruice of God come to that passe amongst you now?
I meane onely the Ceremonie of it, as the Tyme, and th'Attyre, the companie of women, the offerings, and the feasting of neighbours and friendes, to be as thinges indifferent & of no moment: But not theprayers and thanksgiuing in the church, that I holde to bee holy and not indifferent.
The trueth is yee holde yee can not tell what amongst you: The Ceremonie stickes so neare to your seruice, and your maner of seruice is so sutable and agreeing with your Ceremonie, that yee can not for your liues sever the one from th'other. Take away the Ceremonie, and there is no need of your seruice that I see. Therefore you may doe well in my conceite, to let them both henceforward sleepe and surcease. For lett the poore woman that hath escaped, bee never so thankfull, or let her husband (as maister of the familie) with his servantes and friends giue God thankes never so earnestlie and Christianlie for that deliverance, (and that euen then when the remembrance of that mercie of God is freashest in their memories) yet all this is nothinge to you, nor of no reckoning, vnlesse the Woman may haue her solemne Purification at her monethes end, with her white vayleor some such marke to be knowen by, which is a manifest signe that albeit yee pretende Thankesgiuing, yet in trueth yee care not for it, so your Popish custome and ceremonie of Purifying be not broken of.
Indeed it were fitt that ye women should appoint the service and ceremonies of the Church, and then belike we should be wel & handsomelie served. But I pray you tel me one thing: What if for the peace of the Church you should giue thankes after this maner as in the book is prescribed, what discredite, daunger or inconvenience would ensue to you vpon that?
That is as much to say in good English, as what if for the peace of the Church one should make shew to giue thankes, when in deed and in trueth there is no Thankesgiving at all? were not that a plaine mocking of God, a kinde of Hypocrisie, & Prophaning of the name & Religion of God?
Trust me I thinke you are one ofthe perversest creatures that ever anie man dealt with. I speake not one woord of a shew of Thankesgiving, but of giving thankes in deede, and looke now whither you be runne.
Why did you not speake of giving thanks after the maner as the Booke prescribeth: and that as I haue often tolde you, is but a shew or shadow and no trueth. How am I perverse then, when I ground vppon your owne speaches? Now because you aske me what inco~venience would ensue if I should for anie respect vse this prete~ded Thanksgiving, I will shew you (if you will giue me leaue, & that you will with patience heare me) how I shall therein offende many and sundrie wayes.
As how I pray you for my learning?
Two wayes I haue alreadie told you of: as first that in so doeing, I should therein shewe my selfe either Iewish or Popish. Secondlie, that in fayning to giue GODthankes, and to vse no one woord tendingto that ende, nor looking that way, is nothing els but in a sort to mocke God to his face.
Well what then?
Thirdlie in so doeing, I shall not onely nourish, foster and maintayne manie superstitious and erroneous opinions in the heartes of th'ignorant, and so strengthen the simple in their false woorship, but also fall into divers and sundrie most daungerous absurdities: as namelie, first of all that a woman after childbirth is vncleane and vnholy, co~trary to th'Apostles wordes, who teacheth vs that a Woman is sanctified by bearing of children. For what may Purifying I pray you presuppose, but some former vncleannesse? Likewise, that a woman is helde for the time as an excommunicate person, and therefore most solemnly be receyued agayn into the church. For what may Churching presuppose but some former excluding, shutting out and cutting off?
These then I perceyue are someof your supposed absurdities, haue you any more of them?
Well iest as you please, I haue more of them then you or any man of your place ca~ with anie conscience answere or avoyde.
Let vs heare them the~ I pray you, and dispatch that we may know all our payne at once.
Why then I say further that in yeelding to this Churchinge of yours, I should by myne example condemne the primitiue Church, and all the reformed Churches in other Countreyes at this day, who vse no such churchings: and withall iustifie and approoue the papists, and all other superstitious churches that ioine with them in the vse of it.
A great piece of woorke, as if it were such a matter to varie and dissent a little from Calvin or Beza, I tell you they may as well learne of vs, as we of them.
Who spake of Calvin or Beza? I promise you I did not so much as think of the~.I spake onely of the Primitiue and Reformed churches. And albeit those men you speak of were worthie instruments in Gods church, & such as we haue cause to thank God for: yet the Lord I know might haue spread foorth the light of his Gospell, and reformed his Church, had they neuer lived. But this is the manner of you all, you broode of Chauncelors & your Associates, when you can saye nothing, then you fall straight a girding & railing on Calvin or Beza, or some such worthie man.
Gentle Cousen, be not angrie, I meane you no hurt yea faith. What other inconveniences or absurdities doe you finde in this Churchinge, speake your minde freelie, for I am even bent to heare you.
I should therein either my self abuse, or yeeld to th'abusing of the woord of God.
How so I pray you?
I meane concerning the Psalme that is there appointed for that purpose, vz. the 121 Psalme, which being left to the churchby the holy Ghost for comfort and consolation in time of distresse, to applie it to Thankesgiving, contrarie to the purpose and meaning of the holy Ghost, must needes (as I say) be a playne abusing and prophaning of the woord. And if it bee well considered of, it will be founde to bee more fitte a great deale for a woman in the time of her travel, agonie & distresse, then afterward when she is of strength & in good estate.
Yea faith yea faith gossippe, I doubt not if any of your precise crew had sett down that Psalme for that purpose, but you would haue liked of it well enough for all the cavills and quarrells you make against it now.
Thinke you so S=r=: Well I see that men of your occupation may easilie bee deceyved. But to deale plainlie and not to dissemble with you, one especiall reason among others that draweth mee to dislike and refuse this Iuel of yours (I meane yourChurching) is, that in yeelding therevnto, I should iustifie you and your fellowes in your crooked and vnconscionable proceedings, that is in vrging and pressing your owne Traditions before the Commaundements of God.
And bee these the pretie reasons that mooue you thus to dislike the custome and reverent vsage of our Church? Now surely it sheweth the waywardnes of your conceyte, in that you preferre your owne will before the peace of the Church, which ought to be dearer vnto you then thus to stand out & endaunger your selfe about such trifles, & matters of nothing, that are not woorth a rush to speake of.
No are? Then I say still, The more shame for you to keepe such a revell and adoe, for such things as your selfe confesse are not woorth whisteling: and therin you shew your selues to bee right Scribes and Pharisees, that is, Hypocrites, tithingmint and cumine, and leaving iudgment and mercy, troubling the children of God and those that ye ca~ not iustlie charge with anie crime, for not obseruing your Traditions & beggerly Ceremonies, as Crossing, Kneeling, Churching, &c. and in the meane season suffring the breakers of Gods holy commandements (aske Mistres A. B. els, & a nombre of knowne Papistes, Atheistes, Charmers, Blasphemers, Prophaners of the Saboth, and such like) to goe scotfree and vnpunished, as if your whole delight, care and watchfulnesse were only for th'obseruation of these bables and fruitlesse Ceremonies of yours.
O M=rs=I perceiue is a great mote in your eye, wel I pray God that you of the holy brotherhood that make it so daintie, do (the best of you) liue no worse then she doeth now, what soever she hath bene heretofore.
Amen say I, and better to. Indeed to doe her no wrong as I heare no great exclamation of her, for any notorious crime, so onth'other side, wee that are her neighbours, may safely acquite her of any great co~mendation that shee hath for any holy and religious course thereby to draw on others by her example. Therfore praise her as much as you list, when you haue done the best you can, shee will bee founde but an ordinarie woman: and the special thing that you can co~mend in her (for any thing I see) is this: that she is as quietly churched whe~ her time comes, as any of the rest of her neighbours.
I would to God I could say so by you to Cousen, condition I had giuen twentie pound yea faith, & then you might haue eased vs of much of this trouble.
You may doe one day, when you ca~ bring me any sufficient reason and warrant for it out of the Scripture. And if you will but giue vs a tolleration and dispensation for it till then, we will aske no more.
You say well, I know your meaning. But in good truth I muze that the Peace of the Church doeth no more mooue you.
You muze you say, that the peace of the Church doeth nomore mooue me: And I muze likewise what you would haue saide if you had lived in the dayes of our Savi. Christ, who defended his Disciples against the Pharisees in a verier trifle & of farre lesse moment then this our refusall of your Churching.
Where I pray you, shew me that for my learning.
What say you to the refusall of washing of handes at meate? Is not that as small a matter as may be? And if you had bene by at that time, when our Savior so boldly defended his Disciples therein, it is like enough you would haue coumpted him for a verie Trifler, or some busie Troubler of the Peace of the Church, that would keepe such a doe for nothing. Sure by your dealing with vs we can coniecture none other.
Tush the Comparisons are not alike.
Trulie even as like as may be. The Pharisees founde fault with the Disciples forbreaking a Tradition of th'Elders, viz. washing of handes at meate: and you find fault with vs for breaking a much woorse Traditio~ of yours. You aske vs often whether Churching be not a Decent thing: We aske you againe, whether washing bee not both a Decent thing, a cleanly thing, and a wholesome thing? Our Savior (you see) defended his Disciplesin the breach of that Decencie of those Pharisees of that age: and his woord doth warrant and defende vs in the breach of this supposed Decencie of your Pharisees of this age.
Nay then yea faith, if yee goe to that, ye may take your selues by the nose Mistres Cousen: For who the Devill be the right Pharisees & Hypocrites if yee be not? Ye are so demure, and ye make it so nice and so holy amo~gst you, that by the Masse a dogge would not dwell with you.
I perceyue if a dogge dwelt with you, if you could but make him speake once, you would quicklie teach him to sweare.
O that is all your grace amongst you: you thinke your selues so pure over other men, because you can a litle bridle your selues from swearing, and yet ye wil doe tenne times woorse and make no bones at it. As couetous, as spitefull, and malicious yee are the most of you, as dogges. I knowe one of your crew who would not sweare for no good, and vsed ordinarilie to pray with his me~ in his chamber, and yet beeing at a Knights house, where hee had good entertayneme~t, they prayed so hartilie amongst them, that for conscience sake they faire thwited me of a valence of a bedde, and caried that & a piece of plate with them to the value of twentie nobles at the least.
Well though this peradventure may be one of your legend stories, for any thing I know, yet alow it to be true, what gette you by that? one sinne you know excuseth not another. These were hypocrites & theeves,therefore you to avoide this daunger, will needes be swearers & ruffeans: what physike or policie call you that to avoid Hypocrisie by plaine and open iniquitie?
Why I doe not defend swearing to bee good, woman: you doe not heare me say so, I wish I could leaue it with all my heart: It is but a foolish custome and comes from me at vnawares, and that many times whe~ I thinke no harme in the world.
Th'Apostle is against you in that: for he sayeth, Out of the aboundance of the heart the mouth speaketh: And our Saviour saieth, That out of the heart comes evill thoughts, and yet you can droppe vile oathes amongst you (such is your skill) & thinke no harme. I must needes commend you for this, by meanes whereof you haue brought one notable thing to passe in our Church, and I wish for my part yee were Chronicled for it.
What is that good gossippe?
Why, That albeit there be manyParishes amongest vs without a preaching Minister, yet to mende the matter, there bee few Dioces in the lande without a swearing Chauncelor.
That is more the~ you know, good huswife. But if it were so, I doe not thinke but the woorst Chauncelor amongst vs doeth more good then many of your vpstart and busie headed Preachers, pratlers I should say.
Well, to let that rest as it is (for if there be any thing amisse, wee should doe wrong to looke for amendes from you) you see evidentlie, that th'example which I alleadged of our Saviour Christ in reproving the Pharisees and defendinge his Disciples in their refusall of that trifle of washing of handes, is both a check to you, for thus troubling of vs without cause, & a good warrant for vs to doe as we doe.
Doe I see it? I promise you I must gette me better spectacles then, then ever I could yet light on.
Well, if you doe not see it, I must needesholde with you, that your spectacles are starke naught in deede: But whether you doe see it, or will not see it, it is and ought to be a lesson of instruction to vs whom you now thus trouble: That whensoeuer anie Pharisaicall hypocrites doe strictlie vrge and presse the keeping of their owne traditions (bee they neuer so small and trifling) with the neglect of the co~mandements of God, thenit is our partes by all lawfull & holy meanes to bende our selues against them, and not to yeelde to th'observation of the least of them: much lesse when the Traditions shalbe noisome, hurtfull and superstitious, and derogatorie to the glorie of God.
In good faith it was neuer merrie world since these twatling women became divines. I see I do but spend time with you. And yet when you haue sayd and done all that you can for your life, it will be founde (as I haue said) but a trifle that you stand vppon, whereas the peace of theChurch is, or ought to bee to you a matter of great moment, and a thing that you ought daily to pray for, if you haue (as you pretend) any conscience with you, or regard of brotherlie loue, with a desire to mainteine vnitie, and to avoyde iarres & dissentions.
We are I confesse to pray for the peace of Syon: For they shall prosper that loue her. But what? Is the Church now become a maynteiner of trifles? By your speaches so often iterated and redoubled (for you harpe still on that string) it should bee so: and what indignitie were that? But in deede as I haue told you the thing we stand vpon (if it be rightlie examined) is not in that nature of indifferencie as you would beare the world in hande it is, make of it what you will either Thankesgiving or Purifying: if it be Thankesgiving indeed, it is my bounden duetie (say I) to performe it, and a sinne to leaue it vndone: If it bee Purifying, it is my bounden duetie toavoyde it, and a sinne to practise it, because it treadeth vnder foote the sufficiencie of ofthe death and bloudsheading of IESVS Christ, which is th'onlie purgation of my sinne. So that turne it which way you will, it is no light matter or trifle of small regarde, as you would haue it, but a thinge that one way or other greatly concerneth the glorie of God, & therein also you seeme to me apparantlie to crosse, entangle & ensnare your selfe in your owne speaches.
How so I pray you?
I haue tolde you alreadie, and that so often, that I am halfe wearie of telling it. But sure your minde is so on your haulfpenie, that you neither remember what I say, nor thinke on that you say your selfe. Haue you not alwayes called this Churching of yours, a Thankesgiving? and haue you not laboured by the title of it in the Booke, to defende it to be a Thankesgiuing and no Purifying?
Yes that I haue, and so I say still.
Why then I saye for shame away withthis trifle and trifling of yours, and let vs beare no more of that: For Thankesgiving you know must needes be a part of Gods woorship and seruice. And what an impious & vngodly thing were it to make the holy woorship and seruice of God a trifle, a matter of nothing, not worth a rush, or a thing to bee done or not done at our pleasures? I protest vnto you, if it were a Thankesgiving in deede, that is such a part of Gods woorship as he hath comaunded and prescribed in his word, if I should wilfully refuse to doe it, I were not woorthie to bee coumpted a member of his Church.
Yet still me thinkes the peace of the Church doeth not poize and prevaile with you as it should doe.
Heere is a doe with the Peace of the Church, and yet when ye haue all done, a man may easilie see that though ye talke of it never so much, yee vse it for the most part but as a staulking horse amongst you.
What meane you by that?
Why, you know well enough, that the staulkinge horse is not to blame for the death of the foule, he doeth but onely shadowe and stand before the fouler while hee killeth him: Even so doe you. The Peace of the Church (as you handle it) is a notable vaile to shadowe all your deformities and corruptions. If a good Minister doe not yeelde to your lawlesse and vnconscionable subscription, or if he overskippe the Crosse in Baptisme, Ring in Mariage, or any such needles Ceremonie, then straight you choke him with the peace of the Church, the peace of the Church, and so you doe now by vs for our refusall of kneeling and Churching.
And I pray you in good earnest, why may not these and more then these be endured and yeelded vnto for the peace of the Church?
If the Peace of the Church were so deare vnto you as you pretende and make shew of, then would ye never for shame trouble either Ministers or people for such oddethings as those that rather hinder then further men in Religion. But your maner is whe~ you speake of one thing to meane another. You speake of the Peace of the Church, but you meane still the peace of your Hierarchie, the peace of your vnrulie places and offices, the Peace of all your Popish & beggerlie Ceremonies, so they may stande still vntouched, if yee Chauncelyers and your Officials may be at quiet in your roomes and iurisdictions: Litle (the Lord knowes) doe yee care for the peace of the Church: and that is seene not only by your troubling of vs now without cause, but by your ordinarie sile~cing, suspending & imprisoning of the best and holiest Preachers for these trifles, and your countenancing and allowing of dumme dogges, bee there liues and behaviour neuer so shamefull.
O (my good kinswoman) we haue heard enough of these matters long agoe. These supposed quarrells haue ben answered and answered againe, you come to late yea faith withyour baskett of Apples now. What a Devil should you medle with any of these matters? It were much fitter for such as you are, to medle with your spindle and your wheele, and soberlie to attend your trades & vocations, then thus in the pride of your heartes to controlle your betters, and to deale in Church causes which belong not vnto you.
I was I thank God busied in my vocatio~, and so I might haue ben still, had not you sommoned me the~ce by your officer. I know right well Church causes belo~g not to such as I am to deale in, neither doe I meddle withall farther then by way of sute or co~plainte to those that haue authoritie to redresse. And if the Peace of the Church can not mooue you to leaue cyting & troubling vs for trifles, whom otherwise you can not charge with anie crime, never blame vs if the bare sound and noyse of the Peace of the Church doe not at al mooue vs to yeeld to any of your trifling & fruitles Ceremonies against our consciences.
Well I am sorie you are so wilfull yea faith: I perceiue I shall doe no good of you.
I tell you you may easilie doe good of me, and easilie draw me to the bent of your bow, if you can produce and alleage vnto me but one only sentence and proofe out of the scriptures of God.
Scripture? there is nothing with you but Scriptures. No No. It is even the pride of your heart, and pievish singularity of your owne conceyte that doth thus draw you. Why doe you thinke no body seeth anie thing but your selfe? or doe you thinke there be not as sober & as honest wome~ as you Churched?
Then I perceyue you haue no Scripture in the worlde to perswade mee with, your onely scripture is the pride of my heart, the Singularitie of my conceite, and I can not tell what. But you aske me whether as honest women as I be not churched? I aske you againe, Whether as honest men as youhaue not denied Christ. Th'examples of the godlie (you know) are not to be followed but in godlines, whereas it is the common guise of you and your generation to make a solemne gathering and calling as it were of the scabbes, imperfections and bleamishes of the best men, and then to lay them in our dish straight as a choakepeare to vs: as for example, if ye find once that Father Latimer and Ridley, or anie such like reverend man, did weare square cappe and surplus, why then there is no remedie but this must bee proclaymed straight as an authenticall warrant to all the succeeding Ministers of the lande, that they may boldlie and safelie yeelde to the wearing of the like attire.
And I promise you, It is somthing I tell you as light as you make of it. Why is th'example of the godly Martyrs nothing with you, and your precise brotherhoode?
Yes it is something: but I doe not thinke it should waigh more with vs thenth'example of Abraham, David, or Peter, whose steppes you know we must not follow when they slippe or goe awry. But will you your selues I pray you (if a man may aske it) stande to the iudgement, and bee ruled by th'example of the godlie Martyrs?
I see no reason but wee may and ought.
Why then downe falles to the grounde straight your lawlesse oath of Inquisition, wherewith yee so plague the Church now a dayes, Iudge by Mai. Tindall els, Mai. La~bart, and others that suffered for the testimonie of Gods trueth.
Indeed Ma. Tindall and Ma. Lambart were somewhat wilfull.
Iust, how els? Thus yee marshall the Martyrs as it please your selues, when they may serue your turne (be it in neuer so great ignorance and weaknesse of theirs) then their names, their pietie, and their patience are layde before vs in great and capitall letters, as paternes to follow. But when they crosse you in any thing (bee thesame never so apparantlie warranted by the Scriptures) then alas, they were but men, yea and many times wilfull men, as you doe now most iniuriouslie slaunder M=r= Lambart and M=r= Tindall.
But to leaue these circumstances and by-matters, doe you thinke it is a sinne to be Churched? speak your conscience.
As I haue alreadie saied, if it be a sinne to make shew of Thankesgiving, and yet to giue no thankes at all: if it be a sinne to abuse and misapplie the sacred Scriptures of God to another ende and purpose then it was giuen by the holy Ghost: if it bee a sinne to strengthen and confirme the Papist in his superstition, and the simple and ignorant in their false & erroneous woorship: if all or any of these bee sinnes, then doe I not see how your Churching (as it is vsed amongst you) can escape the stampe and brandmarke of sinne. And howsoever it may bee to others, I doe well assure my selfe it were a sinne and wickednes in mee,because it is against the light of mine owne conscience grounded vpo~ the reasons that I haue alleaged vnto you.
Why, but if you like not the Psalme in the Booke whiche you keepe such adoe at, and be so coy & conceyted, that for feare of abusing it, forsooth you are loth to haue it read to you, yet your Minister may vse another if he will, and pray as he thinkes good. So you would decentlie & womanly come to church at your time, as other your neighbours doe, by my trouth for my part I could bee content to winke at manie things, and shew you any favour I could.
Then I perceyue you haue forgotten how in the beginning when I asked you what you meant by Churching, you tolde mee that which was prescribed in the booke: For law sayed you, would not warrant any other. And are you come now to giue vs libertie to vse another, so we wouldquietlie obserue your Ceremonie.
You say well, Is this the thankes I haue for my kindnesse and favor to you, in that I am contented to saue you from trouble and daunger, to yeeld a litle to your weaknesse, because you seeme to make co~science of I can not tell what? In good faith goship, you shall sitt till your heeles ake before I offer you this favour againe.
Nay, but for all your chafing, I would not haue you mistake me: What favour soeuer you shew me, I will not by Gods grace be vnthankfull for it to my power. But I vnderstood you that you gaue me euen now free libertie to speake my minde, and that you would willinglie heare what soeuer I should say: and I tooke it and doe still take it, that your Sommoning and sending for me hither, was rather in your loue to conferre with me and to satisfie me, then by anie rigour of your law to punish me.
By my trouth you hitte it right:For I was greatlie beholden to your Father, and therefore I haue reason to wishe you well, & in that respect I would gladlie doe you what good I may.
Why, then you continew this minde to giue me your free warrant to speake in this case what I thinke, and to cast all the doubtes and make all th'obiections I can against you, that so you may the better resolue me in th'end?
How els? In the name of God, speake your minde boldlie, neither shall you offend me with any thing you say: For I imagine you can say nothing in this cause, but I haue heard it alreadie.
Well then, doeth not this (I pray you) plainlie verifie and confirme that which I told you of before when I likened you to the Phariseis, vz. That your own foolish Traditions and fruitlesse Ceremonies were dearer to you and of more pretious accoumpt, then the Sacred ordinance of God?
How so, I conceyue not that?
No? Did not you say that for my sake you would be co~tent to winck at the breach of the Booke, and giue the Minister leaue to vse other prayers, so I would be content in any sort to be Churched, and keepe your monethlie and manerlie Ceremonie?
Why if I saied so, you are the more beholden to me for that I doe not meane (I tell you) to shew euery bodie that favour.
Well, howsoeuer I may in this regarde thanke you for your loue to me, yet to deale plainelie with you, I can not therein praise you for your loue to the Church, nor never shall till I see Preaching as much beholden to you as Churching is.
Why, doe you thinke I doe not preferre the preaching of the worde before anie other ceremonie of the Church, be it neuer so commendable?
It should appeare no by your dealinge with our Minister.
Your Minister! yea faith your Minister hath no more witte then hee occupies: He knowes not who is his friend nor who is his foe. I would to God he would be his owne friende once. Stand sticking and mincing it at these bables and trifles as he doth, when he might be quiet in his ministerie, if he would him selfe.
So might wee poore women (whom you thus trouble) be quiet too if we would bee Churched: Our Minister you know is an honest man of life, and a painfull Teacher in his place, you can not charge him with anie misdemeanour for your life. He preacheth amongest vs with great fruite, and hath wonne manie to the Gospell, and yet for refusall of your lawlesse subscriptio~ beside the Statute, and for not wearing of your surplus, & not Crossing in Baptisme, you neuer let him rest among you, but one while you are doeing with him in your Court: an other while the Pursevant from the High Commission trounceth him: Sothat yee make the poore man spend the better part of his poore living in iaunceling vp and down about the moon-shine in the Town-dich.
Why, who is this long of, gentle Cousen? Is not all this long of himselfe? There be as wise & as learned as he that yeeld to all this you speake of, and more then this for the peace of the Church.
But I pray you tell mee, Why may you not be as kinde to him in his Ministerie & Preaching, as you offer to bee to me in this Ceremonie of Churching? You saye you preferre the preaching of the Gospell before anie ceremonie what so ever: if you meane in deede as you say, then for Gods sake wincke a little at the breach of the Booke in him as well as you are contented to doe in me: let not your loue to me in private bee greater then your loue to the Church in publike. Looke a litle thorough your fingers, and passe by as if you saw not his refusall of the Crosse and Surplus.That so we may enioye the meanes of our salvation in peace. And if in anie case you will yeelde to the breach of the Booke, let it bee for the Gospell sake, and not for a Ceremonie.
In good faith, I can not tell what to say to you, with beeing among the perverse, you haue gotten as it were a kinde of habite of perversenesse. I had rather then any golde your husband and you had neuer planted your selues in that Parish: why you were well enough before, and well accoumpted of among your neighbours, and it must needs grieue many of your good friendes to see you in these tunes now.
I may truelie thanke God, as for many other his mercies, so especially for this that ever I came to this mans Ministery (whom yee so trouble amongest you). I was indeed a Protestant before, and thought well of my selfe, and yet (if I shall not lie to you) I had no more Religion then my horse. Butnow I may truly say, that as my knowledge is in some measure increased, so I neuer made conscience of sinning and offending God, till I came to the place where I nowe dwell. All which as I must and doe attribute to God, as th'Author and Founteine, so to our Minister as the meanes and instrument.
Indeede you haue made a very woorthie increase, and mended the matter wonderous wel. And all this is for nothing els but because you are come from Churching to No Churching: what a wonderful cure and charge your Minister hath wrought in you. I beleeue he vseth to Catechize you in nothing els but only in Churching, you seeme to be perfect in the point.
Well, I would you could tell how to discharge a good conscience in your places, (any of you Chancelours) aswell as our Minister doeth in his. His ordinarie teaching is (thankes be to God) in matters ofmore moment then you speake of, and if you heard him once your selfe, I make no question but you would say so. For mine owne part I never hearde him speake publikly of this particular custome of churching in my life, further then might bee gathered out of any generall doctrine of his. Indeed I confesse I haue had private conference with him about it, and hee hath fullie satisfied me.
In what sort (I pray you) hath he satisfiedyou? may I be so bold as to craue a copie, or to be pertaker with you of your ghostly fathers resolutions?
Why you haue heard the most of them alreadie, and I haue made knowne to you at large the reasons that haue mooued mee to shake off and abandon this foolishe and superstitious custome of yours, wherewith I had well hoped you had bene satisfied.
Indeede you haue told me many prety things, but yet they bee such as I haue hearde of before. Why,they be the common reasons of you all amongst you. I neuer had any of you before me, but they haue pleaded euen as you doe, or to the same effecte.
The more saye I (vnder correction) haue you to aunswere for, That havinge had so manifest reasons layed before you so long agoe, and the same so often iterated and repeated vnto you, there is yet no manner of relenting in you, but you doe still persist and goe on in your course, in troubling poore women without cause.
Why you know my Lord Bushop went farther with some of you not farre from your quarters, and made the proudest of them crouch, and come on their knees, enforcing the~ to be Churched in despite of them, and that two or three yeares after they were layed. You would thinke I deale hardlie with you, if I should vse any of you so.
Now sure it was Bushoplike done ofhim if he did so. But what warrant I pray you had my Lord to make them crouch in this maner as you speake of? Doeth the Booke or any Law of the lande authorize him to Church a woman 3 yeare after shee is brought to bedde? shew me that I pray you for my learning?
Well, you haue nothing to doe with that. Therefore it shall be good for you Cousen (as I haue told you) to medle with your own matters & to bee armed howe to aunswere for your selfe, and not to deale in things impertinent to your place.
Content then, you giue me good counsell: But remember your self, I pray you, that it was you that brought in the Bushop & not I. I medled not with him till you spake of him. But to desire to bee resolved in some things of you is not I hope impertinent to my place, is it?
No, god forbid, whatsoever you desire to be satisfied in, be bold I pray you to propound it, and I will thankyou and doe my best to resolue you as farre foorth as lieth in me.
Why then in this Thankesgiving you speake of, who is it that you would haue giue thankes?
Why, the woman that hath bene deliuered.
When is it that you would haue her giue God thankes?
When shee is strong and able to goe to Church.
And not before? would you haue her forgett her self, and be vnthankfull till then?
Nay, God forbid, I hope shee hath more grace then so. But I speake of publike tha~ksgiving & not of private.
Why, but the blessing you see is private,
and what reason is it then, or what
warrant, or what example haue you out of the
Scripture, that there should be an
ordinarie sett seruice in Publike for euery priuate
and perticular blessing? I would faine you
resolved me in that. If the Minister
bee in duetie bounde to giue God thankesfor euery private and particular bleshing,
why not then as well for my husbands fall
of his horse, as for my deliverance? I tell
you I holde my husbande a farre more
woorthy member of the Church then my
selfe, and therefore I see no reason why yee
should not cause him to bee Churched as
well as me, and so all others in our parishe
that haue escaped either drowning or
danger of death.<|endoftext|>What, honest! Welcome into. How fares the noble Knight, and all the true Trojans at home?
I thanke God Sir, all well. My Master remembers his loue to your Worship, to you Master Vicar, and to all his friends in these parts.
We are much bound to him for his kinde remembrance; but I wonder what winde driues youhither? we may strew greene rushes for you; I thinke you were neuer heere since Master Maior tooke his oath.
Sir, you are in the right, but such troublesome guests come soone enough, like foule weather, before they be sent for.
Nay say not so, the worst dogge in your masters house cannot come vnwelcome to.
That's more of your kindnesse then our merit; but I pray you what's the reason the bowling greene is so emptie vpon so faire a day?
Why man, there is a great Faire at, thither they are all gone, tag, rag and longtaile.
Then I feare I am come at an ill time.
Why so?
My master hath sent me for the pyde nagge, hee would haue him runne inparke, lest hee spoile himselfe this drie season: besides, I haue appointed the Smith to bee heere in the afternoone. Now if the Castle-keeper bee gone to buy Hobbyhorses too, I am in a faire case.
To put you out of doubt, vpon my knowledge he is ridde out, more then an houre and a halfe since.
Then it is likely to be darke night before he finde the way home.
Assure your selfe of that; it is a forfeit for a Sheppy-man to come from a Faire till Sunne set.
Sue the ill lucke; and the worst is, I knownot how to spend the time all this liue-long day.
As if I haue not a good dish of Oysters, and a cold pye at home to hold you tacke.
Many thankes good Master Maior: but in very deed I brake my fast so well with our old Gardiner atbefore I came out, that I shall haue little mawe to any meate till night.
Then what will you doe?
On my little honestie I know not, vnlesse some good bodie would lende mee a Play-booke to make my worship laugh.
FaithI doe not remember any such in my custodie, but our Searcher lent me a merry book which came to his hands the last weeke.
Sir, you meane that squibbing pamphlet against Sir, which I borrowed of you yesterday morning.
The very same: I would you would take the paines to fetch it.
That labour shall be saued, we neuer parted companies since we met.
Now if you bee kinde gentlemen, let vs sit downe yonder, vpon Pennylesse Bench, and suruey it.
Agreed; for I thinke wee shall haue no bodie in hast come to trouble vs.
What may the title of the booke bee? and who is the Author?
He may be, for ought I know, he discouers himselfe only by the marke of I. R.
I dare lay a good wager it is that, whom my Master so hampred in his: my minde giues me it is the same, whose late arriuall makes him so much merriment.
Not vnlike: hee hath wonne the spurres for an arch-rayler. The most rauing, and brauingthat euer I read. Had he gotten any prize by his last worke, you should haue now seene him out of his maskers sute: he stands close behinde his picture: if it passe currant, he will then peepe out, otherwise he will hide his head in a Bench-hole.
But is this the fashion of professed Diuines, to broach Positions which they dare not justifie with the subscription of their names, and being namelesse themselues, to perbreake persons of note.
Doe you wonder at that? As if old pursetakers will present themselues in their owne likenes without, and.
Indeede that were the next way to the Gallowes; but surely this kinde of cunning ioyned with so great scurrility (which in my little view I discouered) would make me shrewdly suspect their sinceritie, who are so intemperate in their owne affections, and regardlesse of better mens credits.
This is the Catholike charitie, and soulegaining patience practised now adayes; but he is not without his shifts. That he concealeth his name, it is his humilitie, as regardlesse of wordly respects. That hee is so tarte, it proceedeth from his zeale of the cause, not any hatred of the person.
In my opinion he needs not feare any great applause for the extraordinary skil of his work. T'iswell if he scape in this learned age without reproof. But to make zeale the Patron for his personall frumps, is intollerable hypocrisie.
Could he shew any such sparkes of personall disdaine, flying from Saintpenne, there were yet some little hope, that hee hath at least a dramme of that: but you shall heare how he contradicts himselfe. Saint(saith he).
Then is hee as like Saint, as an Owle to an Iuie bush.
And could hee single out no body but my Master to make the Anuill of his malice? I doubt hee hath taken a wrong Sowe by the eare; if his coate be not swingd' well and thriftily, let me bee held for a sowced Gurnet.
Indeede it had beene the wiser way, first to haue beleguered the Castle which he formerly lost; and had not either vaine hope of a second voluntarie lapse, or necessarie feare of some foule discouerie, diuerted his force, hee would rather haue followed the chase of his olde prey. Well, hee is not vnlike to haue some hornets about his eares: But for Sir, hee hath passed his word to answere him with comtempt.
Silence verily is fittest for a Gentleman of his place, vnlesse his aduersarie were of more worth then his Start-vp.
I wonder in my heart whatmeant to come vpon him with a fresh reply, hauing publike notice of his resolution.
This was it that animated him; the Knightssecur'd his pen free passage without controll.
Nay, then I would my girdle might breake; seeing he will wake a sleeping Lyon, as long as I can hold ain my hand, I will ferret his sides till he crie.
I perceiue thou art true bred; such a Whelp is fittest for this game: But how camest thou by thy Latin?
Faith, I waited on a yong Gentleman, at, some three, or foure yeares, where I got a few broken ends together, enough to patchhis Cox-combe with a.
On my soule thou art a merrie grigge. I would not for the price of a good Breake-fast haue wanted thy companie in the reuiew of this discourse.
Perhaps you will say so, by that time wee haue done; It shall goe hard if I find not Crotchets in this Beetle-head, to descant vpon his plaine song. But I long to heare the bookes name.
It is called.
What!the Conqueror? O victorious. In what pompe art thou led to the Capitoll?
Would you know how? his Charriot is drawne with foure grisly:,,, and, and attended with,,, and.
If he triumph after the old Roman maner, he must (for the gaining of applause) be very liberall in his gifts to the people.
Hee passeth for that of all that euer I knew. Here he flings a, there a; here hee bestowes aof his owne taking; there hee casts our.are his ordinarie fauours; and as for, and, you would admire his lubberalitie.
Stop there good,teeth will water, if you talke of any more such Iunckets.
No not if hee gaueinsteede of; these dainterils haue layen so long vpon his hands, that I feare me they are scarce sweete.
His last Treatise, (if I be well aduised) wherein hee began to fling at the Knight, was Christned,.
The?They must bee Bables indeed if he bee able to moue them. What a braue Lad is this, that dreames of nothing but Ouerthrowes, and Triumphs? No doubt hee rescued many Shauelings in this skirmish. Twas pittie hee was not inwhen my Lordvndertooke his voyage: Then should his Lordship haue had no neede to haue stood to the curtesie of the two Vniuersities.alone would haue soon brought those poore Sauages, vnder the belt of his Discipline. But had he not great lucke (trow you) to scapehis fanges, comming so neere the confines of Hell?
He complayneth that he met with a, meaning the Knights,.
And well worthie, for hee gaue the onset without a challenge, neither came he as a(according to his colourable pretence); but as a man of Warre with a flagge, to batter the invincible Fort of the Knights reputation.
Nay by your leaue, S=r=.cast out his Gloue to any.
What was that to? what needed hee haue fought as the Popes Voluntarie, vnder those colours? Had he such interest in the Title, that hee could not forbeare the Claime?
As for that, it had beene pardonable, if in the confidence of his cause, hee had endeauoured to disable the Knights refutation of, by the. but toto blemish his credit, to, nay to make him ato vent other mens patches, as it argueth rather an aking tooth, then a religious minde, so is it able to driueher selfe into an.
Had the, I meane Discretion, beene his guide in that journey;, beene superintendent in his thoughts, hee would haue found another way to the wood. 'Tis strangeto alienate his affections, whosewe labour to informe.
Will you haue the right? I haue gotten the length of his foote.sees thathath a Wind-mill in his head, therefore hee buzzeth in his eares to set the clapper a iogge, that so he may get a good Grist.
Had there not been some such pecuniary, or sinister ayme, I verily thinkehis pen had beene at a full period. Hee would haue accepted the Knights reasonable satisfaction, and endured a little showre, especially raised by the blustring windes of his owne distemper: hee would not haue prouoked the grimme Porter the second time, whom he found so fell at the first. Somewhat it is that makes him so bray in the eares of his supposed, who was well contented to haue taken a nappe, and to let him passe without regard.
Yet would he make the world beleeue hee is so desirous of peace, that hee hath now out of the aboundance of his charity brought him ato stop his mouth.
Trust mee truly, hee comes ouer him with kindnesse; this hony was not fetched from thehiue, but from thehole, more like to stir choller then to procure rest.
This tricke he learned in his passage ofthe Ferriman; to looke towardswith his face, and rowe towardswith his pen. He sets out thefor a signe, but his vessels are full of gall and wormewood within.
If we may take his owne word in his owne worke, it is the.
If hee had presented him with the iuice of, and, it had beene more proper for the dimnesse of his sight. It seemes he hath not been brought vp vnder an, but rather in ashop, he is so cunning in dishing out this saucy.
What will ye say then to this?I hope you will not taxe this to be broken-winded.
I promise you an excellent close. Had my master such ain his kitchin, that would quench the fire withand, theandwould soone share his lands: his patrimony would then be in a dangerous consumption indeed.
, you are somewhat too quicke, his honest meaning is to bee accepted: yet if I haue any iudgement, hee is more elegant in one leafe of this booke, then in all the other he wrote before.
Marry hee may thanke Sirfor that, whose phrases are so interlaced throughout the whole discourse, thathis stile may seeme to haue put on her holli-day coate.
This one thing I heard a Gentleman of good quality obserue, that hee hath an extraordinary gift in the retorting of conceipts: And withall protested that he thoughtwas begotten on the side of a hill, he so returns word for word like an Eccho.
The truth is, the poore man hath a very weake stomacke, hee casts vp whole periods as they went downe, without digestion or alteration.
If I were his Phisition, I would prescribe him a cup of wine and sugar next his heart, for what with his,and, he hath a very bad stomacke, and a worse braine.
He ill deserues it, who measures other mens liquor, by the shallow panne of his owne wheeling skonce. If hee breake his fast with nymble-brainedsomewhat more liberally, hee strait fumbles in the mouth, and tumbles out ain euery answere according to his.
He was not then mistaken that didhim by the name of, which vpo~ long search he hath found to signifie: as much to say, astothe, who hath in his time made more razling Indentures, then the best Scriuener inor S=t=..
Yet as flustred as hee was, when his wench told him that he kissed like a Clowter, hee could text her with. And when shee pleaded that it went against her heart, he could protest by the faith of a Catholique, not to come within a foote of her conscience.
It seemes indeed he speakes not by guesselike a, but as one beaten to the trade by experimentall proofe, when he saith,. Marke how feelingly he speakes euen of the thought.
Let him be what he will, this is no fit Court to draw his Inditement: hee will trauerse it with an; Let vs rather heare how he bestirs himselfe for Purgatory.
Nay by your leaue Sir, his Apology touching the exceptions in themust haue the precedence. This hath he cunningly in his first chapter prefixed to a worke; by good probability, long studied, against the Knights first letter, some sixe yeares since directed to M=r=.
Bee it as it list: seeing wee are come asto sitte vpon his account, let vs first see his charge, and then his discharge.
Indeed equity her selfe cannot prescribe a more indifferent course then this. There is great reason yourshould stand in these.
No doubt he hath placed a Lion in the forefront to make the better way, for the Marshalling of his weaker and more heartlesse troopes.
If he haue the least dramme of Rhetoricall Chiualry, he will be sure to put the best legge formost.
You are both wide; in stead of a Lion, hee hath committed the conduct of his forces tothe foxe, whom hee presents on his paper stage witha Target, to shield him from the imputation.
It must be a nimble Foxe that can shift off so many palpable wrongs; hee had neede haue his ioynts thoroughly annointed with the oyle of leazing.
Doubt you not that; his poynts are well tagg'd with. And first, as if hee (good man) meant nothing but pure deuotion, hee deplores the, wishing that the few lines which concerned the,.
Hee were a wise man would loose a good Breakfast, for better repast then I could euer discouer in his Larder. It seemes his booke is somewhat a kinne to andrugge, which requires the attendance of an houre-glasse, and a Spanish. Hee that dares not but allow a certaine number of Psalms in our Ladies Psalter to be read after supper, is angry if his owne lines bee perused when a man hath dined. If there bee any such danger in taking his receits vpon a full stomack, he should haue done well to prescribe both diet and time.
Vndoubtedly hee hath a reference to theand, mentioned in his Preface, which liquor he saith the Knight loues well. This holy water runnes from his pen in such aboundance as if he hadhis tunne for a Standish: hee dreames of no body but, who in his merry veyne wrote more wise sentences, then euer issued fromhis most sober thoughts; heerein he displayeth his folly, or rather his malice, in the highest degree. But the best is, he is like to purchase as much thanks of the iudicious Reader, by this his iniurious, ashis vngracious Sonnes got by traducing their old Father for a Dotard, and so vnfit for the management of his estate. The Knight is able to shew him more then ato wipe away this blurre: whereis the prompter, you must imaginewill deliuer a good euidence.
,are no new inuentions, nor grounded truths: as if a Gentleman cannot drinke a cup of wine but hee must instantly be as wise as staring. The Knight is of an affable, and pleasant disposition, yet hee comes not alwaies vp toTearme.was no Plough-man, though once for a priuate end he fained himselfe a Rusticke, and put his hands to the share.was vpbraided for being all night in a tauerne, but how did hee answere for himselfe?(quoth he).
cannot heare with that eare: Hee should haue shewed more discretion in shaping his credulous, according to the prescript of this direction; had hethe, as well as hee summed thewine, his intruding curiosity would haue passed with lesse blame.Hee that is lumpish at his meales, will proue but a slug in his more serious affaires.
I am sure the old Frier was of your mindein this; for handling those words, He made his diuision thus. Here is first. Secondly,.
Gra-mercy, I perceiue thou hast not left all thy Latine shreads at home. But I would gladly know what the Knight mistooke in the perusall of his discourse that he should be thus charged with an.
The Knight (if you be remembred) tooke it in ill part that hee was taxed by the, and, as also with the.
And can hee either blame the acceptance, or deny the cause, which is yet extant vnder his own hand?
Yes, hee forsooth doth not simply derogate from the Knight in any of these, but comparatiuely matching them together, giues the precedence, where he thinks he had most cause.(saith he).
Were there no more but this, it is more then common Ciuility can well warrant; had hee not bin ill tutord hee might haue learned that comparisonsare odious. Might not the Knights commendable qualities say vnto him,? The questionwas not allowable amongst the Disciples. In this case, shewes little care of the whole. The Poet might haue informed him,: he that hath but an vnce of each of those former properties, wants not a graine of a worthy man. So that by sundring them he labours to lessen their esteem, and by disparaging that which he seemes to hold in highest regard, hee plainly nullifies the repute of the rest.
Hee that hath but halfe an eye, may easily perceiue his comparatiue praises, to be indeede priuatiue disgraces: as you may see by his Comment vpon his owne text. For wheras he stiled the Knights booke an, he now explanes himselfe, that the want of.(saith hee). Is this the comparatiue degree wherewith hee dubs his pen?: seeingwill afford no more, tis well wee haue this. But such a Boone is not like long to be enioyed. I fearerepents himselfe already of his seeming bounty; For as if his pen had beene ouer lauish, hee doth interpret theformerly acknowledged, to signifie.
I promise you he hath mended the matter well, these milde censures are able to raise. Is this thewith which hee is content to crowne my Masters temples? Is this the tune which the? then may the gingling of mypasse currant for reasonable good melody. I easily beleeue hee went, who can no better iudge of those Christall streames.
If a man should giuethis attribute, that he is, which (bearing a double construction) may be warranted, albeit he haue beene scarce seasoned with the Principles of eyther Science, and so a Dullard in both: how could he but hold himselfe ill handled, if afterward the same party should tell him that he shewed morethen, morethen? But the best is, (as I heard the Knight once say) he makes no more reckoning of his praise, in giuing him that hee had not, then of his dispraise, in taking from him that he had; as hauing neither more nor lesse, for either of both.
Yet this comes short ofhis equiuocating straine. For did hee sincerely ayme at the Knights praise in his grant, why doth hee then gainelay it in those his contradictory imputations? or did his mentall entendment seeke the disparagement of the Knights learning (as now the euent hath made apparant) to what ende then doth he protest the sincerity of his good meaning? Why doth he labour to colour his former frumpe with a distinction of learning, yeilding the lesser arm of that tree to the Knight, and keeping the greater (as purchased by his long study and delight) to himselfe? whereas in fine he dispossesseth him of all, euen of the least leafe of the smallest branch.
Thus is the Foxe now vncased, hisof due respect, and, prooued to bee but the: but I would gladly see vpon what ground he buildeth those his derogatory and disgracefull termes.
Forsooth he hath gotten the wind of an opposition betweene the Knights, and his, and that in the first sentence of his, which he produceth as a.(saith hee).Thisreading without an Intergatory saith,, whereas the argument is drawnethat it cannot be thatshould be to seeke of cunning conueighance, then which nothing can bee more sutable to the purpose.But admit there were no dash visible to his squinting eyes, besides the full poynt, yet might his wisdome haue taken it for spoken, in which acceptation it is no lesse thento the.
Tut, this Make-bate hath no other proiect but to setagainst, andagainst, to cast a bone betweene the, and the, and to set them both together by the eares with the truth: but the best is, the least dash of a pen will easily reconcile them.
Nay this is not all, hee challengeth thealso, as, in auerring that the(saith he).
Then I am sure our Preacher deliuered false doctrine the last Sunday, for hee spake much of, and I remember hee had such a word as, which was frequent (as he said) in the mouth of theand. Hee spake somewhat also of the, who vouched nothing but Antiquity, and of thewho pleaded the authority ofandfor the passage of their heresie: the particulars are crept out of my slippery braine.
Hee might further haue informed you of the Heretique, who in the opendid vant of the Pedegree and descent of his doctrine, from all the ancient Fathers of the Church.(saith hee). Was notan Heretique? yet forsooth he did beleeue,;. If theofwere not a glistering varnish,would not haue gone so high to fetch the descent of hisgrounding their foundation vpon those words of,.
Hee might haue shewen himselfe a more skilfull Herauld, and gone neerer the sound, & sence, had he drawne their originall from these wordes of the Apostle:; but thesemust bee a day or two elder then the Moone, or else they will hold themselues no Gentlemen: their holy water must either flow from, or else it hath but a base current; and could they not fetch the authority of their Monasticke life from the sample of Christ himselfe, they would repute it, as of an vpstart family.
I applaud their witte; this is not the worst fetch to gaine esteeme. Were I a rich man it should cost me an hundred pound twice told, but I would haueorto stand on the top of my line. I would not sticke to alter two or three letters of my name, to make my selfe of kinne to. Me thinksis a statly, it runnes so full in the mouth.
The best iest (the liuelyof his malicious spirit) is this that hee playeth vpon theletters which fall in order, without any choice, as directs to the marginall notes. Hee had charged the Knight with an: heereupon Sir, discouering diuers his, (more then were named) to abridge the length of hisdid margent thus.(which word hee falsly cited). This falling vnder the letter, O,wittely tells him that,. In like manner he descants vpon the letter,, by which hee vnderstands.
Alas poore man, I beshrew my heart if I do not pitty the penury of his barren conceit. He was neere driuen, (God wot) when hee was faine to ransacke the Wardrope of his witte, for such thredbare shifts.
What thinke you of this? when the Knight tells him that, hee in the quaintnesse of his nimble Conceipt retorts it thus.Was not here anfarre fetch'd? When the Knight sayes,, he conceitedly answeres. For, he returnes: somewhat more Arte hee shewes in putting, for; for, he altering the person saith,. And as for the, the,and the, he bandies them vp and downe, as if thewould affoord him no other balls. Thus doth he play, reuerberating according to his Rhetoricall skill the same syllables without any variety of inuention.
Sir, It was well obserued. I now seereport was grounded vpon good warrant.is a perfect, there cannot apasse his fingers,. Sircites a part of twoout of a knowne, onely with alteration of one word,. Whereupontells his reader, that the Knight makes a verse that.
He hath not onely a quarrell to my Masters, but for want of better stuffe hee scannes hisalso vpon his fingers, and findes them too short by many feete. Yet I dare vndertake there areenough left standing to beare a millon of as stout Scar-crowes as.
That which galleth him is, that the Knight now.
Now you speak of that, you put me in mind of a merry answere which I heard my Master make touching that point. The Woods (quoth hee) standing vpon holy ground, he hath little reason to find fault if I gaue them; withall hee concluded, that he was not a little glad he had power so to order them; and the rather, for that suchmight be disappointed for building their nests there.
The felling of those Woods (as I haue heard) will be the raising of a more charitable work: But of what timber are those fellowes made, who with their goggle eyes prye into euery mans priuate affaires? Is this the next way to further? but amongest other things, I muse howscapes his fingers, seeing his reuolt first bredde this quarrell; tis a wonder hee doth so quietly part with his prey,.
Assure your selfe there is a pad in the straw. It is either for feare of some foule discouery, or for hope of his recouery: hee finds it his best course, to sooth him with the acknowledgement of a, and to free him from the vices of vulgar life.
We will not diue so deepe in his thoughts. I warrant the Knight laughes his heart sore at thewench, whichinuention hath lately landed on our English coast.
Laugh! I protest there comes not a friend to visit him, but hee tells him of the, & how friendlyhath promised to bring him to the house where shee is to bee found: onely hee feares shee is some cast wench; and if the Frier her Ghostly Father, by whom she was conuerted, haue blowne vpon her, hee hath passed his word to turne her ouer toGroome. And shall not I (thinke you) be well promoted with thereuersion? But the best is he coniures them all.
If the Knight should make vse ofhis curtesie in this, he shall haue good cause to confesse that there is aindeed. When he shall meet withvpon Earth, hee will giue the more credite to those singing flames, and ghastly Ghosts in the after World.
I haue heard goodaffirme, that dreames most commonly arise, either, so saies,; or, and then,; or else, and then. Now perhapshauing an ill braine, and worse bloud, had beene reading of, and his: or of, or else the Poet, who had both faire daughters ofor of& his, and so hauing a spleen at the Knight, doth with a strong imagination fasten the supposed crimes vpon him, as if hee had binin that kind.
in that kind; I heard him say one day in the Stable, hee would giue 20. poundhad said troth, wishing that all rich widdowes neere London might read his booke: for then they would hold him, and craue no other testimony for the approbation of his courage and virility.
The like fable thecoyneth to disgrace onewhom he describeth to be one of theKnights; who (saith the);:.
O notable figment! this is inuented to cry quittance for our, mentioned in the Letter to the.
As I am a true man, I cannot imagine that so impious an affection can harbor in any Protestant breast; but I remember I met not long since with a pretty, not altogether dissonant from this purpose, made vpon the credible relation of a Gentleman who had trauelled forraine parts: which as neere as I can hit it, runnes thus.
I promise you this is more then an inch beyond the reach of my Latin: I would it were Englished.
On the sudden I cannot render it better then thus.
If my doublet had no better buttons thenofhad, I should cracke them all with laughing at this conceipt. I trowdarknesse will bee sufficiently enlightned with this more passable probability. If hee haue any sparke of shame he will not heereafter seeke such, which show themselues in the blacknesse of vgly vntruth, when they are once brought to the light of Triall.
Surely his braine is very like the soyle of, which (assay) yeelds euery Moone, a new supply of strange Monsters, and deformed creatures, not to be paraleld by any former praesidents. But all this while wee haue ouerslipped his. What saies he to the Knights valour?
In my opinion he might well haue giuen ouer that chase, as hauing receiued a modest, short sufficient, and discreet answere. Yet saith he,.
It were better theshould picke out the eies of tenne thousand such, who are not onely as so many, but hugeblemishing the sight of the body polliticke. Though he think there is not such a, holding him no wiser then M=r=., yet it is well knowne his approued sufficiencies neede no such trumpet to commend him in the gates.
You haue no reason to take it in ill part, hee serues all Iustices of peace alike, glauncing at them as.
, passion hath almost drawne vs aside from the firstpretended against the, which was.
You say well; he builds vpon that,, which might bee easily salued with that,. It is an old saying and a true,? Hee that is regardlesse of his owne soule, life, and state, is no fit guardian for a Common-weale. But see how purblind thisis; when he hath a purpose to play the counterfet. Hee that was so quick-sighted to spye a marginall note ninty two pages off to serue his owne turne, will not now see that which is directly opposite, beeing directedthereunto with the letter, wherewith hee hath not beene vnacquainted since hee could number; for had he but cast his eye (O partiall eye) aside, hee might haue seenebedewing his cheekes with this lament,. So that if the question be how it could stand with the Knights valour to, he brings inepitomizing that, which himself thorow the amazement of a so monstrous proiect was vnable to particularize to the full: vizt..
This winde no doubt raised the storme of the Knights passion, wherof that the reader might entertaine more then a generall, or cursory apprehension, he giues him an hint by himselfe, and his owne friends, what euery trueshould haue either corporally or relatiuely felt.
Had he made an enumeration of the worthy Peeres, whose massacre was murtherously intended, then would he haue charged him (as I heare he doth for his Apology in the behalfe of the most renowmed, and euer memorable, and what not? Or else you should haue seene them all summed vp, with one and the same regardlesse account, that had the powder put out these.
It is very probable, howsoeuer he speake of some of his owne profession who detest that bloudy plot more, and for higher respects then the Knight, yet it seems this Libeller is none of that number: for albeit there was an impossibility that Sirshould haue gone to the pot alone, without the company of many noble Lords, and the rest his worthy associates there assembled, he sticks not to say,. Thus dothbewray his true intention in the particular, which pollicy aduiseth him to colour and conceale in the generall.
! here is a new, spick and spanne, from the mint: you haue on the sodaine giuen him as fit a name as the bestcould possibly haue inuented. These two wordes do import as much as,; the first of which hath no neerer affinity with his name, then the other with his nature, as being, so regardlesse of Kisse and Kinne, that he will be easily drawne, according to the Prouerb () to libell against his own Father and neerest of bloud.
As I am true Groome, I thought M=r=. Mayor had called him, which hee might well haue warranted; For whatsoeuercould inuent,suggest,pretend, ormaintaine, hishath raked together, out of the bogs of Hell, to cramme this his railing Pamphlet withall.
You haue not yet heard al he hath to say, for the degrading of the Knights valour, who (saith).
Were hee not past all shame, hee would haue swallowed downe that morsell with silence; The more he rubs that sore, the more he renewes the memory of that Tragicall ende of, whose princely breast carried to his graue the Characters of their gracelesse, and vngrateful disloyalty. Their murther of Kings, their garboyles raised in free States, and their alienating the hearts of subiects from their obliged obedience, must not in any hand in them bee held treason, but deuotion; wheras on the contrary it is not Courage, but Cowardise, to seeke by the execution of penall lawes (which are now grown rusty for want of vse) to free the country from such, who make themselues drunke with the bloud of the Saints, playing with imperiall Globes, as Whales do with barrels, which they tosse vp and downe at their pleasures.
Yet as if these things were nifles, no whit preiudiciall to a Common-weale, he complaineth of want of the Knights Charity,(saith hee).
An ouer-feruent desire indeede.Rather then faile, if there be any powder in a Country, they will send fiery Chariots to hoise vs vp into the Clouds.
It were better in my opinion to trauel thither on foot; hee shall bee sure to lose much lether who spurres Cut so fast: but by his leaue I will not hyre such a blind Guide at so deere a rate. When I come to S=t=,or, he will beare mee in hand, that I haue a little further to trauell, as being in the Suburbs of Paradise, whereas (God wot) I shall haue gone so farre out of my way, and then stand in need of a new helpe, to bring mee out of the Deuills mouth.
Wee shall heare anon what ghostly directions hee will giue vs to further vs in this voyage: In the meane season it is not amisse to obserue what skill hee vseth in peruerting the Knights meaning. The Knight indeed professeth irreconcilable detestation; but of whom?Hee proclaimes not warre against, and other poore seduced soules; his discretion hath taught him not to bind the nocent and innocent in one bundle. They arewhom hee brandeth as worthy perpetuall detestation., as long as they deserue that denomination, I cannot see how the mostdare bid them; neither doth he malitiously desire, but rather vpon more then probableconiecture by way of caution foretell the damnation of their soules who second those hellish Pyoners, in those diuellish courses, which are so odious in the sight of God and man. Reason he had to expresse his dislike asas he could; for that hee feared the like incouragements, and meritorious attributes, to such future attempts from the Papall Sea, by whose Agents that plot is now (in shew) disclaimed; though rather for the contrary successe, then the barbarous immanity thereof.
I am verily perswaded that most Christian Charity would not sticke to professe eternall opposition to that, whose hearts harbour dangerous factions, whose tongues are tip'd with malitious scandalls, whose hands are imbrued in a Sea of innocent bloud. If the greathaue shut the gates of heauen against such inueterate, and impenitent Murtherers, I cannot see how mercy can be hired by the Popesto lend them a key for their entrance into life.
It was no cruelty of yore to cast a poore harmlesse infant springing from the scorched womb of the mother, into the fiery flames, there to be consumed; but now the very speech ofagainst notorious traytours, and matchlesse Malefactors, argues: the truth is, our Iustices may be wel suspected for both, as being according toaccount. Did they imploy their authority in suppressing them in their particular Shires, as well as they vse their wits indecreeing against them in the, they should gaine more honour, and the Countrey reape farre more good.
I dare say you long till you heare how he laies about him in the defence of, but his meaning is to try your patience. The second part of histouching certaine exceptions against himselfe, taketh vp the remainder of his first Chapter. For the dispatch of these(so hee tearmes them) as if hee were challenging his Copes-mate at, hee doth methodically diuide this sequele into,and.
The rime may well beseemethe Poet, orthe Ballad-maker; but I would gladly see the reason; what meanes he by?
Sir(I remember) to abate the pride of his spurtling quill in blemishing the worth of other mens lines, giues him a tast of such an, wouen throughout that work, as would inforce trueto blush at the very first sight therof, there being very few leaues wherein the Reader shall not meet with a, aor a. Some of which he there paged to saue himselfe a labour in the discouery of those many other,, and, which any curious eye without the helpe of Spectacles might easily discerne.
And what flappe hath he gotten to free his paper from these magotting creatures, whose blowing hath made his periods so vnsauory?
He doth confesse, and auoid. He forsooth had rather vtter his minde in a; as being.
Hee that will take vpon him to Minorize the learning of Authors, and to dedicate his workes vnto persons of that extraordinary note, and superlatiue iudgement, must not onely weigh his positions in the ballance of the sanctuary, that they bee consonant to the truth, butthem also with a Rhetoricall, that they want not those comelywhich are requisite in the Professors of. The fabricke of Theologicall worke ought to bee raised. Ragged and rugged stones are fitter for the wild, then to stand in the. To runne a poore silly heartlesseout of breath, argues little variety of wit and lesse solidity of iudgement.
Will you seeplay her prize? then listen how pretilycan defend.(saith he).
Heere is a Ladde for the nonce to helpe a lame dogge ouer a stile. O thou rarely patronized, downe on thy marrow-bones, prostratethy selfe at the foote of this thy valorous Champion borne in, who hath stretched his fiue wits on the Tenter-hooks to maintaine thy worth. Tis great pitty that this lustycame so raw from the; had he continued a little longer at School by this time he would haue made theroare.
I know not how other men stand affected: for my owne part, I haue euer held that Fidler worthy to bee turned out of doores among the rascall company, (though he haue a badge on his sleeue as broad as my hand) who still harpes vpon one string, and dwells vpon one tune, be it the best horne-pipe, that eueraffoorded. Doth not one harsh bleating voice disgrace a whole quire? Doth not one vnsauory hearb giue a relish to the whole pot of pottage? A discord I grant may be admitted with some grace, but not continued without some intollerable disgust. In a word, if one flye mar a boxe of sweetest ointment, I cannot see what credit this multiplicity ofcan bring tobooke.
I hope we shall find better stuffe in the rest; how doth he shake off the? they sticke I feare so close to his skin, (maugre hisperfume) that they will hardly out of the bone.
He blusters mainly that the Knight shold crie,.
Is he so impudent as to stand in the defence of these vncouth and ridiculous fopperies, which can shew no other pedegree butto countenance them from exploding contempt.
As touching the first practise; he doth not say thatare Christned; but that the.
Whether it be a similitude, or anI am not so cunning a Logician to distinguish. It skils not much how they please to tearme it, who are driuen to their shifts in seeking some colourable mantle to shroud it from the inglorious note of. The question is,, what warrant he hath for this genericall similitude, (which he confesseth) betweene the, and the.
Nay there he leaues you to your own search. If you can neither findto warrant this practise, hee meanes not to be your Informer. It sufficeth him beeing betweene Hawke and Buzzard to turne it ouer with a witlesse and vnciuill iest, which he deuideth betweene his old familiars theand the.
I haue heard some say there was once much adoe about theof an: but there beeing store of that breed at,is now growne so nice, that he will not be seene vpon the backe of his olde, wherefore the poore weariedis faine to ride him.
Tis pitty they should part companies; yet did I neuer see man more troubled with thein his sleepe; thenis at mid-day with the,of whom he grones to be disburdened. Faine would he haue the Printer beare part of his luggage; but seeing it is now more then a yeere and a day since thewas found as a stray, and cryed in open Mart by, the custome of the Mannormakes it his owne, without cutting off either mane or tayle.
My masters I am glad to see your wits so frolicke; yet I must needes say it is but: besides, his reasoning approoues more then you say. For admit a, should put on the Popes robes, his, his, come with S., sit downe in theon the Chayre appropriated to his Holinesse: and that he should in his passage be saluted by the Vulgar as Pope (bearing those ensignes with which that Deity alone is dignified) Should he not be sure to be called, and pay deare for this his genericall, and accidentall resemblance? Will it serue his turne to say, Alas no man heard mee say that I was, I did but weare his vestiments, and a little counterfeit his state.
I will giue him my word hee shall finde it better to play the, then so to immitate the.
The case is of the same nature. The
blessing of Bells is no lesse presumptuously
accompanied with the sacred rites, and ceremonies of,
(yea with greater solemnities) then the Christning
of Children: so that the Laye people know not how
to distinguish them. Now marke howplayesthe, he doth not say thatare Christned,
onely this,. Neither is the Venetian, though habited like the: Shall he
not be sure to haue this pearle or the like rung in his
eares, by oneor other.I haue so
charitable an opinion of, that his reuerent
respect to theof the Romish Sea, would make
him say, Fye vpon such a Pope. Yet (see how blind
deuotion ouer-swaies th'equity of his iudgement in
the like) hee quarrells with the Knight for saying,.<|endoftext|>Seeing I am appoynted to defend the profitable arte of setting of Corne, though in respect of learning very vnfit, yet because I haue professed and practized Husbandrie for the most part of thirtie yeeres, and that you, the author of the booke (calledsay that husbandrie is no part of your profession, I may hope to maintaine against you by way of argument in plaine Husbandrie, that Plowing and Setting is much better and more profitable, than either Plowing and Sowing, or Digging and Setting.
I maruell that my booke doth so much offend you, I thought to haue pleased you all Ploughmen, for so commending the olde fashion of Plowing and Sowing.
Surely sir you haue no otherwise offended me, than all other men that desire the good of their Countrie, and be sorie to see the simple abused and discouraged by your meanes, and how you please an othersort of wilfull men, that will neither know what may be profitable for themselues, nor haue any such heartie loue to their Countrie and poore neighbours, as they ought to haue. As for your booke, howsoeuer you meant, it serues to so little good purpose (in my conceite) that it was the chiefe cause that moued me to take this worke in hand, to correct (if it were possible) the euill humors and preiudicate opinions against Corne-Setting, that it hath planted in mens heads and hearts.
I am sorie that my booke should breede any euill humors in mens heads or hearts, and I pray you what faults doe you finde in my booke?
Sir there be faults too many, which being the fruites of your idle houres (as you say) be not much to be marueiled at, for seldome doth idlenes bring forth any profite in husbandrie. And it is not my purpose to expostulate with you vpon all particular faults; they are too many to trouble the reader with: but you shall heare mine opinion, like a man of my plaine profession, & I will tell you my minde what I doe thinke in this argument, as well as I can. To passe ouer other matters, I will begin to defend our old fashion of Ploughes, against your strange Plough, that you say. Sir, if you can deuise a Plough that will goe deeper in all grounds (for you make no difference) a foote more than ordinarie, it were good you brought it forth; for surely it is likely to proue an implement of great force to our English Husbandrie: for with it you must be compelled to plowe land twentie inches deepe or thereabouts, and yet I must confesse to my remembrance, I neuer saw any Plough, though drawne with ten oxen, to goe aboue eight or teninches ordinarilie, and that with much a doe; and I pray you, how many Oxen or Horse will your Plough require to be drawne with? for in some places if you make it goe, we plaine countrie men will suspect you will Coniure: and in many places the qualitie of the mould will not permit our ten inches, much lesse your two and twentie. Againe, what vse I pray you shall the Common-wealth haue of such an implement, where either it cannot goe vnles the diuell draw it, or may not goe for the euill mould it will turne vp? and so your Plough in that place doth more harme, than your booke can doe good any where else.
Not so sir, I will haue my Teeme and my Plough so made, that it shall goe well of that depth in such grounds, as I will chuse to set my Corne in.
It may be possible (if it please God to worke such wonders by your inuention) but we the poorer sort of Husbandmen, cannot make Ploughs, and prouide Teemes of that value and qualitie; neither haue we such change of Land, as to make choyse of apt grounds to beare the weight of such Plowes & Teemes; but I doubt not by Gods helpe, to plowe and dresse ten Acres of Land, as well as you shall doe with your strange Plough, or any man shal do with a spade, except he digge it two spit deepe, & so burie the first spit with the second, which wil be both extreme chargeable and impossible in most grounds; and yet where he may digge but one spit, there will remaine needes vnburied specially the Cooch, which I neuer saw destroyed, but with a sommer fallow, or burning the land, as the Deuonshire men doe: the which killing of weedes, howsoeuer it can be done, is the chiefe cause, that vpon extreame barren Land, those countrie people haue good Corne, which otherwiseshould haue little or none: and I desire all good Husbands to consider how necessarie it is for them to destroy the weedes, before they sowe or set their Corne, that (if possiblie they can) they suffer not the weeds to sucke out the sappe of their grounds in the spring time, and all sommer, before they commit their seede to the ground, indangering it with such enemies, which they may doe (in my opinion) by one or two plowings more in their sommer fallow aboue ordinarie, if the weedie condition of the Land, or the season of the yeere doe require it.
Well sir, admit you doe plowe your Land as well as the Spade can doe it, as deepe as your Plough will goe, yet as I say, you cannot plowe it deepe enough, nor lay it leuell and plaine for the setters to worke vpon.
Not so sir, these are not altogether so idle as you make them, but I pray you how will you make this barren Land rich enough, to haue such increase as will answere the charge of setting?
Indeede that is not altogether so idle as the other, but yet very easie to be answered, and very likelie to be compassed, euen in the barrenest Countries and places farre remoued from all meanes to enrich their Land. Here then I would aduise all good Husband-men that intend setting, to lay all their soile and foule doung that they vsed to scatter ouer thirty Acres or there abouts, (being their ordinarie season) I say, lay it vpon ten Acres. And by reason they leaue twentie Acres to rest, they shall keepe more store of Sheepe either of their own, or take to folde of other mens, and so keep them better, and by that meanes their folde will be much bigger, and their Land will be folded much better: and if there be any Marle of Chalke, or of other sort of good molde neere to be had by any meanes, they shall now haue leasure to fetch it, by reason they haue so little tillage to doe: or else doe this, follow the example of a Gentleman that made a great quantitie of soile, by the fodering of all his Cattell vpon a peece of exceeding ranke ground about an Acre, which being very good and restie Land neere his house,he plowed vp in the end of Aprill, when his Cattell went to grasse, and with two or three plowings so mixed the restie ranke ground with the doung and fodder of his cattell, that he had ten loade for one of very good soile, (to the fatting of other grounds) then otherwise he should haue had; and also there is much dounge to be made with Ferne in places where it is neere: many good Husbands do prouide great store in summer, that in winter will serue for cattell to sit drie vpon, and make great store of soile, with little cost, hauing now so much leisure in this small Tillage. By these and diuers other good meanes very common and easie, when men haue little plowing, they may so inrich their land, that they shall not neede to doubt of a better increase (by Gods helpe) sufficient to pay the charge of setting liberally, with threefold increase at Haruest.
Then you may fall into another inconuenience, that I warned you of in my booke, that is, to make your land too ranke, and then your Corne will ledge, and euery stalke will be slender and long, euery eare will be heauier and longer than ordinarie, and so the Corne will fall downe and ledge, and come to little good.
This inconuenience will easilie be helped. Wee had first neede to helpe our barren land, and make it hartie, and then for falling and ledging I will set it thin enough, as the qualitie of the ground requireth: for it is the thicke sowing of ranke land vpon euill tillage that causeth Corne to ledge. If the land be rich and the yeere wet, the Corne ranke, and the weedes many; then (as you say) it is like to ledge: few poore men in England complaine their land is too rich, or desire their Corne more thin, for then their purses would be more emptie. I could easilie teach them such tricks as well as you with allyour cunning: and as for the length and slendernes of the straw, I doubt not but it will be fit to beare the heauie eares, which God send me, and take you the light if you like them better.
Your reasons may proue good for sowing, but for setting, you will be set a ground presentlie. For where will you get people enow to set a Season fit for a Teeme to be kept on? All the labourers in the Countrie will scant serue you, and fiue or sixe such as you would be.
I must needes confesse, that your experiencehath taught you to say more in this matter than I conceiued of it before. But yet seeing you looke for no more increase than sixe or eight quarters vpon an Acre, it is not the admirable arte the first booke speakes of (which made me mislike and write as I did) for many men in diuers places haue had the like increase; neither doe I yet perceiue how the charges of setting will be answered, nor any matter worthie so great account as you make of it.
What you see I know not, or what the cause should be I cannot tell, that so many men should be so blinde or so vnwilling to see how to doe themselues and their neighbours so much good: but I feare me it is the iust punishment of God vpon vs the sinfull people of this good Land, that we hauing so great plentie of all good things, do consume with gluttonie and with drunkennesse so great blessings of God alreadie bestowed vpon vs: and if we should by this meanes or any other, expect a greater aboundance than yet we haue receiued, it is to be feared that the Lord that seeth how wickedlie we would consume it, will not permit such an vnthankfull people to receiue so exceeding great a benefit, but euen by our owne frowardnes will quite ouerthrow it. But yet let vs see if we can possiblie be brought to discerne any thing worthie account in this noueltie, as you tearme it: And for example, say that thirtie Acres by Rodde, will require three bushels of seedemeasure to euerie Acre, (for so you say it will) and so in most land it doth, which is eleuen quarters and two bushels of seede to thirtie Acres: What is the vsuall increase vpon an Acre in the common fields barren land?
The increase of an Acre of such barren land,
commonly is not aboue two quarters one yeere withanother, and one Acre with another, and when they so doe,
there neede be no dearth in England; for where one hath
aboue, three hath not so much: and therefore you will
hardlie approue that your setting will be to any great
purpose in those common fields, barren Land.<|endoftext|><|endoftext|>Nay, come foorth, come forth I say, Ile giue thee a crowne, though it be but a crackt one: what wilt not? art so hard to be drawne forth?
S'foot thou shalt know thatdares enter: nay.
Whose this behinde me?
Tissir; what will you neuer leaue your quarrelling?
Well,hath defended you a good many times; but tis no matter, another time shall serue: shall I get you outalone, that I may haue you.
Yes if youle be singletoo.
Nay, put theofaside, that there were two of them, I hope you were able to buckle with them.
Ile tell you what, if I goe into the Field with him, hangvp if I doe not cutpoynts, and lash him when I haue done: nay, you shall findemettle to the very backe: 'sfoot, my teeth be an edge at him.
If you offer but to thrust towardshim, Ile strike you downe.
Hang him, I defie him base Spaniard.
Defie me? sirrha,spits i'thy face: dar'st meete mee i'the fields, crauenly Capon?
Capon?
I Capon, so I say sir.
Why any man may see that thou art well caru'd; and yet mee thinks thatshould not speake of that, for it's an hundred to one if he be not gilt too.
Well, if thou goest into the fields with me, Ile make a Capon of you before I haue done with you, you shall nere come home vncut Ile warrant you.
Nay, you shall findea notable Cutter.
He a Cutter? alas he nere went into the fields yet, but he was soundly hackt before he came out
Nere talke you of hacking, for it's a hundred to one if you haue not the.
'Sfoot if you be so,nere feares you: come a long.
Nay nere goe, for if you doe,Ile sende one after you, which shall scowre you both. Thecan doe it. I haue seene him handle you both brauely.
The, Alas wee are the best Friends hee has, and if it were not for vs, themight soone shut vp his shoppe.
Alas, you need not talke of his shutting vp of Shoppe, and if it had not beene for him, you had broken by this time, Nay, nere talke: For you know hee can holde your nose to the Grind-stone, when hee list. And as for you, you knowe hee brought you vp first, and if you had stayed with him still, it might haue bene better for you.
Better for mee? Alas hee knewe not how to vse mee.
Hee vsde you too well indeede: for when you were with him he furnisht you with Siler and euery thing, but now you are worne out of all fashion. You are euen like a Lapwing, you are no sooner Hatcht, but you runne abroade presently from him.
Yet I scorne to runne away from him.
But it were more wisedome then to stand: For theis a man as well Armed as any man I knowe, and has as good skill ins weapons.
Ha, is the winde in that Doore? Faith nowe I see which waye you stand bent, you had rather sleepe in a whole skinne, then goe into the Fields to trye your selfe.
Syr,has bene proou'd before now, and yet heele prooue himselfe againe with you, if you dare follow him.
Doe you heare? If you goe, looke forat your backs presentlie; For I am a Iustice of Peace, and am sworne to keepe and defend the Peace.
Syr, wee will fight, and doe you take it inif you please: if you once offer to hinder vs, Ile so Pummell you, that you were neuer better Pummeld in your life; And howsoeuer, I hope theres Lawe against you as well as others, andcan put vp aagainst you.
Alas I care not if you were both Plaintifes against mee, you shall findeyour Defendant Ile warrant you:I, and if neede bee, I could put vp an Action of Batterie against you.
What talke you of Law?scornes to haue any other Law thenlaw, and that vpon you.
Away, the Time was indeed when thou wast a notable Swash-buckler, but now thou art growne olde.
I, you doe well, to excuse his Cowardise.
Why Sir, tis well knowne thathas flourisht in his dayes.
Flourisht? yfaith Syr I, I haue seenehang with nothing but Scarffes ere now.
With Scarffes? with a Halter, if he had beene well seru'de, For hees a notable Theefe.
A Theefe?
I, a Thiefe. Did you nere heare of, this is the very same man.
Nay, nere hitith teeth with that: for you know you were both Indited for treason before now, and were in danger to be hangd, and drawn too, and had escapt well if you had not bene quarterd.
I hope knows how to keep his.
You are a craftie: Itwere well if you knewe howe to keepe your friendship too, for Gentlemen and Friendes should not fall out.
a Gentleman?
A Gentleman? and has Armes.
But mee thinkesby the very sounding of his Name should bee the better Gentleman, and has the better Armes too: for if the truth were well knowne,hath but one arme.
beare Armes? Hees a base companion. Alas I haue knowne you beare a Basket.
If you looke ith, Ile warrant you, you shall findeof more antiquitie then you: Hee deriues his Pedigree from; and that from S., that killd the Draggon.
I,, the other day: But Ile warrant youof as good a blood as hee for his hart.
Byth masse, I thinke indeed, you are both wel sanguind. Your both of one blood, only thers this difference, thatcoms of the elder brother,of the yo~ger.
And oftentimes the younger brother prooues the better Souldier.
Nay,will defende you both for good Souldiers.
a Souldier? When did you ere knowefight a Battell?
Yesis a Souldier, and a Man as well Armed at all poyntes as anie one.
No, no, itsthat's the notable Souldier; Why, theres none of all you Captaines could doe anie thing in Warre without him.
I hopehath not beene at Fencing-Schoole all this while for nothing.
Alas there's nonebut: But yet if you speake of Souldiers, the'rs Bow, Bill, and Gunne, worth twenty such as wee are.
Indeed they say that Bow has bin an olde Souldier.
Yet hees not fit for a Souldier, any man may bende him as hee list.
And as for Bow-string, I dare vndertake to whip him my selfe.
Then let mee alone to tickleownes nocke yfaith.
But what say you to? hees a notable sturdy villaine.
, Ile pay him soundly, if ere I reach him.
Its more then you can doe, Ime affraide; Fora Tall-fellow ons hands, and will quickly be Wood: and then theres, such another Bouncing-fellow too.
, Alas hees No-body: any little Boy will make him roare. I haue made him goe off 'oth Fieldes, a good many times my selfe.
Well, isNo-bodie? Ime sure heel giue some blowes sometimes.
Its' nere but whenouercharges him, then indeed heel be somewhat hote oth matter.
I think thatis a vile bragger, he doth nothing but cracke.
Faith I knowe not what Souldier hee is, but they say, Hees an excellent pollitician.
Hee a Pollitician?
Why, hee has an excellent wit?
Pish, Its nothing but a flash.
Ime sure I can remember since he was a Parlement-man.
Hee a Parlement-man: For what Shyre?
Nay ber-lady, it was for the whole Countrey.
I wonder they should chuse him: Why he does euery thing on the sudden.
Oh he plottes shrevvdly. If they had not look't too it, Hee had vndermined the vvhole parlement-house.
I but hees No-body now-adayes, Hees blovvne vp long agoe.
Well, if eyther you, or any body else shuld meete with Povvder, yet its a hundred to one, if he meete not vvith his match.
Nay, you should let him alone, and you should see thatas notable a bragger as Povvder. He thinks hee shall nere be matcht too: but hee shall, and ouer-matcht too, by; I vvarrant him. Come, after your long Parley, Dare you goe into the Fieldes?
Dare I? You shall soone see that: Goe, and Ile follovv you.
Well saide, desperate., You may be asham'd to offer it. You knovve you are tvvo-handed-Sworde, andhas but one hand (vnlesse I helpe him) to do any good vvithall, and yet youde haue him go into the Fieldes vvith you. Come, theres neyther of you shall goe. Doe not you knovvethat Duells are put downe? Youle bee bound to'th Peace euer heereafter, if you strike but one stroke. Therefore you had best let me decide your controuersie for you.
Why, you are a backe-Friend to vs both.
Nay, you knowe Ime equally allyed to you both, and therefore shall proue an impartiall Iudge: How say you, will you be rulde by me?
Nay let him choose,at a good poynt, whether he will or no.
Why areyou so longbefore you speake?
Are duells put downe? Then I am forc'de to be Friends: Speake then.
Then in briefe it shall bee thus., you shall beare Chiefe force ith Campe, and be made Generall of the Field, to beare sway euery where. As for you, since Duells are put downe, you shall liue quietly and peaceablie heere 'ith Court, and goe euery day in Veluet: You shall be Frendes with euerie one, and bee on euery ones side, that if occasion serue, andbe absent, so that matters are driue~ to a push,shall be the onely man to performe a Combate: And I my selfe will backe you both, as occasion shall serue. How say yee, are yee content?
Wee are.
Then goe before to my House, to thein: and there weele conclude all.
A.<|endoftext|>I had thought Mr. Prynne had had no eares, but me thinkes hee hath eares;
My Lords, there is never a one of your Honours, but would be sorry to have your eares as mine are.
In good faith hee is somewhat sawcy.
J hope
your Honours will not be offended, I pray God give you eares to heare.
The busines of the day
is to proceed on the Prisoners at the Barr.
As for your crosse Bill, it is not the busines of the day; Hereafter if the Court shall see just cause, and that it favours not of Libelling, wee may accept of it; for my part I have not seene it, but have heard somewhat of it.
I hope your Honours will not refuse it, being it is on his Majesties behalfe; wee are his Majesties Subjects, and therefore require the Iustice of the Court.
But this is not the busines of the day.
VVhy then, My Lords, I have a second motion, which I humbly pray your Honours to graunt; which is, That your Lordships will be pleased to dismisse the Prelates, here now sitting from having any voyce in the censure of this cause, (being generally knowne to be Adversaries) as being no way agreeable with equity or reason, that they who are our Adversaries, should bee our Iudges: Therefore wee humbly crave they may be expunged out of the Court.
In good faith its a sweet motion, is't not? Herein you are become Libellous. And if you should thus Libell all the Lords and Reverend Iudges, as you doe the most Reverend Prelates, by this your Plea, you would have none to passe sentence upon you for your Libelling, because they are parties.
Under correction (My Lord) this doth not hold; Your Honour need not putt that for a certainty, which is an uncertainty; we have nothing to say to any of your Honours, but onely to the Prelates.
Well, proceed to the busines of the day; Read the Information.
You heare Gentlemen wherewith you are charged; and now, least you should say, you cannot have liberty to speake for your selves, the Court gives you leave to speake what you can, with these conditions: First, that you speake within the bounds of modesty. Secondly, that your speeches be not Libellous.
Then speake a Gods name, and shew cause why the Court should not proceed in Censure (as taking the cause) against you.
My Honourable good Lords, such a day of the moneth there came a Subpoena from your Honours, to enter my appearance in this Court; which being entred, I tooke forth a coppy of the Information, which being taken, J was to draw my Answer, which I endeavoured to doe, but being shutt up close prisoner, I was deserted of all meanes, by which I should have done it; for I was no sooner served with the Subpoena, but I was shortly after shutt up close prisoner, with suspention of pen, inke and paper; which close imprisonment did eate up such a deale of my time, that I was hindred the bringing in of my Answer: You did assigne me Counsell, 'tis true, but they neglected to come to me, and I could not come to them, being under lock and key: Then upon motion in Court, yee gave me liberty to goe to them; but then presently after that motion (J know not for what cause, nor upon whose commaund) I was shutt up againe: And then I could not compell my Counsell to come to me, and my time was short, and I had neither pen nor inke, nor Servant to do any thing for me, for my Servant was then also kept close prisoner under a Pursevants hands; This was to put impossibilities upon mee. Then upon a second motion for pen and inke (which was graunted me) I drew up some Instructions, and in a fortnight time sent 40 sheetes to my Counsell; suddainly after I drew up 40 sheetes more, and sent to them; My Lord, I did nothing but by the advise of my Counsell, by whom I was ruled in the drawing up of all my answer, and payd him twice for drawing it, and some of my Counsell would have set their hands to it. Here is my Answer, I tender it upon my oath, which your Lordships cannot deny with the Iustice of the Court.
Wee can give you a President, that this Court hath proceeded & undertake~ a causefor not putting in an Answer in six dayes; you have had a great deale of favour shewed in affording you longer time, and therefore the Court is free from all calumny or aspersion, for rejecting your Answer not signed with the Counsels hands.
But one word or two, my Lords, I desire your Honours to heare me; I put a case in law, that is often pleaded before your Lordships, one man is bound to bring in two witnesses; if both or one of them faile, that hee cannot bring them in, doth the Law (my Lords)make it the mans act? You assigned me two Counsellors; one of them fayled, I cannot compell him; Here he is now before you, let him speake, if I have not used all my endeavours to have had him signed it (which my other Counsell would have done, if this would have set his hand to it with him) and to have put in long since.
My Lord, there was so long time spent ere I could doe any thing, after I was assigned his Counsell, that it was impossible his Answer could be drawne up in so short a time as was allotted; for after long expectation, seeing he came not to mee, I went to him, where I found him shut up close prisoner, so that I could not have accesse to him; Whereupon I motioned to the Lieftenant of the Tower, to have free liberty of speech with him co~cerning his answer, vvhich being graunted me, I found him very vvilling and desirous to have it dravvne up, vvhereupon J did moove in this Court for pen & paper, vvhich vvas graunted, the vvhich he no sooner had gotte~, but he set himself to dravv up Instructions, and in a short time, sent me 40 sheetes; and soone after I received 40 more; but I found the Ansvver so long, and of such a nature, that J durst not set my hand to it, for feare of giving your Honours distast.
My Lords, I did nothing, but according to the direction of my Counsel, only I spake mine ovvne vvords; my ansvver vvas dravvne up by his consent, it vvas his ovvne act, and hee did approove of it; and if he vvill be so base a Covvard, to doe that in private vvhich he dares not acknovvledge in publick, I vvill not such a sinne lye on my conscience, let it rest vvith him. Here is my Ansvver, vvhich though it be not signed vvith their hands, yet here I tender it upon my oath, vvhich you cannot in Iustice deny.
But Mr. Prynne, the Court desires no such long Ansvver; Are you guilty or not guilty?
My good Lord, I am to ansvver in a defensive vvay, Is here any one, that can vvitnes any thing against me? Let him come in. The Law of God standeth thus; that a man is not to be condemned, but under the mouth of two or three witnesses. Here is no witnesse comes in against me, my Lord, neither is there in all the Informatio~ one clause that doth particularly fall on me, but onely in generall, there is no Booke laid to my charge. And shall I be condemnedfor a particular act, when no occusation of any particular act can be brought against me? This were most unjust and wicked. Here I tender my answere to the Information upon my oath; My Lord, you did impose impossibilities upon me, I could doe no more then I was able.
Well hold your peace, your answer comes too late. Speake you Dr. Bastwicke.
But this is not the busines of the day; VVhy brought you not in your Answer in due time?
My Lord, a long time since I tendred it to your Honour, I failed not in any one particular: And if my Counsell be so base and cowardly, that they dare not signe it for feare of the Prelates (as I can make it appeare) therefore have I no Answer? My Lord, here is my Answer, which though my Counsell out of a base spirit, dare not set their hands unto, yet J tender it upon my oath.
But Mr. Dr. you should have beene briefe; you tendred in too large an Answer, which (as J heard) is as Libellous as your Bookes.
No, my Lord, it is not Libellous though large, J have none to answer for me but my selfe, and being left to my selfe, I must plead my conscience in answer to every circumstance of the information.
What say you Mr. Dr. are you guilty, or not guilty? Answer yea or no, you needed not to have troubled your self so much about so large an Answer.
I know, none of your Honours have read my Booke; And can you with the Iustice of the court, condemne me before you know what is writen in my bookes?
What say you to that was read to you even now?
My Lord, he that read it did so murther the sence of it, that had I not knowne, whathad writen, I could not tell what to have made of it.
What say you to the other sentence read to you?
That was none of mine, I will not father that which was none of my owne.
Did not you send that booke, as now it is, to a Noble mans house together with a Letter directed to him?
Yea my Lord, I did so, but withall you may see in my Epistle set before the booke, I did at first disclaime what was not mine; I sent my Booke over by a Dutch Merchant, who it was that wrote the addition I doe not know, but my Epistle set to my Booke, made manifest what was mine, and what was not; and I cannot justly suffer for what was none of mine.
My Lord, you heare by his owne speech, the cause is taken.
Yea, you say true my Lord.
My noble Lord of Arundell, I know you are a noble Prince in Israel, & a great Peere of this Realme; There are some honourable Lords in this Court, that have beene forced out as combatants in a single duell; it is betweene the Prelates and us, at this time as betweene two that have appointed the feild. The one being a coward goes to the Magistrate, & by vertue of his Authority disarmes the other of his weapons, & gives him a Bullrush, and then challenges him to fight. If this be not base cowardice, I know not what belongs to a Souldier. This is the case betweene the Prelates and us, they take away our weapons (our Answers) by vertue of your Authority, by which we should defend our selves, and yet they bidd us fight. My Lord, doth not this savour of a base cowardly spirit? I know, my Lord, there is a Decree gone forth (for my Sentence was passed long since, to cut of our eares.
Who shall knovv our Censure, before the Court passe it? Doe you prophesy of your selves?
Mr. Dr. I thought you would be angrie.
No my Lord, you are mis-taken, I am not angrie nor passionate, all that I doe presse is, that you would be pleased to peruse my Answer.
Well, hold your peace. Mr. Burton, what say you?
My good Lords, your Honours (it should seeme) doe determine to Censure us, and take our cause, although we have laboured to give your Honours satisfaction in all things: My Lords, what you have to say against my Booke, I confesse I did write it, yet did I not any thing out of intent of Commotion or Sedition: I delivered nothing, but what my Text ledd me too, being chosen to suite with the day, namely the fifth of November; the words were these, &c.
Mr. Burton, I pray stand not naming Texts of Scripture now, we doe not send for you to preach, but to answer to those things that are objected against you.
My Lord, I have drawne up my Answer to my great paines and charges, which Answer was signed with my Counsels hands, and received into the Court, according to the rule and Order thereof. And I did not thinke to have beene called this day to a Censure, but have had a legall proceeding by way of Bill and Answer.
Your Answer was impertinent.
My Answer (after it was entred into the Court) was referred to the Judges, but by what meanes I doe not know, vvhither it be impertinent, and what cause your Lordships had to cast it out, I knovv not. But after it vvas approoved of, and received, it vvas cast out as an impertinent Ansvver.
The Judges did you a good turne to make it impertinent, for it was as Libellous as your Booke, so that your Answer deserved a Censure alone.
VVhat say you Mr. Burton, are you guilty, or not?
My Lord, I desire you not onely to peruse my Booke, here and there but every passage of it.
Mr. Burton, time is short, are you guilty, or not guilty? VVhat say you to that which was read? Doth it become a Minister to deliver himself in such a rayling and scandalous way?
In my judgement, and as I can proove it, it was neither rayling nor scandalous, J conceive that a Minister hath a larger liberty the~ alwayes to goe in a milde straine: I being the Pastor of my people, whom I had in charge, and was to instruct, J supposed it was my duety to informe them of those innovations that are crept into the Church, as likewise of the danger and ill consequence of them: As for my Answer, yee blotted out what yee would, and then the rest which made best for your owne ends, you would have to stand; And now for mee to tender onely what will serve for your owne turnes, and renounce the rest, were to desert my cause, which before I will doe, or desert my conscience, I will rather desert my body, and deliver it up to your Lordships to doe with it, what you will.
This is a place where you should crave mercy and favour, Mr. Burton, and not stand upon such termes as you doe.
There wherein I have offended through humane frailty, I crave of God and Man pardon: And I pray God, that in your Sentence, you may so Censure us, that you may not sinne against the Lord.<|endoftext|>My Lord, the King hath understood both by report, and the verdict of divers Gentlemen of quality, that you stand impeached of divers great and haynous crimes; and to try if they be true, he brings you here this day to triall, doing like the Almighty King in the 18. of Genesis, that sent downe to see whether their sinnes were so grievous as the cry of them, and Kings on earth can have no better paterne to follow, then the Kings of heaven: the Soveraigne, Gods Vicegerent on earth, hath commanded that you should be tried this day: and the desire of his Majesty is your tryall should be as equall asequity it selfe. And because the crimes that come this day before you, may in some breed detestation, and the person in others compassion: first lay these two aside, and let your reason sway your judgement, and your head your heart. And therefore these Peeres, who are your Peeres, and who have as noble justice in their hearts, as noble blood in their veynes, are this day to try you; therefore if you be innocent, speake without feare, and bee sure those that accuse you shall not escape free. But if you be faulty, I advise you to give honour to God and the King, and confesse your fault, for it is no vaine confidence nor subtilty that can hide the truth; therefore if truth touch you at the heart, and your conscience is a thousand witnesses, and God is greater then both, stand not against it; and if you doe not, God will put into the hearts of those noble persons to finde it out, and doe that is just.
I have beene a close prisoner these six months, without friends, and without Counsell, and am but of a weak speech at the best, and therefore I desire to have the liberty of having a Counsell to speake for me.
For your imprisonment, to you it hath beene a speciall favour, for you have had time enough, more then ever any man had that hath beene committed for such offences, and more favour then ever any man that came to this bar, and you demand nothing that the law can allow you but you shall have it, but for your demand I must move it to the Judges and they shall satisfie you in it, or in any other thing you require.
not guilty;
how wilt thoube tried?
by God and my Peers:
the prisoner is indicted of rape and sodomy, by two indictments, and hathpleaded not guilty, and it is my duty to charge you to stand to the triall of it, and you are to judge of it, as they are to be proved by evidence, and you are to ballance it. This cause may cary in it, in some pity, in others detestation, both of which ought to be put into the ballance, for a graine on either side may sway the scale, but reason must rule your affections, and your heads, your hearts: you are to give an attentive eare, and then weigh equally, that the scale may leane the right way, and the Judges will assist you in point of law, which if you doubt, one may propound it to me, and I to them, or of the prisoner, this your Lordships are to doe without corporall oath: The law conceiveth you of such, that you will do that for justice, which others doe for their oath, and therefore admits of no challenge, God direct you to it.
my Lord high Steward, and it please your Grace, there are two Indictments againstLord, the first for Rape, the second for Sodomy, the prisoner is honourable, the crimes dishonorable of whichhee is indicted (if it falls out to be true) which is to be left to triall; I dare be bold to say, never Poet invented, nor Historiographer writ of any so foule, thoughhath curiously set out the vices of some of the Emperors, which had absolute power, and that might make them fearelesse of any maner of punishment, and besides were heathens and knew not God, yet none of them came neere this Lords crime; this is a crime of that rarity in our nation, that wee seldome know of the like, and the other that we scarse heare of it, but they are of that pestilential nature that if they be not punished they will draw from heaven heauy judgements upon this Kingdome: I can speake with comfortthat all my time, both in his Majesties royall Fathers life, and since he came to his Crowne, I never had occasion to speake in this place against any Peere of the Realme before now, and God knowes I doe it now with sorrow, and I hope I shall not have occasion to doe so much againe; but his Majesty who is the patterne of vertue, not onely as King, but in his person also, in whom it is hard to judge whether hee excell most in Justice or Mercy, but I rather thinke in Mercy, for he would have my Lordthe prisoner at Barre heard with as much favour as such a crime as this can bee; when he first heard it, he gave strict accoumpt that the triall should bee searched, that his throne and people should be cleared from so grievous sins, and therefore he was indicted in his owne Countrey, according to the law, by Gentlemen of worth. The Bill is found, and now he is brought to this Barre to be tried by his honourable Peeres, such as of whose wisedome and sincerity there can bee no question, but to have an honourable hearing. And first, I shall beginne with the indictment of Rape,tells us of Kinglaw, before the conquest; if the party were of no chast life but a whore, yet there may bee a ravishment, but it is a good plea to say she was his concubine; In an indictment of Rape there is no time of prosecution necessary, for, but in case of an appeale of Rape, if the woman did not prosecute in convenient time, it will barre her for the, our law had no knowledge of it till 15.8. by which statute it was made fellony, and in this there is no more question, but onely whether it bee, and the law the 5. of, sets downe in generall words, and there the law doth not distingish, neither must we: I know you will bee curious how you give the least mitigation of so abhominable a sinne, which brought such plagues after it, as we may see in Gen. 18.Judges 14. Rom. I. But my Lords, it seemed to me strange at the first, how a noble man of his quality should lust to such abhominable sins, but when I found he had given himselfe over to lust, and find that, and that if men once habit themselves in ill, it is no marvell if they fall into any sinne, and that he was constant in no religion, but in the morning would be a Papist, in the afternoone a Protestant; I shall bee bold to give your Grace a reason why hee became so ill, he beleeved not God, then what may not a man runne into? but I find things beyond imagination, for I find his intentions bent to have his wife naught, which the wickedest man that ever I heard of before would have vertuous, and godly, how bad soever himselfe be, and him lewd to his owne wife, if she love him she must love, whom he loves above all, and not in any honest love, but in a dishonest; he gives his reason by Scripture, she was now subject to him, and therefore if she did ill at his command it was not her fault but his, and he would answer it; he lets thiswho he calls his favourite, spend of his purse 500. l'., and if his wife or daughter would have any thing, though necessary, they must lie withand have it from him, and not otherwise; also tellingand his daughter, that he had rather have a child by him then by any body else. But this thing I had rather should come out of the mouthes of the witnesses then from me. was a Page to Sir, and had no meanes when he came to my Lord: he entertained him for a Page eight yeares, and then let him keepe horses in his ground, by which I thinke he inriched himselfe 2000. l'. but he never sat at the table with him till he had married his daughter, then gave him to the value of 7000. l'., was sent from Ireland by my Lord, to be a Page to my Lady, his Father and Mother were very meane folkes, there he spent out of my Lords meanes 500. l'., and he gave him at one time 1000. l'. and hath made divers deeds of lands to him: My Lord was at first a Protestant, after the buying of Fountaine turn'd his religion.
I advise you not to deny those things which are cleerly proved, for then the Lords will give lesse credit to the rest you say. The first or second night after we were married,came to his bed side whilest we were in bed,
you have seene the cleernes of the cause proved, and I know your wisedomes to be such as you well know in so darke a businesse a clearer cannot be; for let a man be never so wicked, he will not call witnesses to see it.
Guilty;
Lord, you have beene indicted, and have pleaded not guilty, and put your selfe on God and your Peers, who have found you guilty of both, and therefore my heart grieveth that my tongue must utter, but justice is the way to cut off wickednesse. O thinke upon your offences, which a Christian ought scarce to name, and which the depraved nature of man, which carries us to all vice, yet hates this unnaturall sin; and you have not onely offended against the nature, but the rage of a man, jealousie; and though you dye not for it, yet you have abused your daughter, and having honour and fortune to leave behinde, you would have had the spurious seed of a varlet to inherit both.But my Lord it grieves me to see you stand against a truth apparant and concluded upon, how God might have taken you away in your sinnes, and therefore I hope he hath reserved you as a subject of mercy, when you were blinded in your sins he sends you to see this day of shame, to turne you to him; and seeing hee doth in a manner draw you, spend the rest of your time in teares and repentance, and this dayes worke is a correction for many crimes corruption.
Forasmuch as thouLordhast been indicted
of divers fellonies, for which thou desiredst to be tryed by
God and thy Peeres, which tryall thou hast had, and they
have found thee guilty of them, thy sentence therefore is, that
thou returne to the place from whence thou camest, and from
thence to the place of execution, there to bee hanged by the
necke till thou be dead.
 And the Lord have mercy upon thee.<|endoftext|>This horrible and detestible Traytor, this maine Traytor
this instigator and seducer to treasons, he that hath a spanish heart, you are an odious man, see with what a whorish forehead he defends his faults: this is he that would take away the King and his Cubbs, O abominable Traytor:
let me see the mony, and then I will answer you to thepurpose.
Oh Villaine! Oh vile Traytor! hath he used me thus? Nay then I will tell you all,
Siryou haveagainst you who carried the letter and toare out that sheet, which concerned the Lords of the Councell (for so was my Lordconfession) and he hath been offered the rack for it, but what he has confessed, I as yet know not:
well
the Rack-keeper was called for, was he not?
Nay
pardon me my Lord, for this, by your Lordships favour, I take to be the course of examination in this kinde. After that the examinate hath confessed, and his confession is written, it is all read over againe distinctly and deliberately to him, that he may be sure to say nothing but truth: and then in confirmation that it is undoubtedly true, and that he will stand thereunto, he is to subscribe the same. Now my Lords, if my L.did accuse me thus rashly out of his passion, and afterwards when he had read it againe, began to relent, and (with sorrow for the wrong he had done me) refuse to set his hand thereunto, then I say my Lords I have reason to take hold of it: And it is well knowne to you my Lord, and my Lord of, how he hath recanted his accusation, moreover he hath most penitently sorrowed for this injury he hath done me, and could never be quiet in his conscience till he had purged me.
Master Atturney, you must not thinke that all that maketh for me is policy, and all that maketh against me is plain, and God revealeth it. I were well fitted for justice, if you should come to be my Judg, what indifferency is therein this my Lord Chiefe Justice? Remember I beseech your Lordship the statute of the first ofthe Sixth hath this. That no person shall be condemned of treason unlesse he be accused by two lawfull accusers, and those to be brought before the party, if they belong to England. And remember too the statute of the 13 of the Queen. No man shall be arraigned of treason, without the oath of two sufficient and lawfull witnesses brought face to face.
But howsoever I am sure
the law of God liveth for ever. And you shall finde it inin the seventeenth Chapter.And in the nineteenth Chapter.Divers other places of the old Testament are to this purpose, confirmed by our Saviour too in the eighteenth of, and the eight of, and by Saint2. 13, And by the whole consent of the Scripture. And if the Common-law be assaith (who was a great Lawyer) then there ought to be two witnesses: For he saith a tryall is by verdict, and by witnesse,
But
you tell me of one witnesse, let me have him. Prove the practises by one witnesse, and I will confesse my selfe guilty to the King in a thousand treasons. I stand not upon the Law, I defie the law, if I have done these things I desire not to live: whether they be treasons by the law or no. Let me have my accuser brought to my face, and if he will maintaine it to my face, I will confesse my judgement.
Howsoever I do not expect it of duty: And yet I say you shoulddeale very severely with me if you should condemne me and not bring my accuser to my face. Remember a story ofa reverend Chief Justice in this Kingdome; Tells of a Judge in this Kingdome that condemned a woman for murthering her husband, upon the presumption or testimony of one witnesse (as it seemed) and after she was burned, a servant of the mans that was slaine (being executed for the same fault) confessed that he slew his Master himselfe, and that the woman was innocent. What did the Judge then say to, touching the remorse of his conscience for proceeding upon such slender proof,That he could never be at peace of conscience whilest he lived, although he but gave consent upon the verdict of the Jury. But my Lords for the matter which I desire, remember too the story of:thought the Judges fooles because they would condemn a daughter ofwithout asking the witnesse a question: Why then my Lords, let my accuser be brought, and let me aske him a question, and I have done: for it may be it will appeare out of his owne tale, that his accusation cannot be true, or he will be discovered by examination. But yet principally my Lords remember what is said in theof,. And I will tell you, Master Atturney, if you condemne me upon bare inferences, and will not bring my accuser to my face: you try me by no law but by the Spanish inquisition. If my accuser were dead, or not within the land, it were something. But my accuser lives, and is in the house, and yet you will not bring him to my face.
Sir, it cannot be granted you: you have heard your selfe that the Law will not dispense with it.
First,
that I should make choice of my Lordof any man living: A man of no following, nor of no force; that I should dreame of disturbing of the state, now every body was so glad of the Kings comming, and of unexpected peace: and now the state was greater, and stronger than ever it was. That I should be so simple to expect mony from Spaine: for I knew how much that Kings revenue was impared, and his treasure intercepted. I also knew well that where he had usually in his Havens, 6 or 7 score sayle of ships, now he had not six or seaven sayle of ships: I knew well too that his Jesuites begged from door to door in Spaine: and I knew well that the King of Spaine was bankrupt, as was protested by most of the Merchants of Christendome: And could I imagine then that in his poverty he could disburse six or seven hundred thousand Crowns? or if he had been in case, could I thinke it so easy a matter, to obtaine such a sum of mony of the Spaniard? do Princes so easily now a dayes part with such Masses of mony? I knew that the Queene of England disbursed no mony to the States of the Low-countryes (though it were partly for her owne security) before she had theandin pawne. I knewlikewise Shee disbursed no mony into(though for the like occasion) till shee hadin pawne, and afterwards more warme security: Nay, the Citizens ofwould not lend their Queene money, till they had her lands in pawne. What pawne had we to give the King of? What did we offer him? Or how could we invent to offer to him the letter of an, whom he could not chuse but know to be of no following, what a mockery is this? what would I make my selfe? A Cade? A Kett? A Jack-Straw?
All your suspitions, and inferences, are but to fortify my Lordaccusation; My Lordis the only man that doth accuse me. My Lordlives and is in the house, let him maintaine his accusation to my face. My Lordhath confessed himselfe guilty, he is meerly at his Majesties mercy: and without doubt shall highly offend the King, if he go back from his word, wherein he hath abused his Majesty, and so is to looke for no mercy, but shall surely dye. On the other side he hath accused me to instigate and draw him into these treasons, and if it be so, then I have been the overthrow of him, his honour, estate and all. He is a man of a most revengeful nature, as all the world knowes, who would he be more willingly revengedon, then on him vvho hath been his utter ovrethrovv? Why then my Lords if he vvill not displease the King in hope of mercy and compassion (vvhich is his onely plea) If he will be revenged on the man that brought him to all this, that hath ruinated him and his house, then will he justifie his accusation to my face, then good my Lords let us be brought face to face.
Siryou have heard it cannot be granted you, pray importune us no longer. No longer
it toucheth (my Lord) upon my life which I value at as high a rate as you do yours.
you have heard the proofs, I pray you consider that these men
do usually defend very bad causes every day in the Courts against men of their owne profession, as able as themselves: & if they can do so, what may they do with me, that never studied the law till I came into the Tower of: That have been practised in other affaires, and am weake of memory and feeble as you see,
But remember the godly saying of Saint,. If you would be content to be judged upon suspitions and inferences, if you would not have your accusation suscribed by your accuser. If you would not have your accuser brought to your face (being in the same house too) where you are arraigned, if you would be condemned by an accusation of one recanted and truly sorrowfull for it, if you in my case would yeeld your bodyes to torture, loose your lives, your wives, and children, and all your fortunes upon so slender proof. Then am I ready to suffer all these things.
Nay by your leave
he that speakes for his life shall speake last. Are you contented
that the Jury shall go together: yea, in Gods name
Nowshall be glorified,shall have a great victory this day, as great as when it was said. Now SirI will prove you to have a Spanish heart. See with what a vvhoorish forehead he hath defended his fault: he hath deceived my poore Lordaswas deceived with an apple, by a letter in an apple, and hath seduced this poor Lord to write I know not what to him against his conscience: But he could not sleepe quietly till he had revealed the truth of it to the Lords, and voluntarily of himself written the whole matter to them with his owne hand but yesterday, vvhich I vvill read vvith a loud voice though I be not able to speake this sennight after:
Novv it shall appeare that my Lord, is an unworthy, base, silly, simple poore soule.
Is my Lord so poore? Yea,
in Spirit. Would to God you were so
I will tell you the troth. It is true I got a poore fellow in the Tower, to cast up a letter tyed to an apple (for soletter was conveyed) in at my Lordwindow, when the Lievtenant was at supper, (which I was loath to have spoken of, least the Lieutenant should be blamed, but all the Lieutenants in the world could not have helpt it) wherein I intreated him for Gods sake to do me right, and to right the truth unto me: because I knew not whither I should be arraigned before him or no: and hereupon he writt to me how he had wronged me: and herein I did nothing that was dishonest for ought I know; but I sent him a letter againe, (because I heard he should be arraigned first) and desired him to publish my innocence at his arraignment; But that notwithstanding he writ unto me againe, which letter I have now about me (being all my hope) and I beseech your Lordships to peruse it.
My Lordmarre not a good cause,
Master Atturney, you are more peremptory then honest, you must not come heer to shew me what to do.
Nay
I dare say your Lordshipps would not offer it. But my Lordreceived a letter from his wife, that there was no way to save his life but to accuse me:
I protest to God
they are false like as the rest. Saving that this I do confesse; That my L.offered me a pension, and I (alas my Lords) loath to cast him away, and being confident that I had disswaded him from those humours, did conceale it. But that ever I dealt with him for any suchpension is most untrue.
Sir, you are to be conveied to the place from whence you came, and from thence to the place of execution, and there to bee hanged till you are halfe dead, your members to be cut off, your bowells to be taken out, and cast into the fire before your face (you being yet alive) your head to bee cut off, your quarters to be divided into foure parts, to be bestowed in foure severall places, and so
Lord have mercy upon your soule.
And I am glad
that you have given the world so good satisfaction of your Religion, as by some bookes published by you, you have.<|endoftext|>Robte E. of Essex, hold vp thy hande,
I have
a true harte to her Ma=tie= and my countrye and have done nothinge but that w=ch= by the Lawe of nature and the necessitie of my case I was inforced vnto;
ffor
yf a man intend the deathe of a kinge beinge the heade of the comon welthe w=t=hout w=ch= the members cannot live, it is Treason: they not onlye intended but allso acted so far forthe as was in there powre vz: By assemblinge a powre and encitinge the Subiectes to Rebell,
Th'earle
hathe done both, for he hath raised a power in a setled govermen=t= w=ch= the lawe intendes to be a purpose to destroye the kinge, for he y=t= abusethe the gou'm=t= hates the Governor. The contynuingeof his power assembled at Essex house being comaunded to disperse them, is playne Treason. Agayne
to rayse force to take a Towne, forte or place of defence is Treason: the E. of Essex raised a force not to take a small Towne but the verie Cittye of London: not a slend=er= fforte but y=e= Towre, nor there to rest, but to attempt the sacred Pallace of the Prince, killinge her subiectes after a most disloyall mane=r=. What shold I say more,. But what answeres my Lo. of Essex? that the Lawe of nature comaunndes and he was bound to his owne defence. But I will shewe that he transgressed the Lawes both of God & Nature and of reacon's. Consider first the Quallitie of the offence, 2 the manner 3 the p'sons by whome 4 the p'sons against whome it was comitted, and they shall be lefte w=t=hout excuse. And ffirst let me tell them, that Treason for satisfacon of a passion in Nature is noe excuse to Treason. All offences gainst God and nature, are: Rebellion worst of all confoundes all Nature, God and reacons. This Treason is for y=e= quallitie p'meditate and aymed at the heade, even of her Ma=tie=: ffor the manno=r= howe soddaine soev=er= yet it is highe Treason: ffor soddaine Treason is not les daungero=s= then y=t= w=ch= is of longer growth. But my Lo. yo=r= offence was past an imaginerie offence, it was; neither was it of that soddaines as yo=u= wold have it beleeved, ffor yo=u= wore a black bag about yo=r= necke conteininge a Catologue of the names of such as were mene of yo=r= number: a black bagg was meetest for such a black cause: But my Lo. there lyes a greate burthen vppon yo=r= Lo=p= for drawinge so many worthye gent. into so desp'ate and detestable a busines. ffor the p'sons by whome thes Treasons were comitted, they received there first breath vnd=er= her mat=ie's= gou'nm=t=: Th'earldome of Essex given to his father by her ma=tie=; howe she hath loaden this man w=th= hono=ers=, offices and dignities, the world can testifie
above all her ma=tie's= favo=res= made him greate, neither was it fruitles to his estate: for I am able to p've and make good accompte that her ma=te's= guiftes to himamounted to 300 thousand poundes. Allso the Earle of South: received divers favo=res= from her ma=tie=, thoughe for his misdemeano=res= it pleaseth her to thinke worse of him. The p'son against whome thes treasons were intended was against her sacred ma=tie=, against the Relligion w=ch= her highenes sincerely p'fesseth at home and p'tecteth in other provinces: and her exercise of Justice comixed w=th= admirable mercy, w=ch= is aparant in this, that in the examinacon of all the p'sons imp'soned for this facte, none were rackte nor offer of fortune made vnto them. And an other thinge materiall to be noted comes into my mynde, no two of the examinantes spake togither & yet they all agree in y=e= substance of theire tales.
the Lo=es= of the Counsell put vnto them 2 Counsello=res= of State to summon him; the reason because there was a Roytous company assembled, The intent to admonish him, he camnot, was forborne till the next day y=t= a guilty conscience counselled him to put himselfe into strengthe: ffor there were forces expected from Wales, y=e= discou'ie whereof th'earle nowe doubted & Consultacon was had amongst them 3 monthes before whether was best, first to surprize the Tower and Court, or to p've there freindes in London. Allso at Drewrie house, it was resolved vppon 4 daies before theie brake owte into open rebellion y=t= to goe to y=e= Courte was y=e= best: then was allotted to eurie one his severall place of charge, S=r= Christopher Blunt, a reconcyled Papist, to haue charge of the vtter gate, S=r= John Davies the Hall, a Papist likewise & S=r= Charles Davers the presence, a secret Papist (as is confessed), Th'erle of Essex the privye Chamber: Should the Court have bene thus guarded, oh (saith) S=r= Christopher Blunt, what fearefull humo=er= shall we fynde them in at Courte when we surprize them. Well what shold be the end of y=e= surprize? forsoothe to call a p'liament. A bloody parliam=t= wold that haue bene when yo=r= Lo=p= that nowe standeth all in black, shold haue worne a bloody Robe. But my hope is y=t= he shalbe Robte the laste Earle of his house that wold have bene Robte the first Kinge of this land. Well what did he? heassembles a greate number of Barons, Earles and gent. of Quallitie, yet her ma=tie= held gracous and sent vnto him favo=r= vz. the Lo. Keep: th'earle of Worcester, the Comptroller and the Lo. Cheife Justice, two of them of his owne blood, th'other, men that never malliced him, as himselfe will (I thinke) confess. Thes charged him vpon his alledgiaunce, to lay downe his Armes and to disolve his troupe. Nowe marke the fury of a rebellious company, They cried owte kill them, kill them, we shall have the less to doe, they but abuse and goe aboute to betraye yo=u=: here you see Treason in the house: before he went owte he was a Trayto=r=: when he came into the Citty whatt did he? even followed the rules of Treason: Treason durst never looke directlye vppon a Prince, for the Ma=tie= of godes annoynted doth ever cast forth such beames as daunteth the eye of disloyaltie and therefore he p'tendes a cause of stirringe the State, Or (saith he) at firste entraunce I shold haue bene murthered by my Lo. Cobham and S=r= Walter Raleighe but when he was gott w=t=hin them & began to speake nearer to them, then an other cause was invented, vz. y=t= the Kingdome of England sholde be soulde to the INFANTA of Spayne: In the end fyndinge in London truer hartes then he expected, he resolved vppon his retorne, what to doe? to burne some pap'r least they shold hurte his freindes:
My Lo.
began to tell us that one was touchinge th'erle of South: in whiche instant one at my back, cryed owte kyll them, kill them: he said he knewe him not yf he sawe him agayne, but he was suer he had on a white Sattin doblett.
but
for any intent of treason towarde her Ma=tie= or the State, I am cleare and I can avowe asmuch for the rest there p'sent. But my Lo. Steward and the rest of yo=r= Lop=s=, I wold not that yo=u= shold mistake me in this, as if I went aboute to saue my Lyfe: no, I despise it and am at peace w=th= god and have forgott the world, beinge more desirous to dye then to live. That w=ch= I speake is rather in satisfacon of this nobleman that standeth by me and the rest that are engaged w=th= me, whose hartes are purely affected and whose bodyes are able to serve theire sou'aigne and their countrye. But to confirme in me the doubte of beinge s=r'=prised in my house, S=r= Walter Raleighe pleaded S=r= fferdinando Gorges to leave vs or he was lost, tould him that he came owte of a sinkinge ship. And the adviser on Saterday night and Sunday morninge, came not from light and vayne reportes but from an honorable adu'tisem=t=. But my Lordes
I haue had very uniust courses vsed against me, Papists soughte owte to accuse, as Tho. Blunt, and one Sudall a Preiste, Allsoe Bales a Scrivener confessed to me and others that he counterfeited my hand twelve tymes. What measure might I then expect from such begininge?
w=ch=
was never ment yo=u=.
S=r= fferd. Gorges I wish yo=u= shold speake any thinge that shold do yo=r= self good, but remember that yo=u= are a gent. and that yo=r= reputacon oughte to be deare vnto yo=u=. I pray yo=u= answere, did yo=u= advise me to cease my enterprise? My Lo.
I thinke I did. Nay
it is no=w= not tyme to answere vppon thinkinge, did yo=u= indeede so counsell me?
I did.
Well, let his lyfe and my death witneshowe truely he speakes.
But
put the case as yo=u= wold haue it, that it was advised both to attempt the Courte and Towre att once, neither of the two was done: how can it then be made treason? It is true we did consult at Drewry house, about securinge the E. of Essex his arrest free from impeachm=t= and that for noe other end, but to p'strate o=r= selves at her mat=e's= ffeete, humblie submittinge o=r= selves to her m=er=cye, and laying forth our greifes to her self, whereof we thought she had noe true informacon from others. this was the end of o=r= meetinge, and not w=th= any treasonable thought of my p'te. I take god to record, and
I desire the opinion of the Judges, whether one thinge consulted vppon and an other executed be Treason, ffor we talkte of goinge to the Courte, the Towre allso was talked vppon, but the counsell was reiected, and this yo=u= will haue to be treason. ffor my p'te I knewe nothinge in the morninge when I came to Essex house of o=r= goinge into London. when I was in London I hard not the p'clamacon, I was not neare by the lengthe of the streete. Let my Lo. Burleigh speake (I knowe him hon=or=able) whether he sawe me in London or not. I never drewe my sword all the daye. I am charged to carry a pistoll: I had none when I went owte. when I came into London I sawe one havinge a pistoll. I desired it of him and had it. But it had never a stone nor cold it have hurte a flye. At my retorne into Essex house I did there what I could to hind=er= the shootinge, and for that ende sent Capt. White about the house. ffrom this kinde of behavio=r= can be gathered noe thoughtes of Treason, and therefore I beseech yo=u= my Lordes, to censure me not accordinge to the letter of theLawe but as in yo=r= trewe consciences yo=u= are p'swaded of me, And in that I was tofarr carryed w=th= love to my Lo. of Essex I confesse to haue offended, that before rehersed beinge the onely drift and scope of my purpose in this busines.
Is this
not Treason to force the Queene in her owne house, to sett guardes at her gates in her Chambers and all p'tes of house, to thinkentthat havinge her in yo=r= power yo=u= mighte doe what yo=u= listed. Good M=r= Attorney
let, let me aske yo=u= what yo=u= thinke in yo=r= conscience, we wold haue done w=th= the Queene yf we had gayned the Courte. I p'test vppon my soule and conscience
I do beleeve she shold not have longe lived after she had bene in yo=r= power. Note but the p'sidentes of former ages, how longe lived Rich. the 2. afte=r= he was surprised in the same manner. the p=re=tence was alike, for removinge of c=er=taine counsellor=es=, but it shortely after cost him his lyfe. such is the vnquenchable thirst of Ambition, w=ch= never can be satisfied so longe as any greatnes is left vnatchived. but know this for certaine, that to make the Courte or Tower a defence for private enemyes is playne Treason.
yo=u= p'duce heere Ex. of wittnesses against me, they are in like state as I am, they speake like men desirous to live, they testifye against me. What reward doe they hope for? Lyfe. I wish that w=ch= they speake may purchase that vnto them. ffor I never ment to Endaunger any of theire lives, howsoever I speede this daye. it is to me a thinge indifferent. I am not in Love w=th= my Lyfe, nor have bene a longe tyme. I could haue bene contented to haue dyed in my house when I was besett: But I thancke Allmightie God, that he hath reserved me to this daye's tryall: But I was driven to this hazard by those that have the Queene's care and doe abuse it, inforcinge againste me many vntruthes, w=ch= knowinge I choose rather to hazard her Ma=te's= mercy: then to abide the daungerous courses that shold run against me.
I expected not
that the matter of defence shold have bene alledged for excuse, therefore I must allter my speeche from that I entended. To Rebell in Defence, is a matter not hard of; in case of Murder, defence is a good Plea, but in this case, to doe all that was done that daye, and then to goe abowte to blamich it, I cannot allowe: I speake not nowe to simple men, I speake to them that can drawe p'se owte of the nature of the thinges themselves. It is knowne by bookes, by experience and by common talke, that noe Lawfull intendimt=es= are bent directlie againste the Prince, but there is a walteringe of gou'm=tes= (as the phrase is in Scottland). thes goe noe way but by p'ticular Iniuries. My Lo=rs=, I cannot resemble yo=r= p'ceedinges more rightlie then to y=t= of Pisistratus in Athens, who launched himself to th'intent that by the sighte of bleedinge woundes, the people might beleve he was set vppon: Yo=r= Lop. gave owte that yo=r= lyfe was soughte by the Lo. Cobham and S=r= Wa. Ra: and carried allwayes such a shewe of religion in yo=u= that mens eyes were not able throughe suche a myste to behould the deceipte. But yo=u= imprisonne the Counsell: what reference hath that facte to my Lo. Cobhm~ or the rest. yo=u= alledged the matter to have resolved vppon on the soddaine. No, yo=u= weare three monthes in deliberacon. My Lo. descend into yo=r= self, and strip yo=u= of excuse: the p'ties yo=u= shott att (yf yo=u= could haue rightly vnd=er=stood) were yo=r= best ffreindes.
ffor
M=r= Bacon beinge a daylie Courtier, and havinge accesse to her Ma=tie= vnd=er=tooke to goe to the Queene in my behalf, and for that ende drue a letter very artificiallye, w=ch= was subscribed w=th= my name, allso another letter was drawne, to occasion that letter, w=ch= other came from his brother M=r= Anthony Bacon, both w=ch= he shold shewe the Queene. Gosnole broughte me both the letters, and in my letter he did pleade for me, as feelingly against those enemyes and pointed them owt as plainely as was possible.
But
lett it be indifferently iudged whether I had cause of greife or not, when I was informed by those of good Credditt, that an honorable, grave, and wise Counsello=r= did with teares lament the co=r=ses they were takinge, that besides for that I spake in London, that the INFANTA of Spayne was intytled to the succession: I had reason, ffor it was tould me that M=r= Secretarye so sayde to one of his fellow Counsello=rs=, that the INFANTA'S tytle Compativelie, was as good as any other in the succession. Allso I sawe soe many oppressions in the State, y=t= I was desirous to sacrifice my selfe in the redresse thereof by doinge any thinge that a Loyall subiecte mighte to doe them w=th=.
My Lo. ffor witt I give yo=u= the p'eminence, yo=u= have it aboundantlie. ffor birthe I give yo=u= place. I am not noble, yet I am a gent: neither am I a sword man. Yo=u= haue therefore the oddes of me. Butt I have inocencye to p'tect mefrom yo=r= malicious slander, and I stand here in the p'son of an honest man: yo=u= there in the p'son of a Trayto=r=. Wherefore I do here challenge yo=u= yf yo=u= dare, to name vnto this honorable assembley, that Counsell=r= to whome I shold speake those wordes.
Then
it must be beleeved to be a ficcon. No
it is not, for the noble man that standeth by me hard it: and it was told ioyntlie to vs both.
if it be so then, my Lo. I coniure yo=u= by all the love and frendshipp that hath bene betwixte vs, and as yo=u= are a Christian: by the hono=r= of yo=r= name and howse and whatsoever else yo=u= hold honorable, as I p'test I holde yo=u= severed from him in impudencye, that yo=u= name here the Counsell=r= to whome I shold speake it.
I refer me
to yo=r= self S=r=, and if you will say vppon yo=r= hono=r= y=t= it were fitt I did name him, I will. I p'test
before you and heaven, that yow shouldyo=r= Prince and Countrye a most acceptable s'vice, for I were a verie vnworthye man to hold that place I doe in the State if I were to be touched in that sorte.
beinge in speeche together aboute those matters, oh (q=th= S=r= Chr. Blunt), my Lo. you are in passion against those of my p'fession: whereunto I answered, did you never knowe y=t= at such tyme as I had power in the State, I was willinge noe man shold be trobled for his conscience.
I was ignorant
of the Lawes, therefore mighte easely transgress the bondes thereof. The first and onely motive thatmy stirr w=th= my Lo. was my love to my Lord, tyed vnto him both by the bondes of Allegiance and his manifold des'tes towardes me. In respect whereof I was content to indure w=th= him the utmost hazard: for I sawe his case verie desp'ate for fav=or= & therefore I consulted w=th= others to steere his passage to her Ma=tie=. I p'test before allmightie God for noe other end then to p'strate o=r=selves at her ffeete, wherein was never mencon made of sheddinge one drop of blood, And if in this my affection, I have bene transported beyond the Limittes of the Lawe, and that her highenes is displeased therew=th=, I doe in all humblenes crave her p'don and mercye, wherein I will never dispaire. I hope her Ma=tie=, beinge Gode's Leivetenante vppon earthe, will imytate him in Lookinge to the Earle and not condemne me for that, wherein onely through ignoraunce of her Lawes I have offended.
S=r= Willm. Knollis
is sent for. I knowe not by what messenger, neither whether he will come or not. I therefore beseech yo=r= grace y=t= some sure gent. may be sent as hath free access to her Ma=te's= p'son, and y=t= may p'sent vnto her my humble desire that it wold please her to comaunde him to come, and in my opinion this gent. that standes here, M=r= Knyvett, a gent. of her Ma=te's= preivy Chamber, were a verie meete man.
M=r= Knivet goe and deliver faithfullie this messuage to her Ma=tie= & I further coniure yo=u= as yo=u= are a gent. and do tend=r= yo=r= reputacon, by all o=r= Love and by y=e= dutye yo=u= owe to o=r= Sou'aigne and Conterye, that yo=u= add this further from me to her Ma=tie=, That if either owt of want of care of me, or content to her self, she shall deny to send him, I doe here vowe vppon my salvacon, that I will never s've her as a Counsello=r= or Secretarie, but will live and dye her subiect and vassaile. I pray you forgett not to deliver it w=th= this p'viso, that I will dye her vassayle and subiect.
No
But S=r= John Davis witnesseth a plain resolucon,
Neither
did I ever drawe my sworde, till I was charged at Ludgate, where I was shott twice in the hatt. I was told my Lo. of Cumberland was there. I desired to speake w=th= him and to make my self be vnd=er='stoode of him. And for that end willed the Company that was w=th= me to stay.
Is it not a straunge impudency in that Dallman to give equall righte in the succession of England, to the Infanta as to any other. herevppon
was grownded the sclaunder of M=r= Secretarye, whereof he is as cleare as any man here p'sent.
noe my Lo.
yo=r= Lo. owt of yo=r= mallice to me desires to make me odious, and of yo=r= mallice haue noe other ground, then the breath betwene vs of the peace w=th= Spayne, w=ch= I labored for the good and quyett of my Countrye, as for my affection to advaunce a Spanyshe tytle to England, I am so far from y=t=, that I hate to think of it. And I pray god to consume me where I stande, If I doe not hate the Spanyard as much as any man lyvinge. But w=th= yo=u= it hath ever bene a MAXIME, to pr'fer warr before peace, in respecte of the consequence to yo=r= followers, and dependers.
And make me
as wicked as owte of any hum=r= of yo=r= harte yo=u= wold make me, yet yo=u= shall not make me absurd to goe into the Cittye after such a fashion as yo=u= describe yf I had not apprehended an ymminent daunger.
Nay my Lo.
howsoever yo=u= goe aboute to cloake matters, and to make a p'tence of an innocente harte, these Deposicons of men of yo=r= owne companye admytt noe contradiction: And I wond=er= not at yo=r= denyall, for yo=u= will appeare to be of all religions, one while Papist, an other while a Puritaine, and that but to gayne vnto yo=r= selfe all sortes of people. It will allso be p'ved that yo=u= have practized w=th= Tyrone:
Yes
yo=u= sent Lea to him as he hath confessed.
yes
and it shall appeare, that Lea had direction from you to attempt the Queene, for the w=ch= he was executed as a Trayto=r= the other daye.
ffor
Bothe S=r= John Davies and S=r= Charles Davers doe depose that yo=u= said vnto them that black bagg could tell that yo=u= were betrayed in London. W=ch= allso is witnessed byBussell, who was very forward w=th= yo=u=. But yo=u= were confident in London, havinge beene p'swaded by yo=r= sicophantes that all the Cittie was of yo=r= p'te and in yo=r= pride and overweeninge of theire p'takinge, yow contemned the Q=ne's= Royall authoritye, her herraldes wold not be harkened vnto.
I never
conferred nor attempted any thinge but to th'ende to serve my Countrie and sou'aigne, by makinge her Ma=tie= vnd=e='stand vs, w=ch= we cold not doe for the potencye of o=r= enemyes, that were aboute her. And therefore I do laye a charge vppon yo=u= all my Lo. and those that be hearers that notw=t=hstandinge all Eloquence vsed to make me seeme a Trayto=r=, a Papiste, a Sectarie and an Atheiste, and to haue vsurped the Crowne, yo=u= will yet witnes w=th= me and so I doubte not but to manifest, by goinge w=th= a courage and cherefully vnto my death, that I dye a good Christian, and never soughte to exceede the degree of a subiecte: howsoever I have bene delte w=t=hall. I euere soughte to appease all humo=r= of revenge, and for confirmacon thereof was resolved to receave the Sacram=t= till the attempt vppon the E. of South. I am far from Atheisme, and doe desire to dye as a Christian and an Earle, that haue faithfullie s'ved my Prince and Countrye, whatsoever others have testified, out of the weaknes of theire hartes against me, or to seeme to haue said enoughe I desire it may not lye heavye vppon me. I never thoughte of a p'liam=t=.
ffor
yo=u= drewe manye Earles, Barons and gent: of greate houses into the busines w=th= yo=u=. howe shall it be though=t= yo=u= could haue rewarded them owte of yo=r= maymed estate.
noe other waye then vppon o=r= knees to her Ma=tie=.
I doubte the varietie of the matter,and digressions haue sev=er='ed the Judgm=t= of the Lo: And therefore I hold it necessarie to recyte the Judges opinyons.
Nowe put case
the E. of Essex intent were as he wold have it beleeved, to goe as a Sup=lt= to her Ma=tie=, yet shall their peticons be armed peticons, w=ch= allwayes p'cede losse of libertie to the Prince. Neither is it a nyce poynt of Lawe (as my Lo. of South: wold have it beleved) that condemnes them of treason. But even Comon sence to Consulte to execute and run together in numbers, in these doblettes and hose, armed w=th= weapons, what can be the excuse? Warned by the Lo. Keep: by a herrald, and yet p'sist, Will any simple man take this for les then Treason?
it was not the company yo=u= carryed w=th= yo=u= that yo=u= trusted vnto but the assistance w=ch= you hoped for in the Cittye. The GUISE thurste himselfe into Paris against the Kinge, with onelye a gent., and found that helpe there w=ch= yo=u= (thanckes be to God) fayled of here. And what followed? The Kinge was put to his Pillgrime's habitt, and in that disguise was forced to escape the furye of the Guise: yo=u= came w=th= fayer pr'tence, w=th= all hayle and a kisse, to the Cittye, but the ende was treason. And that hath bene sufficiently p'ved.
how say yo=u= my Lo. is my Lo. of Essex:<|endoftext|>All Cheape-side, and Lombard-streete Madam, could not have furnish'd you with a more compleat bargaine, you will find it in the wearing, and thanke me both for the goodnesse of the stuffe, and of the Manufacture.
But now the price Mistris. I grant your Commodity is good, The Gold and Silver Laces, and the Frienges are rich, and I hope well wrought. Has your Man made a note of the particulars, and their prices, atthe rate of ready-money (for I buy so) and not as you would booke 'em to an under-ag'd heire, or a Court-Cavalier to expect payment two or three yeares hence; and finde it perhaps never. I come with.
I know your Ladiships payment such; And they are priz'd so Madam to a farthing.
Let mee see, broad plate Silver and Gold-lace, 206 Ounces halfe, and a dram, at five and ten pence the Ounce. 60 l. 5 s. 3 d.4. five and ten pence an Ounce is deare.
I protest unto you Madam that parcell of Lace for a Bed as you intend it, was bespoken, and agreed for at six shillings the Ounce by a very great person: but because ready money came not to fetch it off, Fortune reserv'd it here for you, you could not have been so fitted on the sodaine else withinwalls; and I am glad the same fortune was so favourable to me, as by my hands to designe it for your Ladiships use and pleasure. I hope Madam we shal hear of a young heir a comming shortly, and that will make it a rich and fortunate Bed indeed; And then Sirwould thanke me too.
What a bold slut it is, well then the rest of the particulars here of Laces, and Frienges, Loopes, and Buttons, makes the sum of all an hundred pound eight shillings foure pence, halfe-penny. I am no good Arithmetician, but if any be overcast, and overpaid, you must allow restitution.
Yes, good Madam.
Is all put up into this Box?
All Madam.
Give mee my Purse. Take you home that while I make payment for it; your Gold-weights Mistris.
Here Madam all in readinesse.
You take no Gold but what is weight I presume.
'Tis but light paines to weigh it Madam. But let me save your Ladiship that labour.
Nor shall it be your trouble, command your Servant I pray for a glasse of your beere --
Some beere for my Lady presently.
That I may tell you in more privacy, what perhaps you would not have him heare: for Prentises though they are bound to keepe their Masters secrets, are not all privy to their Mistresses; that's more a Journeymans Office.
Your Ladiship is pleas'd.
Not very well with my selfe, for I have gone beyond my Commission in this bargaine, and exceeded my Husbands allowance. Here's one hundred pounds eight shillings 4 d.in the Bill, and he allowes me but the bare hundred pound.
The od money is but a small matter Madam.
A great matter in an honest poore Countrey Ladies purse, may serve her a whole Christmas at Post and Pare, or Farthing gleeke, when the gay Gamsters wives o' the City may command the hundreds, out of the purses of such poore Ladies Husbands. But here is the odd money, eight shillings foure pence, half penny, and so all's paid.
What meanes your Ladiship?
Doe you not understand mee then? I'le tell you that which I thought fit to conceale from your servant; And from your husband too had hee been here, perhaps he knowes not on't. My husband left with you, or lent you the last Terme a hundred pound, which hee assign'd to me; and now I have it in Commodity. Had you forgot it, when it was to do you a good turne, when your absent husband faild you, and you wanted it.
A good turne Madam?
Yes, was it not to have the free use of a hundred pound ready money, a whole quarter of a yeare, through a dead Vacation, and at last to take it out in wares? A good turne I thinke for a Trades-woman; take heed you do not by your sullennesse make me suspect another kind of good turne, or that you did my husband any to my injury, nor deny the receipt of his money, lest I take up a violence that will not become mee, nor you be able to beare. Be therefore well advis'd both in what you say, and who heares me. Somebody comes.
Madam your Beere.
I'le pledge you Mistris.
I shall presume then Madam --
This was right cast, was it not friend?
Your Ladyship will finde it so --
And I hope you will finde your money so well bestowd Madam, that you will vouchsafe always to know the Shop.
Ever upon the like occasion, Mistris, so most kindly farwell sweet Mistris.
The humblest of your servants Madam. Open the Boot for my Lady.
'Tis done, my Coach-man does it.
I would the Devill were in your Coachmans Coat to take his carriage for his paines.
One word more Mistris, can it be he?
Lay your comands on me good Madam.
Not to your trouble, I perceive a young Gentleman attends for conference with you. Is not his name?
No Madam, his name is, much depending on the young Lord.
I thought I had known him, hee is a handsome youth. I cannot blame you now with him: but bewareof old Knights that have young Ladies of their owne. Once more adieu sweet Mistris.
Most courteous Madam -- and once more to the Devill. But on my life her chast Ladiship is taken with this beard-lesse. How shee shot eyes at him!
Now may your servant obtaine a hearing Lady.
My eares are open Sir.
But you are sad or angry, why seemes that brow to threaten a subjection over him that is your vanquish'd captive; or hasplac'd his Bow there bent at me, whose heart already lodges all his Arrowes, never to be restor'd but by your pity?
Fie, fie upon't! what talke is this? I am vex'd, and you would mad me.
What has displeas'd you?
A crosse businesse that has happened in my Shop to day, I being none of the wisest Chapwoman, have undersold a parcell of the best Commodities my husband had. And should hee know't wee should have such a scwable.
Husbands should be so serv'd that do impose Those mercenary Offices on their wives.
Talke so, and I will heare you, your amorous notes sound like Play-speeches.
Servile, nay slavish Offices, ranking their wives with their prentises.
They pretend onely that wee should over-looke our servants, when they but set us there for shew to draw in custome: but in making us such over-seers they are overseene themselves; Shopkeepers-wives will be medling and dealing in their kinde, and as they are able, as wel as their husbands (some much better, and more profitable) but I was overreach'd I confesse.
For no great matter I hope.
No, the matter was not much (that never fretted me) but the manner has eene kild a Shee shop-keeper. I cannot be long-liv'd, here under a Pent-house, as my Lord (you know) told mee when he said he would shut mee out of this servitude, and that I should change my Coat, though my husband could not, before hee were an Alderman, and be rank'd with Ladies.
My Lord has still the same regard of you.
So it appeares by the Tailor and the Mercer, whom he sent foure dayes since to measure me out, and sute mee to his Honour, and no returne of them found, yet his Land might ha' beene measur'd all and sold, while a poore sute is dreampt on, had he borne the mind of some Lord?
I doubt not but this paper will cleare that jealousie. And while you reade I'le speake that which I dare not utter through, Sighes and Blushes to an intire attention. I am of Noble-blood my selfe, free-borne, And not without good education; But since I am ingag'd in this imployment, And made an instrument of others lust, I finde my selfe a scandall to my Name, To Honour, and to Vertue, the base blot Of Pandare sticking on me. But not this Alone is my affliction. Here's my torment, That while I doe true service to my Lord (Whom I must ever honour) in my Agency Unto your selfe (whom I cannot but love) I finde my selfe a Traytor to his trust, In my negotiation for my selfe. Nor can I finde it possible to desist, Mine own attempts, to you, or forbeare to urge Your constancy to him.
How easie a worke 'Twere for one woman to supply 'em both, And hold her husband play to levell Acoile, A wooden two-leav'd booke, a paire of Tables Would do't.
How wretched is that suppliant, who must make Sute to obtaine that, which he feares to take!
At the beare at the Bridge-foot six a clock, good. Sir, I finde my Lords honorable appointments here, and have heard you all this while.
Now I could wish, and was in hope you had not.
I will not blame you on your Lords behalfe; Because you have enough rebuk'd your selfe. But Sir, if you presume upon the favour I give your Lord, and therefore to obtaine me, Cause I am his, you undervalue me To thinke that I can stoop unto his servant, Though almost his Companion, you may thinke After that degradation by degrees, I may, in time, descend unto his Footman, I'me no cast Garment of his Lordships yet.
You have school'd mee fairely, I am humbled, Lady --
Dee heare, dee heare sir, Mr., One word before you goe.
What would hee buy Mistris? can you take his money? Sir dee heare?
Pray attend you the tother end o' th' Shop, If I cannot handle a Customer, why dos your Master trust mee? Could a frowne fright you? Let a smile then cheare you.
And that's a heavenly one, As that ofat.
Pray leave your Player-like passionate expressions. And if you love mee, like a Man speake to me. As I am a Woman; are you silent? if you doubt the length of my mans Eares at that distance, you may whisper what so? But that is a right shop-whisper indeed with Trades-women that are handsome; Is that the most you will give sir? Could I afford it so, doe you thinke I'd make two words w'ye? yet this before you goe --
Now match it for the price I'le give it you for nothing.
I shall forget I have a Lord. I must forget him here.
Doe so, and if (I say) you love mee, speake plainely what you would have mee doe, or what you would doe with mee (I love to dant these young things that love before they can love to the purpose, or speake to't handsomely like a Boy that would faine be shooting at wild-fowle, before hee knowes how to discharge a Birding-piece) I would heare you speake, you have often muttered and fribled some intentions towards me, but I would heare you speake. Come, if you love me lay by the feare of the Lord that sent you, and tell me roundly now, what you would have me doe?
I would intreat you --
Well; what?
That you would be pleas'd --
With what? or to doe what?
To weare this paire of Silke stockins for me.
Is that all your sute, 'tis granted, with my thanks to you; Have you no more to say?
Yes, I say you are the beautifull'st of Women; and that my Lord in your enjoyment is the happiest --
Nay thinke not of your Lord, but aske me, something.
I would but dare not hope for such a favour, you'l never grant it, my unworthinesse.
How can you tell?
You will not wrong my Lord, so as to doe it.
Not in his sight perhaps. What is it? come.
It is --
It is then, let it be so. Go to Schoole child.
It is -- That you would, let me -- give you this ring, And grace it with your Finger.
Will that be a wrong to your Lord?
Yes, to weare any favours, but his own.
Dos he know this?
No, nor I would not that he should (and given by me) for all the Rubies in Cheapside, where I bought this but now, over the way.
Come sir, I'le dally w'ye no longer, I know what you would have with me.
And now you will betray me: I am sham'd then and undone.
No, but I have you o' the hip. 'Tis plaine you would lie with me: deny it if you can.
O deare, did I say so now?
What need you when I know it, you would lie with me, and you shall. Take courage man.
But, in good earnest, shall I? shall I?
Yes, in good earnest, you'l finde it no trifling businesse, when you come to't once. But sir, upon condition.
Any condition Lady.
All purpose on't is lost, and all comes out else.
Name your condition, I'le performe it if it be in the power of my life.
You saw here at your comming a faire Lady.
I tooke no notice of her.
But she did of you, she is calld the Lady.
SirLady?
The same, you have known her it seemes.
Seene her before shee was married.
I will be briefe with you, as you love mee shee loves you as eagerly, but with much more boldnesse, you saw her whisper mee, and how loth shee was to depart, when her eye was upon you.
I did observe it.
Shee is my noble friend, and the sweetest Lady, I need not set her out. But though you thinke you suffer in your honour, in being an instrument twixt your Lord and mee, with the base blot of Pander sticking on you, (these were your words) I have ingag'd my selfe for her to be your Pandaresse; be so, I shall be even with you in businesse if you account it so.
What dee meane Lady?
To urge against my selfe, for that sweete Lady, which no Woman else I thinke would doe, that loves you so unfainedly as I. But 'tis my fate, and the injunction I must lay upon you, to make mee yours. That first you give your selfe to her Embraces; I'le give you means for your accesse to her, and your successe with her, which done, and on your faith affirm'd to mee, 'tis so, I will perpetually bee yours more freely then your Lords.
You urge this but to try my constancy.
For that I'le satisfie you soon, my husband coming we must to night at the Beare -- My Lord writes so.
And there I will direct you in your progresse.how dost? Mr.how ist? How dos my noble Lord? You are sad methinks. Ha' you overbought any thing here, and so repent your bargaine? Or cannot my wife, and you agree upon't? you must use Mr.kindly my sweet: hee is our noblest Lords most speciall favorite, and must finde all faire dealing here, as well when I am abroad as at home sweet heart.
You heare not mee complaine sir, fare you well.
What an Affinego's this! He might ha' thank'd mee for my good words, though I meant him no good will, I hope thou hast overreach'd him indeed.
your hopes are vaine,in seating mee here to overreach, or underreach any body. I am weary of this Mechanick course; and of this courser habit, as I have told you divers and sundry times, and indeed of youthat confine me to't, but the bound must obey.
Never the sooner for a hasty word, I hope sweete; Not of me nor of my shop I prethee at seasonable times Love. But for thy habit (though this be decent on a Citizens wife) use thine owne fancy, let it be as Courtly, or as Lady-like as thou pleasest, or my Lords desires.
Then I am friends agen.
Troth, and I'le call thee friend, and I prethee, let that be our familiar and common compellation: friend it will sound daintily, especially when thou shalt appeare too gallant to be my Wife.
Then let it be so friend.
Intruth it shall, and I am very much taken with it. Friend I have found a Customer to day that will take off my rich parcell of broad Bed-lace, that my Lordbespoke, and left on my hands, for lack of money.
I have sold it already friend, with other Laces at a good rate.
And all for ready money friend?
Yes friend, a hundred pounds, and somewhat more.
Who would be, or who could live without such a friend, in such a shop? This money comes so pat for a present occasion, to stop a gap. It has stopt a gap already friend.
I have dispos'd of the money, the odd hundred pound for apparrell, friend, and other accommodations for my selfe.
Never the sooner for a hasty word I hope friend.
I have done it friend, whereby to appeare more Courtly, and Ladilike as you say, to gaine you more custome to your Shop.
Uuch friend -- Is it so?
And friend you must not be angry, or thinke much of it, if you respect your profit friend.
I were no friend but a wretch if I would. No let it goe friend, and --is my word, I must not grudge at my friend in any thing.
Then friend, let your shop be your own care for the rest of this day, I have some busines abroad.
Whither sweet friend?
Is that a friendly question?
I am corrected friend, but will you not take a Man to wait upon you?
To watch me, shall I? and give you account of my actions? was that spoke like a friend?
I am agen corrected friend, Doe your own pleasure, you'l returne to supper.
Yet againe?
And agen, I am corrected friend.
Neither to supper, nor to bed perhaps.
Never the sooner for a hasty word I hope.
But if I chance to stay, you cannot be a faithfull friend and aske mee where, or in what company, friendship you know allowes all liberty.
A wity wife, with an imperious will, Being crost, findes meanes to crosse her Husband still; And Tradesmen that so match, must not with Gall Temper their wives, but sweetly by wit-all.
Dos not the World come finely on,, ha? And have not wee convenient commings in already, ha!
Better then wee know how to have payd, for that's the glory on't.
I need no more insconsing now in, nor the Sanctuary of, the Forts of, and, whose walls are dayly batter'd with the curses of bawling creditors. My debts are payd; and here's a stock remayning of Gold, pure Gold harke how sweetly it chincks.
Yes, and 'twill ring the changes shortly.
For necessaries, for necessaries it shall change, and Ring all out, and 'twil so long as I have an Unkle, and know to mannage him, let money flie, I can no faster spend then he supply.
For necessaries sir, but you must not now count Sack and Tobacco, Whores and Fidlers in abundance, necessaries.
Why pray?
Because you'l have but little then for extraordinaries, That is to say in a Gentleman for charitable, and pious works and uies.
The fellow's spoy'ld.
Not spoy'ld neither: For I would but wave your purpose of flying at all new Game, and neglect your poore whore, who now begins to be so violent forwrongs, shee can no longer beare, that shee intends to pursue you with her complaints hither to your Unkles House.
My Unkles House? my house. Is not the first Mornings draught mine?
With great reason, for you are first dry in the morning.
Is not the question first ask'd mee, what will you have to breakfast? what will please you for Dinner, and what for Supper? Has not my Unkle let out monies, and taken Bonds and Morgages in my name? doe not his Tenants crowch to mee, and his servants all call me young Master? And dos not my Unkle take care to marry mee to ten thousand pound, and a thing like a wife?
You have got a brave possession here, I must needs say; and I applaud your fortune most in this, that your young Aunt the noble Lady here, who you see feard would prove a cruell Stepdame to you, appeares to be more friend to you then your Unkle. 'Tis a most gracious Sun-shine in her.
Shee shall lose nothing by't. I have thought a way to requite her.
But sir, for Mistris, will you take no order for the poore soule?
I do not like your zealous solicitation, but her's an order for her, in answer of her Malipert Letter you brought me last night. Give it her, and these five pieces, upon condition that shee never come, write, or send to me againe, till I send to her.
That's somewhat hard Sir.
Nay look you, you are a little mistaken in me. I must give over whoring, for speciall causes thereunto me moving.
O now I finde you. And 'twere richly worthyour patience, if you could winne the Widow by't, for whom you stood in faire election once, untill your last debauchment.
I shall stand fairer for her sir, when I leave working but a weeke or two, shall I not?
Yes, if you leave it quite, but to forsake her whom you have brought low, to fall to others, were such a thing --
Well sir, it may be I will, it may be I wo'nt, what's that to you? carry you the Letter, and the Money, and try how that will worke with her.
I'le doe my best, but if shee should exclaime, and bring on her Cosen Mr.to bee clamorous --
Her Cozen's a Cuckold, exclaime and clamorous! give me my money againe.
Nay I am gone sir.
The Rogue's in faction with 'em; O noble Mr., you have most fairely kept your minute with me, I have written my Letter, seald it and all, here to the Widow.
So early? that is well.
I have written no lesse then six large Epistles this morning, and sent 'em now by my Man to be convey'd into the Country to Lords and Knights, with all the news spirituall, and temporall, forraine and domestick that could possibly fall into a private Gentlemans Collection.
Is it possible?
With such dexterity, that if I would make a Trade on't, I could undoe all the Newes-mongers in Town that live by't.
It is a most commendable practise in a Gentleman, and it will mature your judgement in the bothCommon-wealth and State affaires, and in short time invite you unto the chaire of.
When I am once married, and setled, you shall see what an asse 'tis, he believes me.
How am I comforted in my Meditation for you, and how over-joy'd will your Unkle be at the use you make of your retirements!
I confesse it is (by reason of my unwontednesse to it) some difficulty for me to write to women; wherefore since you have so nobly undertaken the conveyance of this, let me beseech you to apologize for the rudenes of my stile.
Anne Crostill,; The out-side hath no rudenesse on it, and (I doubt it not) shee shall finde within all sweetenesse and urbanity.
As you may interpret it to her sir.
Sir, what I have already said, and do intend to say unto her from your Unkle, and my selfe on your behalfe, together with what you have here written, shall (I doubt it not) prepare so faire a way of proceeding for you; That at your visit of her you may say,, she is your own.
And then -- a ha, Mr.!
Expect your fortune modestly, and when it comes embrace it with discretion.
Sir, I am edified.
It is well if you be so; I will put my undertaking in action presently, Pray for my good successe.
I dare not tell him now I cannot; but I wish well for the Monies sake; and let the Vintners pray, and all the decay'd Sparks about the Towne, whom I will raise out of ashes into flame againe. Let them pray for my good wokes. O my young Lady aunts grave waitingWoman. If shee were not hers, and out of this house I should take her for a Bawd now. But being hers, and here how much may I mistake? all flesh is frayle.
Not to disturbe your morning Meditations, my Lady has sent you --
And you have brought me, what sweet Mistris?
A part of her Ladiships own breakfast, it is very cordiall and comfortable to the spirits, I assure you, and delectable to the younger sort, and profitable to the old.
One ofworkes, or the mad Doctor that preaches boyld in't I thinke.
'Tis a composition of mine owne Sir, of many excellent decoctions, of most wholesome restorative, and costly ingredients.
That it was sent by her makes it more excellent, whose bounteous care of me, I must acknowledge exceeds all cost in carving to me, and countenancing me at her Table, in gracing me in presence of the Ladies that come to visit her; in giving charge for decency in all things for my Chamber, my fires shining, my odours burning, my livery serv'd in, my soft and costly bed prepar'd and spread with perfum'd linnen -- here's Ambergreece in this now --
O is it so, doe you finde that?
But though shee is my own Unkles wife, I could e'ne say 'tis pity a young man had her not.
What a wag's this?
Shee is a most sweet Lady.
Shee is a sweete Lady indeed, I can best speakeit that have knowne her from the wombe hitherto: A sweete infant shee was borne, and a sweete babe I swadled it, and a sweete child I nurs'd it, I traynd it up a sweete child. It was in manners a sweet child, at her Booke and Sample a sweet child. I never whipt it but once, and then it was sweete too, and sprawl'd but a little, and whimper'd but a little it was so sweet a child; And so shee grew upwards, and upwards towards woman, and a sweet youngling shee was, and so grew upwards and upwards towards man, and then a sweete Bride shee was, and now a most sweet Lady shee is, (as you say, and I commend you for it) And so she stands at a stay. For now shee growes no more upwards then upon her Wedding day, not upwards as I would have her upwards, here I meane young Gentlemen, could I but see a sweet babe of hers once by my Master, I could be then content to sleep with my Ancestors.
I had rather see your Gibship hang'd up with Polcatts in a Warren, and your sweet Lady with you, though I confesse that were some pitty. I hope her barrennesse, or his will preserve her from my curse.
I hope still, and shee hopes still; and I make him of this broth for every morning, and many other good strengthning things (I cannot say for the same purpose) for I shall never see him have an heire by her.
Excellent! that's best of all.
Because you then are heire, say you so? Is that your love to your Aunt?
No I protest, I meant by the broth, the bottome was the best of all.
Then I cry mercy.
Cannot all thy art, and her cost finde helpe for my Unkle, think'st thou, to get a child?
Helpe! what dee meane. He might have helpeand helpes enough, were she not too vertuous.
Still thou mistak'st me.
Away wag away, your Aunt loves you too well to thinke so of her.
as I hope to inherit any thing hereafter --
I should but serve you well to tell her your good thought of her.
, by this good -- peece I thinke no harme.
Nay, nay.
Take it I say. And tell her if thou wilt, that I love her so well, that were shee not mine Unkles wife, I would get her an heire my selfe rather then be his.
Kinde young Master, now I am heartily sorry that I mov'd you.
And for my Unkle were I his heire apparent, I rather wish he might live till all this World were weary of him, and the next affraid to take him. Then I survive him (Tongue, a pox punish you for lying) Now I live well, and merily good, Wealth and Estates, bring cares and troubles with 'em, Were all young heires of my contented mind, Parents and Patrons would be better prayd for.
Good Gentleman.
Closet. ----
O my Lady calls.
Present my thanks and best respects unto her.
I should ha' told you first -- I ha' forgot. My head is naught,
What member hast thou good then?
My Lady desires you -- This talke has put me out -- O this head! My Lady desires you --
Desires shee me?
Yes sir, shee desires you.
Refuse me if I desire not her as much, for all she is my Unkles leavings.
My Lady desires you.
And shee shall have me-- And she were ten Unkles wives, and she ten of mine Aunts.
O this head! nay now you will not heare mee, shee desires you to goe abroad in the Coach with her.
Any whither, to, or any of the City out-leaps (I know 'em all) for a spirt and back againe, tell her I am up and ready for her, and could ha' been without her stirrup porredge, though I thanke her for her care. A man can not be too well prepar'd, or provided for so sweete a Lady, in so much distresse. A very, chain'd to a Rock.
What's this you say? I understand no word of it, I would take your answer right, though I falter'd in my Ladies message.
The Devills in this overruning Tongue of mine, I could finde in my heart to worme him out with my teeth.
What must I tell my Lady Sir?
That I am more oblig'd to her Ladiship then I was to my Mother, shee has brought mee a new man into the World, and that my Being and my Life is hers.
I hope hee's a true convertite, did I send you to hold discourse here, Closet?
Nor did I Madam, but I could heare this Gentleman a whole day methinks. Hee speakes so acknowledgingly of your Ladiships vertue, and goodnesse towards him.
I am beholding to him, will you goe with mee Nephew to the Exchange? I am to buy some toyes there for the Country, you may get a fancy by't.
Good, I must weare her favours.
Or cannot you forbeare your study so long?
To doe you service Madam, under whose commands I build my happinesse.
Be not at the distance of complement with mee good Nephew.
I would not be thought insolent deare Madam.
Come the Coachman grumbles at my stay, and 'twill be Dinner-time presently, so the Cooke will be angry too.
You are all tendernesse to your servants Madam.
A sweete Gentleman, and bountifull, if my Lady had been blest with such a Husband, what a place had I had!
Doe you know the contents Mr.of the familiar Epistle you have brought me here?
No Lady, but I guesse it a faire expression of the Writers affection to you, although hee desired mee to crave your pardon for the rudenesse of his stile, it being the first that hee hath composed of that consequence.
Ha, ha, ha, I'le trust you sir, with the full knowledge of it, pray read it your selfe.
I finde shee is pleased, and my indeavour prosperous, for the young Gentleman, I am sorry that I delaid a day in the delivering of it.
Pray read it out sir, for I finde it so pleasant that I could heare it a whole day together.
-- Blesse mee! sure if hee writ this, the Devill dictated to him.
On sir, that's but his first charge.
This could no otherwise be done but by the Devill that ought him the shame.
What follows I pray, there's the first and second point past? marke his method.
Thirdly, and lastly, let mee advise you, since you are so hot upon Marriage, though I assure my selfe you love none but mee, (and I thanke you for't) that you fraine or dissemble an affection to some one of the City, who is but comparative to your selfe in blood and fortune, and so you may make by-use of me as your friend, and have children like me,.
Have you ever heard so queint a Love Letter?
Lady, the injury done in it, to your selfe is unanswerable, but my wrong in being his Messenger, I will make him answer.
Excuse me Sir, he has done me a favour; I pray informe him so with my great thankes. But for what you conceive a wrong to your selfe, use your discretion, you have no more to say to me for him at this present, have you sir?
Not for him but against him, I will un-say all that I sayd before intended for his good.
But i'le not heare you wrong your former love, and judgement of him so, which made so deepe impression here, that I had lock'd his love up as a Jewell in my Breast, and you in striving now to wrest it thence may breake the Cabinet; I rather wish you'l be a friendly meanes to draw his presence hither, that I my self may mildly question him.
Are you serious Lady?
I feare I shall not rest before I see him, but doe not tell him that, lest in this sullen humour, hee force his absence to afflict mee more; I'le hold you sir no longer, deale for me as you can, I know you have a guesse at my desire.
I'le doe you service in it.
I guesse that her desire is to doe some act of Revenge upon him. And (so it be not mortall) it were but Justice in her for so grosse a scorne by him cast upon a well reputed Gentleman. Yet is it observ'd in her that shee has a violent humour to do, and not to doe things oftentimes wilfully against all good councell or perswasion, shee has the spirit of contradiction in her, and an unalterable resolution upon sodaine intentions, a most incorrigible will shee has that will not bow nor breake. This crosse abusive Letter therefore may doe good upon her,however mischievous hee might intend it. If shee meant well to him before, it may the faster bring her on, but it amazes me that hee should write so, bearing his Unkle, and my selfe in hand, that hee so fairely lov'd her, and besought us to negotiate with her for him, should shee forgive it, yet the wrong to us in his vile manners is unpardonable, and so sir, I come to you.
O Mr.--
What mischiefe or despight have I e're done you, That could provoke your desperate spleene against mee, To wound mine honour?
What doe you meane good sir?
You have employed mee basely, made mee your Carrier of scandall, and scurrility to the hands Of noblenesse and vertue. Could the Fiend Lust that is in you suffer you to write No other Sense or Language to a person Of her faire Name, and Worth, then such as Ruffians Would send to strumpets? or it being such.
Could not a Porter, or your Pandare there Serve for the lewd conveyance?
What a welcom's that!
You might safer Ha' sent it so, and your own right hand with it; Then to have drawn my just revenge upon you.
Hold I beseech you, and sir, though I lose the Widow by my error (which was indeed but a meere accident) let mee not be so miserable made as to lose you, before you heare a short Examination -- Deliver'd you the Letter which I sent Yesterday to the Damsell that you wot of?
Yes sir, shee read it, kist it a hundred times, Then made a bosome Idoll on't, And sayes you are the noblest Gentleman.Under a Saint that e're tooke care for sinner.
Hell take her for a mistaking whore, Shee has the widows Letter, and the widow hers, I found it sir, when you judiciously Said it was Ruffian-like, and Strumpet language.
How could you erre so strangely?
O slightly, slightly, curse o' my heedless braine! And then too be trapp'd with carelesnesse. When I was so religiously resolv'd, T'incline to vertue, and a Marriage life, Thinking with one hand to cast off my follies, And to take hold of vertue with the other, For sir, (I will confesse my selfe to you) The Letter you conveyed was in defiance, A loose liv'd wanton, intended to a whore, That impudently hopes an interest in me.
It was not so directed.
I there was (The Hell confound it on't) my giddines: I seald both Letters e're I superscrib'd 'em, And so gave each the contrary direction.
'Twas a grosse carelesnesse, and if you lose A fortune by't, do not blame your friends.
That fortune should favour a whore before An honest woman. 'Twas the sweetest Letter, The daintiest winning things -- (the Devills in't) Shee must not carry't from the widow so. Fetch mee the Letter againe.
Do you thinke shee'l part with't sir?
Cannot you beat it out of her sir?
I cannot tell how to do that.
Thus sir -- i'le give you demonstration, you malicious Rogue, you that conspirst with her to betray me, so good a Master I have beene to thee, and so good a friend to her, i'le recompence you both.
You have undone us both, and will discard us now you are warme in your Unkles bosome agen -- but --
But what you Traitor you?
You put me in good minde, and if I do not somewhat.
I owe you somewhat for your last-nights absence, too pernicious Villaine that kepst thy selfe out o' the way o' purpose that I should bee drunke, and abuse my self, and the house here all lay o' your absence, There's somewhat more for that.
'Tis all upon account sir.
Who knowes an honest Servingman that wants a good Master.
Was it your mans fault Mr.? if I be not reveng'd &c.
No faith, To speak truth he was as much abus'd in it, as you in doing a thing as contrary to his vile conditions, as you did to your noble Name. But I crave onely your pardon, I know not what I doe besides. This crosse blow of chance staggers my reason so --
Well sir, since I have found the errour, my reason reconciles me to you, and since it grew out of your equall intent to cast off the evill, as to embrace the good, I will re-mediate for you to the widow.
But yet shee'l know I have had a whore. Yet then you may say, 'tis such a running Disease among young Gentlemen, that not one of a hundred has scap'd it, that have prov'd stay'd men afterwards, and very sober husbands; As looke you yonders one may prove, whom now I have in good sooth a great desire to beate.
In your Aunts presence, and your Unkles house; Though I were not his friend; could you be so outragious? I muse I see him here though.
Cry you mercy sir, are you his friend?
I make my selfe so, hee being dependent to my noblest Lord, whom I am bound to honour.
What Lord I pray, that I may honour him too.
The Lord.
That loves women above wine, wine above wealth, wealth above friend, and friends above himselfe. There's no scandall in all that sir.
It goes so of him indeed, but he loves honor above all those.
Mr.a word.
Your servant Madam.
In the name of flesh, for what dos his Lordship employ that Angle-worme to my Aunt? Hee has had her this houre in private conference, close chamberd up together, not so much as Matronin the roome with 'em, 'Tis a fine sleeke thing, and almost pitty to hunt it, but sure I must beat it, as place and time convenient may serve.
Pray Mr.move you my Husband for it, I would not medle in his money matters willingly.
Five hundred pound for my Lord upon the mentioned security, I will break it to sir.
Is that the businesse after so much privacy? very prety, my Aunts a woman too, and my Unkle may have as forked a fortune, as any of the City, that lend out money to hedge in Lordships.
I am his Lordships servant.
And I your Lordships good Madam. And yours Mr..
I am for your way Mr..
And I sir, and't please you.
, I would speak with you.
May I not wait upon your Gentleman to the Gate Madam?
No good, though I commend your curtesie, yet would I not you should neglect your owne dignity.
Umh -- I am under Government.
The young man, if you have modesty will thinke you mock him, if not you'l make him become arrogant, know you not whose man he is?
No tis apparent, this over-slighting of him proclaimes shee loves him, whose follower Madam, and I know Lords followers, Knights fellows.
Not all Lords followers to all Knights.
To as many as their faire Ladies will give way to, that are not faint-hearted.
I understand you not; something troubles you, you are not right to day.
I am only as I am in your favour Madam.
Come I know what perplexes you, and 'tis therefore that I desire to talke with you; I am not angry with you, but let mee tell you, although not openly I tooke notice of the pickle you came home in last night, after your Unkle was in Bed; to whom, mervayling at your absence I excus'd you, as gone at my request to visit some Ladies with whom you staid Supper, I told him, when you were with your Roucers.
But did you never go?
Indeed I did, and he was satisfied.
O my sweet Lady Aunt! I was indeed amongst 'em, and deeply merry.
And drunke as deeply!
I will abuse your goodnesse so no more.
Say and hold, for your own good.
What's now become of mee, I am under correction.
I would you could have seene your selfe, and how your disguise became you, as I was told, I do but friendly tell you of some passages, as they were to mee related, by those whom I have charm'd to speake no more on't. Be secure therefore in your Unkle.
O my deare heavenly Aunt!
First, at the doore you bounc'd like a Giant at the Gate of an inchanted Castle, before which could be opened offence was taken by you at your Sedan-men; for asking money (as appeard afterwards) more then you brought from the Taverne, and leaving their office fouler by a distemper'd stomach-full, then you found it. In the strife for these sad causes your Sword being seiz'd on, you being unable to use it, were found by my servants atwith your brace of Corps bearers, in the dirt, and their poore hovill Chaire turnd on his ridge in the Kennel.
I'le never be drunk agen.
I hope you will say so, when you have heard all; but by the way your late stock being spent, here are ten peeces towards a supply.
O sweet golden Aunt!
Well sir, the striefe appeas'd, you were tane in. Then hay is there no Sack i'the house? Tis for you in you Chamber is replid, up you are had, where is the Rogue my man? not seene since Yesterday; Fetch me a wench. Blesse us cries oldthe Butler, wee have none i'th house, nor cannot send for any out o' dores. Dost -- tell me that? is not my Ladies Woman, my Ladies Chamber-maide, the Laundry-maide, the wench under the Cooke, my Ladies Nurse old, nor my Lady her selfe within? I know, or will know all the shee things in the house.
But why me up in your bedroll?
Pseigh.
You remember none o' this!
It is not worth it Madam.
Nor how you scar'd Chamber-maid, whomsent in love to see care taken for you, not dreaming of any ill thought in you, doe you remember how you told her, and what you would give her, when your Unkle died for a small present curtesie? she was faine to satisfieyou with a false promise to steale to bed to you before foure men could force, or humor you into it.
What an unhallowed Rascal was!
'Tis well you consider it now. And still consider. How ill excesse of Wine, Roaring and VVhoring becomes a Gentleman, and how well sobrietie, curtesie, and noble action, and dangers wait upon the one sort, and what safety accompanies the other!
Wine, Roaring and Whoring,will lay that saying of yours Madam to my heart; but Wine is the great wheele that sets the rest a whirling.
True, for had you not first beene sullied with Wine, you would not have abus'd your selfe to ha tumbled in the dirt with your Litter-mules, nor offer'd to seduce my Chamber-maide. Suppose you had overcome her, how could you have come off but with shame to your selfe, and the utter ruine of the poore Wench?
Still shee corrects me for my medling with base matters and people, shee is not angry shee sayes, thoughcall'd for her last night i'my drinke, shee gives me mony,will now understand her, and whereunto all her former favours and her later admonitions are directed, and presently appeare a gratefull Nephew.
Nay, bee not sad upon it, aswould win you from your faults,would have you still be cheerfull. If any thought troubles you, you may be free with me.
O Madam you have made me, and now take me to you.
How meane you?
Freely and wholly, the truest, faithfullst servant, and I thinke the ablest that any Lady of your lacks and longings ever bestowd a favour on, though I say't my self. You'l swear't when you have tri'd me, and't be but hourely for a month together.
Is the man sound troe?
I defy Surgeon, or the Potecary can come against mee.
Sound i' your senses sir, I meane.
O for blabbing Madam never feare mee, now I am resolv'd to live soberly, and be onely yours. And with such pleasure, with such safety, secresie, and fulnesse, I will so constantly supply you, that you shall not have time to dreame of the defects of your old man.
Doe you meane your Unkle, and not know whose wrong you unnaturally and sinfully pursue?
No man living Madam can doe it for him, more naturally and lesse sinfully; I am of the same flesh and blood, and bring his youth to your pleasure, how can you thinke old Unkles children are got? or how came up the proverbe,, doe you thinke? You would have a child by him. All your Cawdells and Cock-broaths will never doe it, An old mans generative spirit runs all into braine, and that runs after covetousnesse too, get wealth, not children. Believe it, much Nephews helpe belongs to it, and then the children are not degenerate, I cannot thinke but many Unkles know it, and give way to it, because stranger bloods shall not inherit their Lands, and so sweet Aunt if I live not to inherit his, my son may, in your first born. There will be a sweet comfort to you.
But is all this in earnest?
In earnest? yes, And I pray so take it, and let it be a bargaine, and now presently in the Chamber, I will make you my first payment for the purchace.
Fie, fie, you doe but say so?
That shall be tri'd presently. Come sweet Madam, I finde you are willing, and I sweare I am resolute, and will be as secret as your own woman, if you will not goe I protest i'le carry you.
Nay preytheeset me down a little.
Psewgh -- I need none o' these whesings I.
But prathee tell mee, dost thou not all this onely to trie me, or am I a Rogue thinke you, or wouldst thou seriously that thine own naturall Unkle, thy bountifull Patron, nay thy father on the matter, should suffer such a wrong, and done by us?
Harke there againe, Madam have I not proved sufficiently and plainely, that I shall in doing the feate for him doe him the greatest right in the world, in getting him, and you an indubitable heire, and to give him both the comfort, and the glory of it?
Was ever such a Reprobate?
And you can doe him no wrong (though you had not a Ladies priviledge) to Cuckold him, for assure your selfe hee Cuckqueanes you, now come Madam.
You speake not on your knowledge.
I never was his Pimpe, but what I have heard, I have heard. Now come Madam.
I heard Mr.protest within these three days that hee thought my Husband the chastest man (of a Gentleman) that he knows.
O did hee so, Madam, believe it they two have whor'd together, and thathas pimpt for him oftener then you ever lay with my Unkle.
What! since he married me?
What else?is not onely his grave Parasite, but his Pimpe, and has spent my Unkle more in these civill punctuall wayes, then I in all my whole debauches, what did you thinke hee kept him for? O they are a brace of subtle dry Tweakes, come now Madam.
What an inhumane Villain's this!
I'le tell you all now upon our inward acquaintance.
You have told too much already to have any acquaintance with me at all, nor shall you unlesse you presently recant all that you have, or would have said upon this subject.
Madam --
Stand further and replie not, lesse I call in those that shall sadly silence you. Have you abus'd your Unkle, and the next best friend you have i' the World, in hope thereby to abuse mee most, that was no enemy of yours till now you justly have provok'd me?
I tooke not a right course.
Was this the best construction you could make of my love to you, or a fit requitall, to make me an incestuous Whore?
Yes, yes, a pox my course was right enough, but I undertooke her at an ill season. Her spruce springall left her but now, i'le tell her so Madam.
Come I perceive you are sorry; and that's a part of satisfaction. Therefore for once i'le winke at your transgression, especially before others. Here's one you see.
I doe, the Devill blind her.
Madam --
But tempt me so againe, and i'le undoe you.
I know how you'l undoe mee witty Madam,--
Nay be not sad, discover not your selfe, and you are safe, for once I tell you.
Shee'l come about I see.
But will you Cozen goe, and doe that for me?
Most readily good Madam, I have your full directions.
All Cosen, if you forget not.
I cannot be so negligent in your service Madam, I finde by this fain'd errand shee dares not trust her trollop there, I love her wit now too.
He is both schoold, and coold I hope. Nowwhat's your News?
Of a Citizen Madam that intreats to speake with your Ladiship.
Doe you not know his Name, or Trade?
Yes, I had both eene now, but I have such a Head.
If you have lost 'em by the way pray go back and seeke 'em, or bring you his businesse.
I ask'd his businesse Madam, and told him hee might trust mee with it without a hand to his booke, but he said it could not be delivered, but by his owne word o' mouth to your Ladiship.
What strange matter is it troe? or what Citizen, is not his Name?
Yes Madam, and he is a (O this head) a --
A Silkeman is he not?
Yes Madam the same.
I hope his impudent Wife has not told him all; if shee has, where's his remedy in this Womans Lawcase?
There's a Gentleman with him too Madam.
Then wee shall have it, 'Tis his Wife sure, well Iam prepar'd for the incounter. Bid 'em come up, if they grow violent or too bold with mee, i'le set my Nephewupon 'em. 'Tis not his Wife, what Creature is it troe with me, Mr.?
Craving your pardon Madam, a few words in the behalfe of this poore Kinsewoman of mine, touching a Gentleman, who I heare lives in your House, Mr., Madam, by whom shee has received much injury.
How sir I pray?
Pray Madam read this Letter, weepe not, but hold up thy head Cuz, wee will not be dasht, nor basht in a good cause; pray read you Madam.
Wherein appeares the injury to your Kinswoman?
In flying from his Word, and Deed Madam. He has borne her in hand these two yeares, and use her at his pleasure, detaining her from her choyce of many good fortunes, and at last sends her this to make amends for all, and denies his act the next day, sending his man to take the Letter from her, pretending 'twas directed to another. But never the sooner for a hasty word Cosen, we will not be dasht nor basht, I warrant thee.
Here's the direction., is that your Name Lady?
I am the sorrowfull one that is knowne by it Madam.
Never the sooner for a hasty word Cosen.
I conceive the businesse, and find the error, and my great doubt is over.
Weepe not I say.
What would you have me doe Mr.?
You have discretion Madam, and I made choice of your Ladiship to open this matter unto you, rather then to Sirhimselfe, whom I would not willingly exasperate against his Nephew, you may be pleased in a milder way to temper him, and worke a satisfaction for my Kinsewoman; Sirand your selfe Madam, are noble Customers to my Shop, and for your sakes I would not deale rigourously with your Kinseman, if a gentle end may be made. But, if you cannot so compound it, the Law lies open, money and friends are to be found, a good cause shall not be sterv'd, I will not be dasht nor basht,is my word, and so good Madam you know my mind.
'Tis pity a Gentlewoman should suffer too much, and I like her so well at first sight, that I am easily mov'd to doe good for her, is shee your Kinsewoman in blood Mr., or your wifes?
Mine I assure your Ladiship, though my wife can boast as great and noble friends I thank fortune, as the wife of any Tradesman that carries a head in the City, (but that's by the by) yet I came of a better house, and am a Gentleman borne, none disprais'd.
Well Mr., leave your Kinsewoman with
me a little while, you shall not be seene in my act, i'le try
what I can doe for her.<|endoftext|>What! Not ready yet, Man?
You do not consider my Voyage fromlast night.
Pish, a meer Ferry, get up, get up; my Cousins Maids will come and Blanket thee anon: Art thou not ashamed to lie a Bed so long?
I may be more ashamed to rise; and so you'l say, dear Heart, if you look upon my Cloaths; the best is, my Buff-coat will cover all.
I gad, there goes more cunning than one would think, to the putting thy Cloaths together: thy Doublet and Breeches are Guelphs and Ghibellins to one another; and the stiches of thy Doublet areso far asunder, that it seems to hang together by the Teeth. No Man could ever guess to what part of the Body these fragments did belong, unless he had been acquainted with u'm as long as thou hast been. If they once lose their hold, they can never get together again, except by chance the Rags hit the Tallies of one another. He that gets into thy Doublet, must not think to do't by storme; no, he must win it inch by inch, as thedid.
You are very merry with my Wardrobe: but till I am provided of a better, I am resolv'd to receive all Visits in this Truckle-bed.
Then I will first scotch the Wheels of it, that it may not run; thou hast Cattle enough in it, to carry it down stairs, and break thy neck. 'tis got a yard nearer the door already.
Sir, Mr.your Taylor's below, and desires to speak with you.
He's an honest Fellow, and a fashionable, he shall set thee forth I warrant thee.
I, but where's the Money for this dear Heart?
-- Well, but what think you of being put into a
Suit of Cloaths, without Money?
You speak of Miracles.
Do you not knowhumor?
Prethee, What have I to do with his humor?
Break but a Jest, and he'll beg to trust thee for a Suit; nay, he will contribute to his own destruction; and give thee occasions to make one: he has been my Artificer these three years; and, all the while I have liv'd upon his favourable apprehension: Boy, conduct him up.
But, What am I the better for this? I ne'r made Jeast in all my life.
A bare clinch will serve the turn; a Carwichet, a Quarterquibble, or a Punn.
Wit from a Low-Countrey-Soldier? One that has convers'd with none but dullthese ten yeares! What an unreasonable Rogue art thou? why, I tell thee, 'tis as difficult to me, as to pay him ready Money.
Come, you shall be rul'd for your own good, Lie down; I'll throw the Cloaths over you to help Meditation; and, upon the first opportunity, start you up, and surprise him with a Jeast.
Well, I think this impossible to be done: but, however I'll attempt.
Husht! he's coming up.
Morrow Mr.: What, I warrant you think I come a Dunning now?
No, I vow to Gad,, I have a better opinion of thy Wit, than to think, thou would'st come to so little purpose.
Pretty well that: No, no; my business is to drink my mornings-Draught in Sack with you:
Will not Ale serve the turn,?
I had too much of that last night; I was a little disguis'd, as they say.
Why disguis'd? Hadst thou put on a clean Band, or wash'd thy Face lately? those are thy Disguises,.
Well, in short, I was drunk; damnably drunk with Ale; great Hogen Mogen bloody Ale: I was porterly drunk, and that I hate of all things in Nature.
And of all things in Nature I love it best.
Art thou there I'faith; and why, old Boy?
Because when I am porterly drunk, I can carry my self.
Ha, ha Boy.
This Porter brings sad Newes to you, you must trust him for a suit of Cloathes, as bad as 'tis: come, h's as honest Fellow, and loves the King.
Why? it shall be my Suit to him, that I may trust him.
I grant your Suit, Sir,
Make hast and dress you: SirDines here to day you know him.
I, I a good honest young Fellow; but, no Conjurer; he and I are very kind.
I gad we two have a constant Revenue out of him: he would now be admitted Suitor to my Lady,my Lordhis Daughter; our Neighbour here in.
Is the Match in any forwardness?
He never saw her before yesterday, and will not be brought to speak to her this Moneth yet.
That's strange.
Such a bashful Knight did I never see; but we must move for him.
They say here's a great Dinner to be made to day here, at your Cousin, on purpose for the enterview.
What he keeps up his old humor still?
Yes certain; he admires eating and drinking well, as much as ever, and measures every mans wit, by the goodness of his Palate.
Who Dines here besides.
O, my Ghest.
He has ever had the repute of a brave clear-spirited Fellow.
He's one of your Dear Hearts, a Debauche.
I love him the better for't: the best Heraldry of a Gentleman is a Clap deriv'd to him, from three Generations: What fortune has he?
Good Fortune at all Games; but no Estate: he had one; but he has made a Devil on't long ago: he's a bold Fellow, I vow to Gad: a person that keeps company with his betters; and commonly has Gold in's pockets: come; I see thou longest to be at thy mornings watering: I'll try what credit I have with the Butler.
Come away my noble Festus and new Customer.
Now will he drink till his Face be no bigger than a three-pence.
Nay, the Devil take thee, sweet Landlady, hold thy tongue: Was't not enough thou hast scolded me from my Lodging, which, as long as I rent it, is my Castle; but to follow me here to Mr., where I am invited; and to discredit me before strangers, for a lowsy, Paltry summ of Money?
I tell you truely, Mr., my husband and I cannot live by Love, as they say; we must have wherewithal, as they say; and pay for what we take; and so shall you, or some shall smoak for't.
Smoak! why a piece of hung Beef inis not more smoakt, then thou hast Smoak'd me already. Thou know'st I am now fasting; let me have but fair play; when I have lined my sides with a good dinner, I'll ingage upon reputation to come home again, and thou shalt scold at me all the afternoon.
I'll take the Law on you.
The Law allows none to scold in their own Causes: What do'st thou think the Lawyers take our money for?
I hope you intend to deal by my Husband like a Gentleman, as they say?
Then I should beat him most unmercifully, and not pay him neither.
Come, you think to fobb me off with your Jests as you do my Husband; but it wonn't be: yonder he comes, and company with him; Husband, husband; whyI say!
Speak softly, and I will satisfie thee.
You shall not satisfie me, Sir; pay me for what you owe me, for Chamber-rent, and Diet, and many a good thing besides, that shall be nameless.
What a Stygian woman's this to talk thus? hold thy tongue till they be gone, or I'll Cuckold thy husband:
You Cuckold him -- would you durst Cuckold him; I will not hold my Tongue, Sir.
Yonders my Guest; what say you Gentlemen? shall I call him to go down with us?
I must make a loose from her, there's no otherway: Save ye Mr.; is your Cousinstirring yet: answer me quickly Sir, is you Cousinyet stirring?
I'll go and see, Sir; sure the man has a mind to beat me; but I vow to Gad I have no mind to be beaten by him: come away.. you'll follow us.
I'll be with you immediately --
Who was that with,.
A man at Armes, that's come from.
A man out at Armes thou mean'st,.
Good I'faith.
I, I; you run questing up and down after your Gambols, and your Jests; and never mind the main chance, as they say: pray get in you Debts, and think upon your Wife and Children.
Think upon the Sack at, with theflavour. hang a Wife; What is she, but a lawful kind of Manslayer? every little hugg in bed, is a degree of murdering thee: and for thy Children fear u'm not: thy part of u'm shall be Taylors, and they shall trust; and those thy Customers get for thee shall be Gentlemen, and they shall be trusted by their Brethren; and so thy children shall live by one another.
Did you mark that? there was wit now; he call'd me Cuckold to my face, and yet for my heart I cannot be angry with him: I perceive you love, Sir; and I love her the better for your sake; speak truly, do you not like such a pretty brown kind of woman?
I do I'faith,. your fair Women have no substance in u'm they shrink Ith' wetting.
Well, you may be undone if you will Husband: I hear there are 2 or 3 Actions already out against him: you may be the last, if you think good.
'Tis true she tel's me; I love your wit well Sir; but I must cut my coat according to my cloath.
Sir, we'll come by our own as we can; if you put us off from week to week thus.
Nay, but good Landlady --
Will good Landlady set on the Pot, as they say; or make the Jack goe; then I'll hear you.
Now she's too much on the t'other hand: hold your prating; or I'll put you out of your Pater Nosters with a sorrow to you.
I did but lay the Law open to him, as they say, whereby to get our money in: but if you knew how he had used me Husband.
Has he us'd you; put so much more into his Bill for Lodging.
Honest, and so he dy'd; I thank thee little, being sober, and when I am drunk, I will kiss thee for't.
Thank me, and pay me my money, Sir; though I could not forbear my jest, I do not intend to lose by you; if you pay me not the sooner, I must provide you another Lodging; say I gave you warning.
Against next quarter Landlord?
Of an hour Sir.
That's short warning,.
By this hand you shall up into the Garret where the little bed is; I'll let my best room to a better paymaster; you know the Garret, Sir.
I, he knows it by a good Token Husband.
I sweat to think of that Garret,. thou art not so unconscionable to put me there: why 'tis a kind of little ease, to cramp thy rebellious Prentices in; I have seen an Usurers Iron Chest would hold two on't: a penny Looking-glass cannot stand upright in the Window, that and the Brush fills it: the Hat-case must be dispos'd under the Bed, and the Comb-case will hang down from the Seeling to the Floore. If I chance to Dine in my Chamber, I must stay till I am empty before I can get out: and if I chance to spill the Chamber-pot, it will over-flow it from top to bottom.
Well, for the description of the Garret, I'll bate you something of the Bill.
All, all, good. or to stay thy fury till my Rents come up; I will describe thy little Face.
No, rather describe your own little money; I am sure that's so Little, it is not visible.
You are ith'right, I have not a cross at present, as I am a sinner; and you will not believe me, I'll turn my Pockets inside outward -- Ha! What's the meaning of this, my Pockets heavy? Has my smal Officer put in Counters to abuse me? -- How now, yellow Boyes, by this good light! Sirrah, Varlet, how came I by this Gold? Ha!
What Gold do you mean, Sir? the Devil-a-piece you had this morning: in these last three weeks, I have almost forgot what my Teeth were made for; last night good Mrs.here took pitty on me, and crumm'd me a Mess of Gruel, with the Children, and I popt and popt my Spoon three or four times to my mouth, before I could find the way to't.
'Tis strange, how I should come by so much Money!
Has there been no body about my Chamber this morning, Landlady?
O yes, Sir; I forgot to tell you that: this Morning a strange Fellow, as ever eyes beheld, would needs come up to you when you were asleep; but when he came down again, he said, He had not wak'd you.
Sure this Fellow, who e'r he was, was sent by Fortune to mistake me into so much Money. -- Well, this is not the first time my necessities have been strangely supply'd: someor other has a kindness for me, that's certain:
-- Well Monsieur, from henceforward I'll keep my wit for more refin'd spirits; you shall be payd with dirt; -- there's the Money for you.
Nay, Good Sir. --
What's your summ? tell it out: Will the Money burn your fingers? Sirrah, Boy, fetch my Suit with the Gold Lace at Sleeves from Tribulation -- Gives him Gold.
Mr., I shall turn the better Bill-man, and knock that little Coxcomb of yours, if you do not answer me what I owe you.
Pray Sir, trouble not your self; 'tis nothing; Ifeck now 'tis not.
How, nothing Sir?
And't please your worship, it was seventeen pounds and a Noble, yesterday at noon, your worship knows: and then your worship came home ill last night, and complain'd of your worships head; and I sent for three Dishes offor your good worship, and that was six pence more, and please your worship's honor.
Well; there's eighteen pieces, tell u'm.
I say,, do not take u'm,
What, Is all your pleading of necessity come to this?
Now I see he will pay, he shall not pay,; go home, and fetch him the whole bag of forty pounds, I'll lend it him, and the Lease of the House too; he shall want for nothing.
Take the Money, or I'll leave your house.
Nay, rather than displease his Worship, take it.
So, so; go home quietly, and Suckle my God-son,.
If you are for the Cellar, Sir, you know the way.
No, my first visit shall be to my Mistriss, the Lady: She's discreet, and how the Devil she comes to love me, I know not; yet I am pretty confident she loves me: well, no woman can be wiser than, you know what will give her leave to be.
Look, look; Is not that your Servant,?
'Tis she; there's no being seen, till I am better habited --
Let him go, and take no notice of him: poor Rogue! He little thinks I know his poverty.
And less, that you supply it by an unknown hand.
I, and falsified my Fathers Keyes to do it.
How can you answer this to your discretion?
Who could see him want she loves?
Oh here's Mr.come, your Jeweller, Madam.
Welcome, hast thou perform'd thy visit Happily, and without discovery?
As you would wish it, Madam: I went up to his Chamber without interruption; and there found him Drowning his cares, and pacifying his hunger with sleep; which advantage I took, and undiscovered by him left The Gold divided in his Pockets.
Well, this Money will furnish him I hope, that we may have his company again.
Two hundred and fifty good pounds, Madam! Has your Father miss'd it yet?
No; if he had, we should have all heard on't before now: but, pray God Monsieurhas no other haunts to divert him now he's ransom'd: what a kind of woman is his Landlady?
Well enough to serve a Taylor; or to kiss when he comes home drunk, or wants money; but, far unlikely to create jealousie in your Ladiship.
Madam, Justicedesires your Ladiships excuse, that he has not yet perform'd the Civilities of his hour to you; he is dispatching a little business, about which he is earnestly employed.
He's Master of his own occasions.
We shall see him anon, with his face as read, as if it had been boyl'd in pump-water: but, When comes this Miror of Knighthood that is to be presented you for your Servant?
Oh, 'tis well thought on; 'Faith thou know'st my affections are otherwise dispos'd; he's rich, and thou want'st a Fortune; atchieve him if thou can'st; 'tis but trying, and thou hast as much wit as any Wench in.
On condition you'l take it for a Courtesie to be ridd of an Ass, I care not if I marry him: the old foole, your Father, would be so importunate to match you with a young Foole, that partly for quietness sake I am content to take him.
To take him! then you make sure on't.
As sure, as if the Sack Posset were already eaten.
But, What means wilt thou use to get him?
I'll bribe, he's the man.
Why this Knight is his inheritance; he lives upon him: Do'st thou think he'll ever admit thee to govern him? no, he fears thy wit too much: besides, he has already received an hundred pound to make thee Match between Sirand me.
'Tis all one for that; I warrant you he sells me Fee-simple of him.
Your Father, Madam. --
The Tempest is risen; I see it in his face; he puffs and blowes yonder, as if two of the Winds were fighting upwards and downwards in his belly.
Will he not find your false Keyes, Madam?
I hope he will have more Humanity then to search us.
You are come after us betimes, Sir.
Oh Child! I am undone; I am robb'd, I am robb'd; I have utterly lost all stomach to my dinner.
Robb'd! good my Lord how, or of what?
Two hundred and fifty pounds in fair Gold out of my Study: an hundred of it I was to have paid a Courtier this afternoon for a Bribe.
I protest, my Lord, I had as much a do to get that parcel of Gold for your Lordship. --
You must get me as much more against to morrow; for then my Friend at Court is to pay his Mercer.
Nay, if that be all, there's no such hast: the Courtiers are not so forward to pay their Debts.
Has not thebeen in the Study? he may have carried it away, and dropt it under the Garden-window: the grass is long enough to hide it.
I'll go see immediately.
This is the Gentleman, my Lord
He's wellcome --
And this the particular of his Estate.
That's wellcome too.
But, besides the Land here mentioned, he has wealth in specie.
A very fine young Gentleman.
Now, my Lord, I hope there's no great need of Wooing: I suppose my Estate will speak for me; yet, if you please to put in a word.
That will I instantly.
I hope I shall have your good word too Madam, to your Cousin for me;
Any thing within my power, Sir.
Daughter, here's a person of Quality, and one that loves and honours you exceedingly --
Nay, good Lord! you discover all at first dash.
Let me alone, Sir; Have not I the dominion over my own Daughter?, here's a Knight in love with you, Childe.
In love with me, my Lord, it is not possible.
Here he stands that will make it good, Childe.
Who I, my Lord? I hope her Ladyship has a better opinion of me than so.
What, Are not you in love with my Daughter? I'll be Sworn you told me so but even now: I'll eat words for no man.
If your Ladyship will believe all reports that are raised on Men of Quality --
He told it me with his own mouth, Child: I'll eat words for no man; that's more then ever I told him yet.
You told him so but just now; fye, Sir.
He shall have no Daughter of mine and he were a thousand Knights; he told me, he hop'd I would speak for him: I'll eat no mans words; that's more than ever I told him yet.
You need not keep such a pudder about eating his words; you see he has eaten u'm already for you.
I'll make him stand to his words, and he shall not marry my Daughter neither: by this good day, I will --
'Tis an ill day to him; he has lost 250in't.
He swears at the rate of two thousand pounds a year, if theAct were still in being.
He's in passion man; and besides, he has been a great Fanatick formerly, and now has got a habit of Swearing, that he may be thought a Cavalier.
What noise is that? I think I hear your Cousinvoice.
I'll go see --
Come Sir, be not discouraged: 'tis but an old mans frowardness; he's alwayes thus against raine.
O Madam follow me quickly; and if you do not see sport, Melancholly be upon my head. --
Cinque and Cater: my Cinque I play here Sir, my Cater here Sir: Now for you Sir: but first I'll drink to you Sir; upon my faith I'll do you reason Sir: mine was thus full Sir: pray mind your play Sir: -- Size Ace I have thrown: I'll play em at length Sir: -- will you Sir? then you have made a blot Sir; I'll try if I can enter: I have hit you Sir. -- I think you can cog a Dye Sir. -- I cog a Dye Sir? I play as fair as you, or any man. -- You lye Sir, how lye Sir; I'll teach you what 'tis to give a Gentleman the lye Sir. --
Is this your serious business?
O you Rogue are you there? you are welcome huswife, and so are you,.
Prithee be not so rude.
Huswife, I'll have you into my Larder, and shew you my provision: I have Cocles, dainty fat Cocles that came in the night; if they had seen the day, I would not have given a fart for u'm. I would the King had u'm.
He has as good I warrant you.
Nay that's a lye, I could sit and cry for him sometimeshe does not know what 'tis to eat a good meal in a whole year: his Cooks are Asses: I have a delicate dish of Ruffs to dinner Sirrah.
To dinner!
To dinner! why by supper they had been past their prime, I'll tell thee a story of u'm: I have a friend. --
Sir Dinner's upon the Table.
Well, well; I have a friend as I told you. --
Dinner stayes Sir, 'tis Dinner that stayes: sure he will hear now.
I have a friend as I told you. --
I believe h's your friend, you are so loath to part with him --
Away; away; -- I'lltell you the story between the courses. Go you to the Cook immediately, Sirrah; and bring me word what we have to supper, before we go to dinner; I love to have the satisfaction of the day before me.
Speak thy conscience; was it not well dress'd sirrah?
What think you of the Park, after our plenteous entertainment Madam?
I defie the Park, and all its works.
Come, Mr., we'll walk in your Garden.
O, one thing I had almost forgot to tell you: one of us two must ever be near Sir.
Why?
To guard our interest in him from the Enemy Madam; who, I doubt, has designes upon him. I do not fear her wit, but her sex; she carries a prevailing argument about her.
By this hand, I have a light upon the best wine in your Cousins Cellar, drink but one glass to me, to shew I am welcome, and I am gone.
Here then, honest. 'tis a cup of forbearance to thee.
Thank you Sir, I'll pledge you -- now here's to you again.
Come away; what is't.
'Tis what you christened it, a cup of forbearance Sir.
Why, I drank that to thee. that thou shouldst forbear thy money.
And I drink this to you, Sir; henceforward I'll forbear working for you.
Then say I: take a little Bibber, and throw him in the River, and if he will trust never, then there let him lie ever.
Then say I: take a little, and throw him to the Jaylour; and there let him lie, till he has paid his Tailor.
You are very smart upon one another Gentlemen.
This is nothing between us; I use to tell him of his Title,; and his setting dog, that runs into Ale-houses before him, and comes questing out again, if any of the woots his customers be within.
I faith 'tis true; and I use to tell him of his two Capons tails about his hat, that are laid spread eagle wise to make a feather; I would go into the snow at any time, and in a quarter of an hour I would come in with a better feather upon my head; and so farewell Sir; I have had the better on you hitherto, and for this time I am resolved to keep it.
The rogue's too hard for me; but the best on't is, I have my revenge upon his purse.
Came not Sirthis way, Gentlemen? he left us in the Garden, and said he would look out my Lord, to make his peace with him.
Madame, I like not your enquiring after Sir: I suspect you have some design upon him: you would fain undermine your Cousin, and marry him your self.
Suppose I should design it; what are you the worse for my good fortune? Shall I make a proposition to you: I know you two carry a great stroke with him: make the match between us, and propound to your selves what advantages you can reasonably hope: you shall chouse him of horses, cloathes and Money, and I'll wink at it.
And if he will not be chous'd, shall we beat him out on't?
For that, as you can agree.
Give us a handsel of the bargain; let us enjoy you, and 'tis a match.
Grammarcy ifaith boyes; I love a good offer how e'r the world goes? but you would not be so base to wrong him that way.
I vow to gad but I would Madam: in a horse or a woman I may lawfully cheat my own Father: besides, I know the Knights complexion; he would be sure to follow other women; and all that.
Nay, if he fought with the sword, he should give me leave to fight with the Scabbard.
What say you Madam? is't a bargain.
'Tis but a promise; and I have learnt a Court trick for performing any thing
Well Gentlemen, when I am married I'll think upon you; you'll grant there's a necessity I should Cuckold him, if it were but to prove my self a Wit.
Nay, there's no doubt you'll Cuckold him; and all that; for look you he's a person fit for nothing else; but I fear we shall not have the graffing of the horns; we must have Livery and Seisin before hand of you, or I protest to gad we believe you not.
I have past my word, is't not sufficient? what do you think, I would tell a lie to save such a paltrie thing as a nights lodging? -- Hark you Sir:
Now will she attempt; igad she has found him out for the weaker vessel.
I have no kindness for that, we'll strike him out, and manage Sirour selves.
Indeed we wonnot.
a Rook, and besides, he's such a debauched fellow.
I am ten times worse.
Leave it, and him that taught it you: you have virtuous inclinations, and I would not have you ruine your self. He that serves many Mistresses, surfeits on his diet, and grows dead to the whole sex: 'tis the folly in the world next long ears and braying.
Now I'm sure you have a mind to me; when a woman once falls to preaching, the next thing is ever use and application.
Forbear your rudeness --
Then I am sure you meant to jilt me: you declinebecause he has wit; and you think me such an ass, that you may pack me off so soon as you are married; no, no, I'll not venture certainties for uncertainties.
I can hold no longer; Mr., what do you think this fellow was saying of you?
Of me, Madam.
That you were one of the errantest Cowards in Christendom, though you went for one of the Dear Hearts: that your name had been upon more posts than play-bills: and that he had been acquainted with you these seven years, drunk and sober, and yet could never fasten a quarrel upon you.
Do you believe this, Dear Heart?
If you deny it, I'll take his sword, and force you to confess it.
I vow to gad, this will not do, Madam: you shall not set us at variance so easily; neither shall you have Sir.
No! then mark my words: I'll marry him in spight of you; and which is worse, you shall both work my ends; and I'll discard you for your pains.
You shall not touch a bit of him: I'll preserve his humbles from you igad; they shall be his Keepers fees.
She shall cut an Atome sooner than divide us.
I have given u'm the slip in the Garden, to come and overhear thee: no fat overgrown virgin of forty ever offer'd her self so dog cheap, or was more despis'd: me-thinks now this should mortifie thee exceedingly.
Not a whit the more for that: Cousin mine, our Sex is not so easily put out of conceit with our own beauties.
Thou hast lost the opinion of thy honesty, and got nothing in recompence: now that's such an oversight in a Lady.
You are deceiv'd; they think me too virtuous for their purpose; but I have yet another way to try, and you shall help me.
Mr.. welcome, welcome: where have you been this fortnight.
Faith Madam, out of Town to see a little thing that's fallen to me upon the death of a Grandmother.
You thank death for the windfall, Servant: but why are you not in mourning for her.
Troth Madam it came upon me so suddenly I had not time: twas a fortune utterly unexpected by me.
Why, was your Grandmother so young you could not look for her disease?
Not for that neither; but I had many other kindred whom she might have left it to, only she heard I liv'd here in fashion, and spent my money in the eye of the world.
You forge these things prettily, but I have heard you are as poor as a decimated Cavalier, and had not one foot of land in all the world.
Rivals tales, Rivals tales, Madam.
Where lies your land, Sir?
I'll tell you Madam, it has upon it a very fair Manor house; from one side you have in prospect an hanging Garden.
Who was hang'd there? not your Grandmother I hope?
In the midst of it you have a Fountain: you have seen that at; it will serve to give you a slight image of it. Beyond the Garden you look to a River through a Perspective of fruit-trees; and beyond the River you see a Mead so flowry: well I shall never be at quiet, till we two make hay there.
But where lies this Paradice?
Pox on't; I am thinking to sell it, it has such a villanous unpleasant name; it would have sounded so harsh in a Ladies ear. But for the Fountain, Madam --
The Fountain's a poor excuse, it will not hold water; come the name, the name.
Faith it is come so lately into my hands, that I have forgot the name on't.
That's much, now, you should forget the name, and yet could make such an exact description of the place.
If you will needs know, the name's; sure this will give a stop to their curiosity.
At least you'll tell us in what County it lies, that my Cousin may send to enquire about it; come, this shall not serve your turn, tell us any Town that's near it.
'Twill be somewhat too far to send; it lies in the very North of.
In good time, a Paradice in the; is't not so Sir?
It seems you went Post, Servant: in troth you are a rank rider, to go to the North of, stay and take possession, and return again, in ten days time.
I never knew your Grandmother was awoman: is she not atoo: pray whistle for her, and lets see her daunce: come -- whist Grannee!
Fie fie Servant; what no invention in you? all this while a studying for a name of your Manor? come, come, where lyes it? tell me.
No faith, I am wiser than so; I'll discover my Seat to no man; so I shall some damn'd Lawyer keep a prying into my title to defeat me of it.
How then shall I be satisfied there is such a thing in Nature?
Tell me what Jewel you would wear, and you shall have it: Enquire into my money, there's the trial.
Since you art so flush, Sir, you shall give me a Locket of Diamonds of three hundred pounds.
That was too severe; you know he has but a 250to bestow.
Well you shall have it, Madam: but I cannot higgle: I know you'll say it did not cost above 200 pieces.
I'll be hanged if he does not present you with a parcel of melted Flints set in Gold, orpebbles.
Little Gentlewoman you are so keen: -- Madam, this night I have appointed business, to morrow I'll wait upon you with it.
By that time he has bought his Locket, and paid hisLandlady, all his Money will be gone: but, Do you mean to prosecute your plot, to see him this evening?
Yes, and that very privately; if my Father know it I am undone.
I heard him say this night he had appointed business.
Why that was it Madam; according to your order I put on a disguise, and found him in the: having drawn him aside, I told him, if he expected happiness, he must meet me in a blind Alley I nam'd to him, on the back-side of Mr.house, just at the close of evening; there he should be satisfied from whom he had his suplies of Money.
And how did he receive the Summons?
Like a bold Hector of; without the least doubt or scruple: but, the jeast on't was, he would needs believe that I was the Devil.
Sure he was afraid to come then.
Quite contrary; he told me I need not be so shy, to acknowledge my self to him; he knew I was the Devil; but he had learnt so much civility, as not to press his Friend to a fartherdiscovery than he was pleased, I should see I had to do with a Gentleman; and any Courtesie I should confer on him he would not be unthankful; for he hated ingratitude of all things.
'Twas well carried not to disabuse him: I laugh to think what sport I shall have anon, when I convince him of his lies, and let him know I was the Devil to whom he was beholding for his Money: go; and in the same disguise be ready for him.
How dare you trust this fellow?
I must trust some body; gain has made him mine, and now fear will keep him faithful.
Pray, my Lord, take no picque at it: 'tis not given to all men to be confident: Igad you shall see Sirwill redeem all upon the next occasion.
A raw mieking Boy.
And what are you but an old Boy of five and fifty; I never knew any thing so humorsome. -- I warrant you, sir, I'll speak for you.
Would'st thou have me be friends with him! for thy sake he shall onely add five hundred a year to her Joynture, and I'll be satisfied: come you hither, Sir.
You'l not find your account in this trick to getbeaten; 'tis too palpable and open.
I warrant you 'twill pass uponfor a time: so my revenge, and your interest will go on together.
, there's mischief a brewing, I know it by their whispring I vow to gad: look to your self, their designs on you; for my part I am a person that am above u'm.
But then you must speak for me Mr.; and you too my Lord.
If you deny't again, I'll beat you; look to't Boy.
Come on; I'll make the bargain.
You were ever good in a Flesh Market.
Come you little Harlotry; What satisfaction can you give me for running away before the Ruffs came in?
Why I left you to u'm, that ever invite your own belly to the greatest part of all your feasts.
I have brought you a Knight here Huswife, with a plentiful Fortune to furnish out a Table; and, What would you more? Would you be an angel in Heaven?
Your minds ever upon your belly.
No; 'tis sometimes upon yours: but, What say'st thou to Sir, little?
Would you have me married to that KingFace?
me no; he's a Wit; he understands eating and drinking well:, the heathen Philosopher, could tell you that.
Come on Sir; What's your will with me?
Why Madam, I could onely wish we were a little better acquainted, that we might not laugh at one another so.
If the Fool puts forward I am undone.
Fool! Do you know me Madam?
You may see I know you, because I call you by your name.
You must endure these rebukes with patience, Sir.
What, are you Plannet stroke? Look you, my Lord, the Gentleman is Tongue-ty'd.
This is past enduring.
'Tis nothing, my Lord; Courage, Sir.
I say 'tis past enduring; that's more then ever I told you yet: Do you come to make a fool of my Daughter?
Why Lord --
Why Lady --
Let's follow the old Man, and pacifie him.
Now Cousin --
Well Mr., I did not think you of all the rest would have endeavoured a thing so much against my inclination, as this Marriage: if you had been acquainted with my heart, I am sure you would not.
What can the meaning of this be? you would not have me believe you love me; and yet how otherwise to understand you I vow to gad I cannot comprehend.
I did not say I lov'd you, but if I should take a fancy to your Person and Humour: I hope it is no Crime to tell it you: Women are ty'd to hard unequal Laws: the passion is the same in us, and yet we are debarr'd the freedom to express it. You make poorbeggars of us Ladies; our desires must have no language; but onely be fastned to our breasts.
Come, come; I gad I know the whole Sex of you: your Love's at best but a kind of blind-mans-buff, catching at him that's next in your way.
Well Sir, I can take nothing ill from you; when 'tis too late you'l see how unjust you have been to me. -- I have said too much already. --
Nay, stay sweet Madam: I vow to gad my fortunes better than I could imagine.
No, pray let me go, Sir; perhaps I was in jeast.
Really Madam, I look upon you as a person of such worth and all that, that I Vow to gad I honour you of all persons in the World; and though I am a person that am inconsiderable in the World, and all that Madam, yet for a person of your worth and excellency, I would --
What would you, Sir?
Sacrifice my life and fortunes, I vow to gad, Madam.
There'sclose in Talk with my Cousin; he's solliciting your suit, I warrant you, Sir: do but observe with what passion he courts for you.
I do not like that kneading of her hand though.
Come, you are such a jealous Coxcomb: I warrant you suspect there's some amour between u'm; there can be nothing in't it is so open: pray observe.
But, How come you so officious, Madam; you, that e'r now had a design upon Sirfor your self?
I thought you had a better opinion of my Wit, than to think I was in earnest. My Cousen may do what she pleases, but he shall never pin himself upon me assure him.
Sirlittle knows how dangerous a person he has employed in making love: --
How's this! Pray my Lady, what's the meaning of that you say to?
What luck was this, that he should over-hear you! pax on't!
Mr., I owe you not that satisfaction; what you have heard you may interpret as you please.
The Rascal has betray'd me.
In earnest, Sir, I do not like it.
Dear Mr.. be pacify'd; you are a person I have anhonour for; and this change of Affairs shall not be the worse for you I gad Sir.
Bear up resolutely Mr.; and maintain my Favours, as becomes my servant.
He maintain u'm! go you! I'll teach you what 'tis to play fast and loose with a Man of War
Lay it on.
Spare him not,.
Fear him not,.
Oh, oh; would no body were on my side; here I am prais'd I vow to gad into all the Colours of the Rainbow.
But, remember 'tis for me.
As you like this, proceed, Sir; but, come not near me to night, while I'm in wrath.
Come, Sir; How fare you after your sore Trial: you bore it with a most heroick patience.
Brave man at Armes, but weak to!
I hope to gad, Madam, you'l consider the merit of my sufferings: I would not have been beaten thus, but to obey that person in the World --
Heaven reward you for't: I never shall.
How Madam!
Art thou such an Ass as not to perceive thou art abused: this beating I contriv'd for you: you know upon what acount; and have yet another or two at your service: yield up the Knight in time, 'tis your best course.
Then, Does not your Ladyship Love me Madam?
Yes, yes; I love to see you beaten.
Well, methinks now you have had a hard bargain on't: you have lost your Cully, Sir; and your Friend, and all to get a poor beating: but I'll see it mended against next time for you.
I am so much amaz'd, I vow to gad, I do not understand my own condition.
What will become of me to night! I am just in the condition of an out-lying-Deere, that's beaten from his walk for offering to rutt: Enter I dare not for.
I hear a voice, but nothing do I see; speak what thou art.
There he is, watching for me: I must venture to run by him, and when I am in, I hope my Cousinwill defend me: the Devil would not lie abroad in such a night.
I thought it was the Devil before he nam'd himself.
Honest Sathan! well encounter'd! I am sorry with all my heart it is so dark: 'Faith I should be very glad to see thee at myLodging; prithee let's not be such strangers to one another for the time to come; and, What hast thou got under thy Cloak there little Sathan; I warrant thou hast brought me some more Money.
Help; help; Thieves, thieves.
This isvoice: How the Devil was I mistaken! I must get off, e'r Company comes in.
Thieves! Thieves!
Where! where!
One was here just now; and it should beby his voice, but I have no Witness.
It cannot be; he wants no Money.
Come, Sirrah; I'll take pity on you to night; you shall lie in the Truckle-bed.
Pox o' this noise, it has disturb'd me from such a Dreame of Eating!
'Twas ill luck to have the meeting broke last night, just aswas coming towards him.
But in part of recompence you'll have the pleasure of putting him on farther streights, O, these little mischiefs are meat and drink to me.
He shall tell me from whence he has his Money: I am resolv'd now to try him to the utmost.
I would devise something for him to do, which he could not possibly perform.
As I live yonder he comes with the Jewel in his hand he promis'd me; prithee leave me alone with him.
Speed the Plough; if I can make no sport I'll hinder none: I'll to my Knight, Sir; shortly you shall hear newes from.
Look you Madam, here's the Jewel; do me the favor to accept it, and suppose a very good Complement deliver'd with it.
Believe me a very fair Jewel: but, Why will you be at this needless charge? What acknowledgment do you expect? you know I will not Marry you.
How the Devil do I know that; I don not conceive my self under correction, so inconsiderable a person.
You'll alter your partial opinion, when I tell you 'tis not a flash of wit fires me; nor is it a gay out-side can seduce me to Matrimony.
I am neither Fool, nor deform'd so much as to be despicable. What do I want?
A good Estate, that makes every thing handsome; nothing can look well without it.
Does this Jewel express poverty?
I conjure you by your love to me, tell me one truth not minc'd by your invention: How came you by this Jewel.
'Tis well I have a Voucher; pray ask your own Jeweller, if I did not buy it of him.
How glad you are now, you can tell a truth so near a lie: but, Where had you the Money that purchas'd it? come, -- without circumstances and preambles --
Umh, -- perhaps that may be a secret.
Say it be one; yet he that lov'd indeed, could not keep it from his Mistriss.
Why should you be thus importunate?
Because I cannot think you love me, if you will not trust that to my knowledge, which you conceal from all the World beside.
You urge me deeply --
Come, sweet Servant, you shall tell me; I am resolv'd to take no denial: Why do you sigh?
If I be blasted it must out.
Either tell me, or resolve to take your leave forever.
Then know I have my means; I know not how.
This is a fine secret.
Why then if you will needs know; 'tis from the Devil; I have Money from him, what, and when I please.
Have you seal'd a Covenant, and given away your Soul for Money?
No such thing intended on my part.
How then?
I know not yet what conditions he'll propose: I should have spoke with him last night, but that a cross chance hinder'd it.
Well, my opinion is, some great Lady that is in love with you, supplies you still; and you tell me an incredible Tale of the Devil, meerly to shadow your infidelity.
Devise some meanes to try me.
I take you at your word; you shall swear freely to bestowon me, what ever you shall gain this unknown-way; and for a proofe, because you tell me you can have Money, what and when you please; bring me an hundred pounds e'r night: (If I do marry him for a Wit) I'll see what he can do; he shall have none from me.
You overjoy me, Madam; you shall have it, and 'twere twice as much.
How's this!
The Devil a cross that I have; or know where to get; but I must promise well to save my credit: now Devil, if thou do'st forsake me!
I mistrust you; and therefore if you faile, I'll have your hand to show against you; here's inke and paper
What makesyonder? he's Writing somewhat.
I'll go see. --
Have you no more manners then to overlook a man when he's a Writing? -- Oh, Is't you Sir? you may stand still; now I think on't you can not read Written hand.
You are very familiar with Sir.
So I am with his Companions Sir.
Then there's hopes you and I may be better acquainted: I am one of his Companions.
By what title, as you are an Ass Sir.
No more Loveby. --
I need not Madam; alass this fellow is onely the 
Sollicitor
of a quarrel, till he has brought it to an head; and I will leave the
fighting part to the Curteous pledger. Do not I know these fellows? 
you
shall as soon perswade a Mastiff to fasten on a Lyon, as one of 
these to
ingage with a courage above their own: they know well enough who 
they can beat, and who can beat them.<|endoftext|>Was afraid, all had been discover'd.
I tremble with the Apprehension still.
That my Brother should take Lodgings i'the Very House where you lie.
'Twas lucky, we had timely notice to warn the People to be secret, he seems to be a mighty good Humour'd old man.
He ever had a notable smerking way with him.
He calls me Rogue, tells me he can't abide me; And does so bepat me.
On my word you are much in his favour then.
He has been very inquisitive I am told about my Family, my reputation, and my Fortune.
I am confident he does not i'the least suspect You are the Woman his Son's in Love with.
What shou'd make him then inform himself soParticularly of me?
He was always of a very Loving Temper himself; It may be he has a doating Fit upon him, who knows.
It cannot be.
Here comes my Nephew. Where did You leave your Father?
Writing a Note within,, this early visit Looks as if some kind Jealousie wou'd not let you Rest at home.
The knowledge I have of my Rival, Gives me a little cause to fear your Constancy.
My Constancy! I vow --
Do not vow -- Our love is frail as is our life, and Full as little in our power, and are you sure you shall Out-live this day?
I am not, but when we are in perfect health, 'twere An idle thing to fright our selves with the thoughts of Sudden death.
Pray what has pass'd between you and your Father I'the Garden?
He's firm in his resolution, Tells me I must marry Mrs., Or swears hee'l marry himself, And disinherit me, when I saw I could not Prevail with him to be more indulgent, I dissembled An Obedience to his Will, which has compos'd his passion, And will give us time, and I hope opportunity to Deceive him.
Peace, here he comes.
, take this, and let your man carry it for me To Mr.Chamber, my Lawyer i'the Temple. Neighbour, a Dod I am glad to see thee here,
Make much of her Sister, she's one Of the best of your acquaintance; I like her Countenance and her behaviour well, she has A Modesty that is not Common i'this Age, a Dod, She has.
I know her value Brother, and esteem her accordingly.
Advise her to wear a little more mirth in her Face, a Dod, she's too serious.
The fault is very excusable in a young Woman.
Nay, a Dod, I like her ne're the worse, a Melancholy Beauty has her Charms, I Love a pretty sadness in a Face which varies Now and Then, like changeable Colours, into a smile.
Methinks you speak very feelingly Brother.
I am but Five and Fifty Sister you know, an Age not altogether unsensible!
chear up sweet Heart; I have a secret to tell thee may Chance to make thee merry, we three will make Collation together anon, i'the mean time Mum, I can't abide you, go I can't Abide you --
, Come, you Must along with me to my Lady. I am going to slip the Boy at a Mistress.
At a Wife Sir, you wou'd say.
You need not look so glum, Sir, a Wife is no Curse when she brings the blessing Of a good Estate with her, but an idle Town Flurt, with a painted Face, a rotten Reputation, And a crasie Fortune, a Dod is the Devil and all, And such a one I hear you are in League with.
I cannot help detraction, Sir.
Out, a pise o' their Breeches, there are Keeping Fools enough for such flaunting Baggages, and they are e'ne too good for 'em.
Remember Night, go y'are a Rogue, y'are a Rogue; fare you well, fare you well; come, come, Come along, Sir.
On my Word the old man comes on apace; I'le lay my life he's smitten.
This is nothing but the pleasantness of his humour.
I know him better than you, let it work, It may prove lucky.
Madam, Mr.has sent to know Whether a Visit will not be TroublesomeThis Afternoon?
Send him word his visits never are so.
He's a very pleasant man.
He's a very necessary man among us Women; He's not scandalous i'the least, perpetually Contriving to bring good Company together, And always ready to stop up a gap at Ombre, Then he knows all the little news o'the Town.
I love to hear him talk o' the Intrigues, Let 'em be never so dull in themselves, he'l Make 'em pleasant i'the relation.
But he improves things so much one can take no Measure of the Truth from him. Mr.swears a Flea or a Maggot, is Not made more monstrous by a magnifying Glass, than a story is by his telling it.
Hold, here he comes.
Mr..
Your Servant Madam.
You have made your self a Stranger of late.
I believe you took a surfeit of Ombre Last time you were here.
Indeed I had my Belly full of that Tarmagant, Lady Dealer; there never was so unsatiable A Carder, an old Gleeker never lov'd to sit To't like her; I have plaid with her now at Least a dozen times, till she'as worn out all Her fine Complexion, and her Tour wou'd Keep in Curl no longer.
Blame her not poor Woman, she loves nothing So well as a black Ace.
The pleasure I have seen her in when she has had hope In drawing for a Matadore.
'Tis as pretty sport to her, as perswading Masks off is to you to make discoveries.
Pray where's your Friend, Mr.?
Soliciting his affairs, he's a man of great Imployment, has more Mistresses now dependingThan the most eminent Lawyer inHas Causes.
Here has been Mrs., so uneasie and Out of humour these two days.
How strangely love and Jealousie rage In that poor Woman!
She cou'd not have pick'd out a Devil Upon Earth so proper to Torment her, Has made her break a dozen or two of Fans already, tare half a score Points in pieces, And destroy Hoods and Knots without number.
We heard of a pleasant Serenade he gave Her tother Night.
A Danish Serenade with Kettle Drums, and Trumpets.
Oh Barbarous!
What, you are of the number of the Ladies whose Ears are grown so delicate since our Operas, you can be charm'd with nothing But Flute doux, and French Hoboys.
Leave your raillery, and tell us, is there any New Wit come forth, Songs or Novels?
A very pretty piece of gallantry, by an Eminent Author, call'd,, very necessary to be read by all Old Ladies who are desirous to improve themselves At Questions and Commands, Blindmans buff, And the like fashionable recreations.
Oh Ridiculous!
Then there is the Art of affectation, written By a late beauty of Quality, teaching you how To draw up your Breasts, stretch up your neck, To thrust out your Breech, to play with your Head, To toss up your Nose, to bite your Lips, to turn Up your Eyes, to speak in a silly soft tone of a Voice, and use all the Foolish French Words That will infallibly make your person and Conversation charming, with a short apologie At the latter end, in the behalf of young Ladies,Who notoriously wash, and paint, though they Have naturally good Complexions.
What a deal of stuff you tell us?
Such as the Town affords Madam. Thehearing the great respect we Have for Foreign Dancing, have lately sent Over some of their best Balladins, who are Now practising a famous Ballat which will Be suddenly danc'd at the.
Pray forbear your idle stories, and give us An account of the state of Love, as it now stands.
Truly there has been some revolutions in those Affairs, great chopping and changing among the Old, and some new Lovers, whom malice, Indiscretion, and misfortune, have luckily Brought into play.
What think you of walking into the next Room, And sitting down before you engage in this business?
I wait upon you , and I hope (though Women Are commonly unreasonable) by the plenty of Scandal I shall discover, to give you very good Content Ladies.
Madam.
I hate my self, I look so ill to day.
Hate the wicked cause on't, that base man Mr., who makes you torment and Vex your self continually.
He is to blame indeed.
To blame to be two days without sending, Writing, or coming near you, contrary to His Oath and Covenant; 'Twas to much Purpose to make him swear; I'll lay my Life there's not an Article but he has Broken, Talk'd to the Vizards i'the Pit, waited upon the Ladies from the Boxes to their Coaches; gone behind The Scenes, and fawn'd upon those little insignificant Creatures, the Players; 'tis impossible for a man Of his inconstant temper to forbear I'm sure.
I know he is a Devil, but he has something of the Angel yet undefac'd in him, which Makes him so charming and agreeable, that I Must love him be he never so wicked.
I little thought Madam to see your spirit Taim'd to this degree, who banish'd poor Mr.but for taking up another Ladies Fan in your presence.
My knowing of such odious Fools, contributes to the Making of me Lovethe better.
Your knowing of Mr., in my mind, shou'd Rather make you hate all mankind.
So it does, besides himself.
Pray, what excuse does he make in his Letter?
He has had business.
Business in general terms wou'd not have Been a currant excuse for another; A Modish Man is always very busie When he is in pursuit of a new Mistress.
Some Fop has brib'd you to rail at him; He had business, I will believe it, and will forgive him.
You may forgive him any thing, but I shall never Forgive him his turning me into Ridicule, As I hear he does.
I perceive you are of the number of those Fools his Wit has made his Enemies.
I am of the number of those he's pleas'd To railly, Madam; and if we may believeMr., and Mr., he sometimes Makes merry with your self too, among His Laughing Companions.
Blockheads are as malicious to witty men, As ugly Women are to the handsome; 'tis Their Interest, and they make it their business To defame 'em.
I wish Mr.wou'd not make It his business to defame you.
Shou'd he, I had rather be made infamous By him, than owe my reputation to the dull Discretion of those Fops you talk off.!
My Dear.
You have been unkind of late.
Do not say unkind, say unhappy!
I cou'd chide you, Where have you been these two days?
Pitty me rather my dear, where I have been So tired with two or three Country Gentlewomen, Whose conversation has been more Unsufferable than a Country Fiddle.
Are they Relations?
No, Welch acquaintance I made when I was last year At St., they have asked me a thousand Questions of the Modes and Intrigues of the Town, And I have told 'em almost as many things for news That hardly were so, when their Gowns were in Fashion.
Provoking Creatures, how cou'd you endure e'm?
Now to carry on my Plot, nothing but love Cou'd make me capable of so much falshood;
'Tis time to begin, lestshou'd Come before her Jealousie has stung her;
I was yesterday at a Play with 'em, Where I was fain to shew 'em the living, as theMan atdoes the dead; that is Mrs. such a one admired for her Beauty, This is Mr. such a one cry'd up for a Wit; That is sparkish Mr. such a one who Keeps reverend Mrs. such a one, and there Sits fine Mrs. such a one who was lately Cast off by my Lord such a one.
Did you seethere?
I did, and imagine you were there with him, And have no mind to own it.
What shou'd make you think so?
A Lady mask'd in a pretty dishabillie`, Whomentertain'd with more Respect, than the Gallants do a Common Vizard.
at the Play entertaining a Mask, Oh Heavens!
Good.
Did he stay all the while?
'Till the Play was done, and then led her Out, which confirms me it was you!
Traytor!
Now you may believe he had business, and You may forgive him too.
Ingrateful perjur'd man!
You seem so much concern'd my Dear, I fear I have told you unawares what I Had better have conceal'd for your Quiet.
What manner of shape had she?
Tall and slender, her motions were very gentile, Certainly she must be some person of condition.
Shame and confusion be ever in her face When she shows it.
I should blame your discretion for loving that Wild man my Dear, but they say he has a way So bewitching, that few can defend their hearts Who know him.
I will tear him from mine, or die i'the attempt.
Be more moderate.
Wou'd I had Daggers, Darts, or poyson'd Arrows in my Breast, so I cou'd but remove the thoughts Of him from thence.
Fie, fie, your transports are too Violent, my Dear. This may be but an accidental Gallantry, And 'tis likely ended at her Coach.
Shou'd it proceed farther, let your comfort be, The Conduct Mr.affects, will Quickly make you know your Rival, ten to one Let you see her ruin'd, her reputation expos'd To the Town; a happiness none will envy her But your self Madam.
Who e're she be, all the harm I wish her, is, may She love him as well as I do, and may he give her As much cause to hate him.
Never doubt the latter end of your Curse Madam!
May all the passions that are rais'd by neglected Love, Jealousie, Indignation, Spight, and Thirst of Revenge, eternally rage in her Soul, as they do Now in mine.
Madam, Mr.--
I will not see him.
I told him you were within, Madam.
Say you ly'd, say I'm busie, shut the door; Say any thing.
He's here, Madam.
What dancing the Galloping Nag without a Fiddle?
I fear this restlessness of the body, Madam,
Proceeds from an unquietness of the mind. What unlucky accident puts you out ofHumour; a Point ill-wash'd, Knots spoil'd i'the Making up, Hair shaded awry, or some Other little mistake insetting you in order?
A trifle in my opinion, Sir, more inconsiderable Than any you mention.
Oh Mrs., I never knew you sullen enough To be silent, come let me know the business.
The business, Sir, is the business that has taken you Up these two days; how have I seen you Laugh at men of business, and now to become a man Of business your self!
We are not Masters of our own affections, our Inclinations daily alter; now we love pleasure, and Anon we shall doat on business; humane Frailty will have it so, and who can help it;
Faithless, inhumane, barbarous man --
Good, now the Alarm strikes --
Without sense of Love, of Honour, or of Gratitude, Tell me, for I will know, what Devil mask'd She was, you were with at the Play yesterday?
Faith I resolv'd as much as you, but the Devil was obstinate, and wou'd not tell me.
False in this as in your Vows to me, you do know!
The truth is, I did all I cou'd to know.
And dare you own it to my Face? Hell and Furies!
Spare your Fan, Madam, you are growing hot, And will want it to cool you.
Horrour and distraction seize you, Sorrow and Remorse gnaw your Soul, and punish all your Perjuries to me --
, you are the Devil that have rais'd This storm;
you were at the Play yesterday, And have been making discoveries to your Dear.
Y'are the most mistaken Man i'the World.
It must be so, and here I vow revenge; resolveTo pursue, and persecute you more impertinently Than ever any Loving Fop did his Mistress, hunt You i'the, trace you i'the, Dog You in every visit you make, haunt you at The Plays, and i'the Drawing Room, hang my Nose in your neck, and talk to you whether You will or no, and ever look upon you with such Dying Eyes, till your Friends grow Jealous of me, Send you out of Town, and the World suspect Your reputation.
At my Ladywhen we go from hence.
I'le meet you there.
Enough.
Stand off, you sha'not stare upon her so.
Good! There's one made Jealous already.
Is this the constancy you vow'd?
Constancy at my years! 'tis not a Vertue in Season, you might as well expect the Fruit the Autumn ripens i'the Spring.
Monstrous Principle!
Youth has a long Journey to go, Madam, shou'd I have set up my rest at the first Inn I lodg'd at, I shou'd never have arriv'd at the happiness I now enjoy.
Dissembler, damn'd Dissembler!
I am so I confess, good nature, and good manners Corrupt me. I am honest in my inclinations, and Wou'd not, wer't not to avoid offence, make a Lady a little in years believe I think her young, wilfully Mistake Art for Nature; and seem as fond of a thing I am weary off, as when I doated on't in earnest.
False Man.
True Woman.
Now you begin to show your self!
Love gilds us over, and makes us show fine things To one another for a time, but soon the Gold Wears off, and then again the native brass appears.
Think on your Oaths, your Vows and Protestations. Perjur'd Man!
I made 'em when I was in love.
And therefore ought they not to bind? Oh Impious!
What we swear at such a time may be a certain proof Of a present passion, but to say truth, in Love there is No security to be given for the future.
Horrid and ingrateful, begone, And never see me more!
I am not one of those troublesome Coxcombs, who Because they were once well receiv'd, take the Priviledge to plague a Woman with their Love ever After; I shall obey you, Madam, though I do my Self some violence.
Come back, you sha'not go. Cou'd you have the ill nature to offer it?
When love grows diseas'd the best thing we can do Is to put it to a Violent Death; I cannot Endure the torture of a lingring and Consumptive passion.
Can you think mine sickly?
Oh, 'tis desperately Ill! what worse symptomes Are there than your being always uneasie when I visit you, your picking quarrels with me on Slight occasions, and in my absence kindly listning To the impertinences of every fashionable Fool That talks to you?
What fashionable Fool can you lay to my charge?
Why the very Cock-fool of all those Fools, Sir.
I never saw him in my life but once.
The worse Woman you at first sight to put on All your charms, to entertain him with that softness In your voice, and all that wanton kindness in your Eyes, you so notoriously affect, when you design A Conquest.
So damn'd a lie did never malice yet invent;Who told you this?
No matter; that ever I shou'd love a Woman that Can doat on a senceless Caper, a Tawdry French Riband, and a Formal Cravat!
You make me mad.
A guilty Conscience may do much, Go on, be the Game-Mistress o'the Town, and Enter all our young Fops, as fast as they come From travail.
Base and Scurrilous!
A fine mortifying reputation 'twill be for a Woman of your Pride, Wit, and Quality!
This Jealousy's a meer pretence, a cursed trick Of your own devising; I know you.
Believe it and all the ill of me you can, I wou'd Not have a Woman have the least good thought Of me, that can think well of; farewel, Fall too, and much good may do you with your Coxcomb.
Stay, oh stay, and I will tell you all.
I have been told too much already.
Call him again.
E'ne let him go, a fair riddance.
Run I say, call him again, I will have him call'd.
The Devil shou'd carry him away first, Were it my concern.
H'as frighted me from the very thoughts of Loving men; for Heav'ns sake, my dear, Do not discover what I told you; I dread his tongue As much as you ought to have done his Friendship.
He's gone, Madam.
Lightning blast him!
When I told him you desired him to come back, He smil'd, made a mouth at me, flung into his Coach, and said --
What did he say?
Drive away, and then repeated Verses.
Wou'd I had made a Contract to be a Witch When first I entertain'd this greater Devil,Monster, Barbarian; I could tear my self in pieces. Revenge, nothing but Revenge can ease me; Plague, War, Famine, Fire, all that can bring universal ruin And misery on mankind, with Joy I'd perish to Have you in my power but this moment!
Follow Madam, leave her not in this outragious passion.
H'as given me the proof which I desired of His love, but 'tis a proof of his ill nature too; I wish I had not seen him use her so. I sigh to think thatmay be, One day as faithless, and unkind to me.
Dear Madam! Let me set that Curl in order.
Let me alone, I will shake 'em all out of order.
Will you never leave this Wilderness?
Torment me not.
Look! there's a Knot falling off.
Let it drop.
But one pin, dear Madam.
How do I daily suffer under thy Officious Fingers?
Ah the difference that is between You and my Lady? how uneasy she is If the least thing be amiss about her?
She is indeed most exact! nothing is ever wanting To make her ugliness remarkable!
Jeering people say so!
Her powdering, painting, and her patching never fail in Publick to draw the tongues and Eyes of all the men upon her.
She is indeed a little too pretending.
That Women should set up for beauty as much in spite Of nature, as some men have done for Wit.
I hope without offence one may endeavour To make ones self agreeable.
Not, when 'tis impossible. Women then Ought to be no more fond of dressing than Fools Should be of talking; Hoods and Modesty, Masques and Silence, things that shaddow and conceal; They should think of nothing else.
Jesu! Madam, what will your Mother think is Become of you? for Heav'ns sake go in again.
I won't!
This is the Extravangant'st thing that ever You did in your life, to leave her and a Gentleman Who is to be your Husband.
My Husband! Hast thou so little wit to think I spoke what I meant When I over-joy'd her in the Country, with a low Courtsy, And what you please, Madam, I shall ever be obedient.
Nay, I know not, you have so many fetches.
And this was one, to get her up to! Nothing else I assure thee.
Well, the man, in my mind, is a fine man!
The man indeed wears his Cloaths fashionably, and Has a pretty negligent way with him, very Courtly, And much affected; he bows, and talks, and smiles So agreeably as he thinks.
I never saw any thing so gentile!
Varnish'd over with good breeding, many a Blockhead makes a tolerable show.
I wonder you do not like him.
I think I might be brought to endure him, and that is All a reasonable Woman should expect in a Husband, but There is duty i'the case -- and like the haughty, I,,.
I wish you do not design your own ruine! I partly Guess your inclinations Madam -- that Mr.--
Leave your prating, and sing some foolish Song or other.
I will, the Song you love so well ever since you saw Mr..
Shall I be paid down by a covetous Parent for a purchase? I need no Land; no, i'le lay my self out all in love. It is decreed --
What generous Resolution are you making Madam?
Only to be disobedient, Sir.
Let me join hands with you in that --
With all my heart, I never thought I should have given You mine so willingly. Here I--
And I--
Do solemnly protest --
And vow --
That I with you --
And I with you --
Will never marry --
A match!
And no match!How do you like this indifference now?
You expect I should take it ill I see!
'Tis not unnatural for you Women to be a little Angry, you miss a Conquest, though you wou'd slight the Poor man were he in your power.
There are some it may be have an Eye like, Big enough for the whole Fair, but I am not of the Number, and you may keep your Ginger-bread. 'Twill be more acceptable to the Lady, Whose dear Image it wears Sir.
I must confess Madam, you came a day after the Fair.
You own then you are in love --
I do.
The confidence is generous, and in return I could almost Find in my heart to let you know my inclinations.
Are you in Love?
Yes, with this dear Town, to that Degree, I can scarce indure The Country in Landskapes and in Hangings.
What a dreadful thing 'twould be To be hurry'd back to!
Ah -- name it not! --
As for us, I find we shall agree well enough! wou'd We cou'd do something to deceive the grave people!
Could we delay their quick proceeding, 'twere well, A reprieve is a good step towards the getting of a pardon.
If we give over the Game, we are undone! What think you of playing it on booty?
What do you mean?
Pretend to be in love with one another! 'twill make Some dilatory excuses we may feign, pass the better.
Let us do't, if it be but for the dear Pleasure of dissembling.
Can you play your part?
I know not what it is to love, but I have made Pretty remarks by being now and then where Lovers meet. Where did you leave their Gravities?
I'th' next Room! your Mother wasCensuring our modern Gallant.
Peace! Here they come, I will lean against this Wall, And look bashfully down upon my Fan, while You like an Amorous spark modishly entertain me.
Never go about to excuse 'em, come, come, It was not so when I was a young Woman.
A Dod, they're something disrespectful --
Quality was then consider'd, And not rally'd by every fleering Fellow.
Youth will have it's Jest, a Dod it will.
'Tis good breeding now to be civil to none but Players andWomen, they are treated by 'em as much Above their Condition, as others are below theirs.
Out a pise on 'em, talk no more, the Rogues ha' got an ill habit of preferring Beauty, No matter where they find it.
See your Son, and my Daughter, they have Improv'd their acquaintances since they were within.
A Dod, methinks they have! Let's keep back and observe.
Now for a look and gestures that may perswade 'em I am saying all the passionate things imaginable --
Your Head a little more on one side, ease your self On your left Leg, and play with your right hand.
Thus, is it not?
Now set your right leg firm on the ground, adjust Your Belt, then look about you.
A little exercising will make me perfect.
Smile and turn to me again very sparkish!
Will you take your turn and be instructed?
With all my heart.
At one motion play your Fan, roul your Eyes, And then settle a kind look upon me.
So.
Now spread your Fan, look down upon it,And tell the Sticks with a Finger.
Very Modish.
Clap your hand up to your bosom, Hold down your Gown. Shrug a little, draw up your Breasts, and let 'em fall Again, gently, with a sigh or two,
By the good instructions you give, I suspect you for one Of those malitious Observers who watch peoples Eyes, And from innocent looks, make scandalous conclusions.
I know some indeed who out of meer love To mischief are as vigilant as Jealousy it self, And will give you an account of every Glance That passes at a Play, and i'th' Circle!
'Twill not be amiss now to seem a little pleasant.
Clap your Fan then in both your hands, snatch it To your Mouth, smile, and with a lively motion fling your Body a little forwards. So -- now spread it; fall back on The sudden, Cover your Face with it, and break out Into a loud Laughter -- take up! look Grave, and fall a fanning of your self -- Admirably well acted.
I think I am pretty apt at these matters!
A Dod I like this well.
This promises something.
Come! there is Love i'th' case, a dod there is, Or will be; what say you young Lady?
All in good time Sir, you expect we should fall to, And Love as game-Cocks fight, as soon as we are set Together, a Dod y'are unreasonable!
A Dod sirrah, I like thy wit well.
The Coach is at the Door Madam.
Go, get you and take the Air together.
Will not you go with us?
Out a pize: A Dod I ha' business and cannot. We shall meet at night at my Sister.
He's going to.
I overheard him talk of a Collation.
I pitty the young lovers, we last talk'd of, Though to say truth their conduct has been so indiscreet, They deserve to be unfortunate.
Y' have had an exact account, from the great Lady I'th'Box down to the little Orange wench.
Y' are a living Libel, a breathing Lampoon; I Wonder you are not torn in pieces.
What think you of setting up an Office of Intelligence For these matters? the project may get Money.
You would have great dealings with country Ladies.
More thanhas With their husbands.
, what has been become of you! we Have not seen you here of late With your friend Mrs.
Dear creature, I left her but now so sadly afflicted.
With her old distemper Jealousy!
has plaid her some new prank.
Well, thatis certainly the worst Man breathing.
I once thought so.
And do you not think so still?
No indeed!
Oh Jesu!
The Town does him a great deal of Injury, and I Will never believe what it says of a man I do Not know again for his sake!
You make me wonder!
He's a very well bred man.
But strangely ill-natur'd.
Then he's a very Witty man!
But a man of no principles.
Your man of Principles is a very fine thing indeed.
To be preferr'd to men of parts by Women who haveRegard to their Reputation and quiet. Well were I minded To play the Fool, he shou'd be the last man I'd think of.
He has been the first in many Ladyes favours, though You are so severe, Madam.
What he may be for a Lover I know not, but He's a very pleasant acquaintance I am sure.
Had you seen him use Mrsas I have done, You wou'd never endure him more --
What he has quarrel'd with her again!
Upon the slightest occasion, he's Jealous Of Sir.
She never saw him in her life but Yesterday, and that was here.
On my Conscience! he's the only man in Town That's her aversion, how horribly out of humour She was all the while he talk'd to her!
And some body has wickedly told him --
Here he comes.
! you are luckily come to justify Your self -- here's a Lady --
Has a word or two to say to you from a Disconsolate person.
You tender your Reputation too much I know Madam, To whisper with me before this good Company.
To serve Mrs., I'll make a bold venture.
Here'sthe very Spirit of Scandal.
No matter!
'Tis something you are unwilling to Hear, Mr..
Tell himwhether he will or no!
Mrs.!
Softly, these are laughers, you do not know 'em.
In a Word y'ave made me hate you,
Which I thought you never could have done.
In obeying your Commands.
'Twas a cruel part you play'd! how could you act it?
Nothing is cruel to a man who could kill himself To please you; remember Five a Clock to morrow Morning.
I tremble when you name it.
Be sure you come.
I sha'not.
Swear you will!
I dare not.
Swear I say.
By my life! by all the happiness I hope for --
You will.
I will.
Kind.
I am glad i've sworn, I vow I think I should ha' Fail'd you else!
Surprisingly kind! in what temper did You leave?
Her raving was prettily over, and she began to be In a brave way of defying you, and all your works. Where have you been since you went from thence?
I look'd in at the Play.
I have promis'd and must return to her agen.
Perswade her to walk in the Mail this evening
She hates the place and will not come.
Do all you can to prevail with her.
For what purpose?
Sirwill be here anon, I'll prepare him To set upon her there before me.
You persecute her too much, but I'll do all you'l ha'me.
Tell her plainly, 'tis grown so dull a business
I can drudge on no longer.
There are afflictions in Love Mr..
You Women make 'em, who are commonly as Unreasonable in that as you are at Play; without The Advantage be on your side, a man can never Quietly give over when he's weary?
If you would play without being obliged to Complaisance, you should play in Publick places.
Ordinaries were a very good thing for that, But Gentlemen do not of late frequent 'em; theDeep play is now in private Houses.
, are you leaving us so soon?
I am to go to the Park with Mrs.Madam --
This confidence will go nigh to spoil this Young Creature.
'Twill do her good Madam. Young men who Are brought up under practising Lawyers prove The abler Council when they come to be call'd To the Bar themselves --
The Town has been very favourable to you This afternoon, my Lady, you use to have An Ambara's of Chaires and Coaches at your Door, An uproar of Footmen in your Hall, and a noise Of Fools above here.
Indeed my House is the general rendevouze, And next to the Play-house is the Common Refuge of all the Young idle people.
Company is a very good thing, Madam, but I Wonder you do not love it a little more Chosen.
'Tis good to have an universal taste, we Should love Wit, but for Variety, be able to divert Our selves with the Extravagancies of those who want it.
Fools will make you laugh.
For once or twice! but the repetition of their Folly after a visit or two grows tedious and unsufferable.
You are a little too delicate.
Sir, Madam, desires to know if You are to be seen.
Here's the freshest Fool in Town, and one Who has not cloy'd you yet. Page!
Madam!
Desire him to walk up.
Do not you fall on him,, and snub him. Sooth him up in his extravagance! he will shew the better.
You know I have a natural indulgence for Fools,And need not this caution, Sir!
Wait without.
Madam, I Kiss your Hands, I see Yesterday was nothing of Chance, The belle`s assemble`s form themselves here every day.
Lady your servant;, let me embrace Thee, without lying I have not met with any of myAcquaintance, who retain so much ofas Thou dost, the very air thou hadst when the Marquise mistook thee i'th' Tuilleries, and cry'd Hey Chevalier, and then begg'd thy pardon.
I would fain wear in Fashion as long as I can, Sir, 'Tis a thing to be valu'd in men as well as Bawbles.
Thou art a man of Wit, and understands The Town: prithee let thee and I be intimate, There is no living without making some good Man the confident of our pleasures.
'Tis true! but there is no man so improper For such a business as I am.
Prithee! why hast thou so modest an Opinion of thy self?
Why first, I could never keep a secret in my life, And then there is no charm so infallibly makes me Fall in love with a Woman as my knowing a Friend loves her. I deal honestly with you.
Thy humour's very gallant or let me perish, I knew a French Count so like thee.
Witt I perceive has more power over you Than Beauty, Sir, else you would not have Let this Lady stand so long neglected.
A thousand pardons Madam, some Civilities due of course upon the meeting a long absent Friend. The Eclat of so much beauty I confess ought To have charm'd me sooner.
The brillian of so much good language Sir has much More power than the little beauty I can boast.
I never saw any thing prettier than this high Work on your Point D'espaigne --
'Tis not so rich as Point--
Not altogether, but looks cooler, and is more Proper for the season., is not that?
The same, Sir.
Forgive me Sir in this Ambaras of Civilities, I could not come to have you in my Arms sooner. You understand an Equipage the best of Any Man in Town I hear.
By my own you would not guess it.
There are Criticks who do not write Sir.
Our peevish Poets will scarce allow it.
Dam'em, they'l allow no Man Wit, who does not Play the fool like themselves and show it! Have you Taken notice of the Gallesh I brought over?
O yes! 't has quite another Air, than th'English makes.
'Tis as easily known from an English Tumbril, As an Inns of Court-man is from one of us.
Truly there is a bell-air in Galleshes as well as men.
But there are few so delicate to observe it.
The world is generally very grossier here indeed.
He's very fine.
Extream proper.
A slight suit I made to appear in at my first arrival, Not worthy your consideration Ladies.
The Pantaloon is very well mounted.
The Tassels are new and pretty.
I never saw a Coat better cut.
It makes me show long-wasted, and I think slender.
That's the shape our Ladies doat on.
Your breech though is a handfull too high in my Eye Sir.
Peace, I have wish'd it lower a thousand Times, but a Pox on't, 'twill not be.
His Gloves are well fring'd, large and graceful.
I was always eminent for being.
He wears nothing but what are Originals of the Most Famous hands in.
You are in the right Madam.
The Suit?
Barroy.
The Garniture.
Le Gras --
The Shooes!
Piccar!
The Perriwig!
Chedreux.
The Gloves!
Orangerii! You know the smell Ladies!, I could find in my heart for an amusement To have a Gallantry with some of our English Ladies.
'Tis a thing no less necessary to confirm the Reputation of your Wit, than a Duel will be To satisfie the Town of your Courage.
Here was a Woman yesterday --
Mistriss.
You have nam'd her!
You cannot pitch on a better for your purpose.
Prithee! what is she?
A person of Quality, and one who has a rest of Reputation enough to make the Conquest considerable: Besides I hear she likes you too!
Methoughts she seem'd though very reserv'd, And uneasie all the time I entertain'd her.
Grimace and affectation: You will see Her i'th' Mail to night.
Prithee, let thee and I take the Air together.
I am engag'd to, but I'le meet you at Saint, and give you some information, upon the Which you may regulate your proceedings.
All the World will be in the Park to night: Ladies, 'Twere pity to keep so much Beauty longer within doors, And rob the Ring of all those Charms That should adorn it -- Hey, Page.
See that all my People be ready..
A fine mettl'd Coxcomb.
Brisk and Insipid -
Pert and dull.
However you despise him Gentlemen, I'le lay my Life he passes for a Wit with many.
That may very well be, Nature has her cheats, stum's A brain, and puts sophisticate dulness often on the tastless Multitude for true wit and good humour., Come.
I must go a little way, I will meet you i'the Mail.
I'le walk through the Garden thither, we shall meet Anon and bow.
Not to night! we are engag'd about a business, The knowledge of which may make you laugh hereafter.
Your servant Ladies.
, as Sirsays --
The Old Man will be here immediately.
Let's expect him i'th' Garden --
Go, you are a Rogue.
I can't abide you.
Come along.
And leave your Mother.
will be sent with a Hue and Cry after us; But that's no matter.
'Twill look strangely in me.
She'l believe it a freak of mine, and never blame Your manners.
What reverend acquaintance is that she has met?
A fellow-beauty of the last Kings time, though by the Ruines you would hardly guess it.
By this time your Mother is in a fine taking.
If your Friend Mr.were but here now, That she might find me talking with him.
She does not know him but dreads him I hear of All Mankind.
She concludes if he does but speak to a Woman she's undone, is on her knees every day to Pray Heav'n defend me from him.
You do not apprehend him so much as she does.
I never saw any thing in him that was frightful.
On the contrary, have you not observed something Extream delightful in his Wit and Person?
He's agreeable and pleasant I must own, but he Does so much affect being so, he displeases me.
Lord Madam, all he does and says, is so easie, And so natural.
Some Mens Verses seem so to the unskilful, But labour i'the one, and affectation in the other To the Judicious plainly appear.
I never heard him accus'd of affectation before.
It passes on the easie Town, who are favourably Pleas'd in him to call it humour.
'Tis she! it must be she, that lovely hair, that Easie shape, those wanton Eyes, and all those melting Charms about her mouth, whichspoke of; I'll follow the Lottery, and put in for a Prize with my friend.
Most people preferto this place.
It has the better Reputation I confess: but I Abominate the dull diversions there, the formal bows, The Affected smiles, the silly by-Words, and Amorous Tweers, in passing; here one meets with A little conversation now and then.
These conversations have been fatal To some of your Sex, Madam.
It may be so, because some who want temper Have been undone by gaming, must others who have it Wholly deny themselves the pleasure of Play?
Trust me, it were unreasonable Madam.
Lord! who's this?
Is this the Woman your Father would Have you marry?
It is.
Her name?
I am not mistaken, she's handsome.
Talk to her, her Wit is better than her face; We were wishing for you but now.
Overcast with seriousness o' the sudden!
A thousand smiles were shining in that Face but now; I never saw so quick a change of Weather.
I feel as great a change within;
But he shall never know it.
You were talking of Play, Madam, Pray What may be your stint?
A little harmless discourse in publick walks, Or at most an appointment in a Box barefac'd At the Play-House; you are for Masks, and Private meetings; where Women engageFor all they are worth I hear.
I have been us'd to deep Play, but I can make one At small Game, when I like my Gamester well.
And be so unconcern'd you'l ha' no pleasure in't.
Where there is a considerable sum to be won, the Hope of drawing people in, makes every trifle considerable.
The sordidness of mens natures I know makes 'em Willing to flatter and comply with the Rich, though they Are sure never to be the better for 'em.
'Tis in their power to do us good, and we despair Not but at some time or other they may be willing.
To men who have far'd in this Town like you, 'Twould be a great Mortification to live on hope; Could you keep a Lent for a Mistriss?
In expectation of a happy Easter, and though time Be very precious, think forty daies well lost, to gain your Favour.
Mr.! let us walk, 'tis time to leave him, Men grow dull when they begin to be particular.
Y'are mistaken, flattery will not ensue, though I know Y'are greedy of the praises of the whole Mail.
You do me wrong.
I do not, as I follow'd you, I observ'd how you Were pleased when thecry'd she's handsome, very Handsome, by God she is, and whisper'd aloud your name, The thousand several forms you put your face into; then, To make your self more agreeable, how wantonly you play'd With your head, flung back your locks, and look'd smilingly Over your shoulder at 'em.
I do not go begging the mens as you do The Ladies Good liking with a sly softness in Your looks, and a gentle slowness in your bows, As you pass by 'em -- as thus Sir --
Is not this like you?
Your Mother Madam.
Ah my Dear child.
Now is she so pleased with finding her agen She cannot chide her.
Come away!
'Tis now but high Mail Madam, the most entertaining Time of all the Evening.
I would fain see thatMother, you so Cry out of, for a monster, he's in theI hear.
Come away then! the plague is here and you Should dread the infection.
You may be misinform'd of the gentleman?
Oh no! I hope you do not know him. He is the Prince of all the Devils in the Town, Delights in nothing but in Rapes and Riots.
If you did but hear him speak Madam!
Oh! he has a Tongue they say would tempt the Angels to a second fall.
Hey, Champaine, Norman, La Rose, la Fleur, La Tour, La Verdure. Dorimant --
Here, here he is among this Rout, he Names him; come away, come away.
This fool's coming has spoil'd all, she's gone, But she has left a pleasing Image of her self Behind that wanders in my Soul -- It must not settle there.
What resverie is this! speak man.
, a discovery! I met with.
You can tell me no news Sir, I know all.
How do you like the Daughter?
You never came so near truth in your life, As you did in her description.
What think you of the Mother?
What ever I think of her, she thinks Very well of me I find.
Did she know you?
She did not, whether she does now or no I know not. Here was a pleasant Scene towards, when in came Sir, mustering up his Equipage, and at the Latter end nam'd me, and frighted her away.
andare not far off, I saw 'em Alight at St..
Sirhark you, a word or two,
Look you do not want assurance.
I never do on these occassions.
Walk on, we must not be seen together, make your Advantage of what I have told you, the next turn You will meet the Lady.
Hey -- Follow me all.
, you shall see good sport anon betweenand this.
I thought there was something toward by that whisper.
You know a worthy principle of hers?
Not to be so much as civil to a man who speaks to her In the presence of him she professes to love.
I have encourag'dto talk to her to night.
Now you are here she will go nigh to beat him.
In the humor she's in, her love will make her do some Very extravagant thing doubtless.
What wasbusiness with you at my Lady?
To get me to meethere in order to an; I made some difficulty of it, and have prepar'd This rancounter to make good my Jealousy.
Here they come!
I'le meet her and provoke her with a deal of dumbCivility in passing by, then turn short and be behind Her, when Sirsets upon her ----
How wonderful respectfully he bow'd!
He's alwayes over-mannerly when He has done a mischief.
Methoughts indeed at the same time he had a Strange despising Countenance.
The unlucky look he thinks becomes him.
I was afraid you would have spoke to him my Dear.
I would have di'd first; he shall no more find me The loving fool he has done.
You love him still!
No.
I wish you did not.
I do not, and I will have you think so: What made You hale me to this odious place?
I hate to be hulch'd up in a Coach; Walking is much better.
Would we could meet Sirnow.
Lord! would you not avoid him?
I would make him all the advances that may be.
That would confirmsuspicion, my Dear.
He is not jealous; but I will make him so, and be Reveng'd a way he little thinks on.
If she should make him jealous, that may make Him fond of her again: I must disswade her from it. Lord! My Dear, this will certainly make him hate you.
'Twill make him uneasie though he does not care For me; I know the effects of jealousie on men of his Proud temper.
'Tis a fantastick remedy, its operations are Dangerous and uncertain.
'Tis the strongest Cordial we can give to dying 
Love, 
It often brings it back when there's no sign of life remaining: 
But I design not so much the reviving his, as my revenge.<|endoftext|>Beleeve me Sir, I have told you what your worship may most certainly trust to.
May I not speak with her?
You know my place. There's no more hope from the deepe pit of griefe To raise in her any conceit of love, Then there's to raise her husband up againe From the cold bed he sleepes in: from the Grave. Take this for all: My Lady Sir, has vow'd To live, and die a Widdow. -- So I leave you. --
Is't possible, that such a one as shee; So young, so beautifull; so full of blood; Such lusty blood, as shee's? for such a losse, Should lose that youth; that Beauty, that quick blood In such a cold retirement? -- Well, I know not! But if she have made such a vow, and keepe it! To finde out such another, and a Phaenix, Is but an equall labour.
Save you Sir; save you, sweet Sir.
As much to you Sir; kind M..
You have bin with the Widdow; this melancholly Lady already. Give you much joy of your faire hopes Sir.
As much to your self; to your self Sir, kind M..
Ile hope as much as I can, though you be a Knight; and I but an honest Citizen. A Mercer, is a Merchant, andwill looke for good Ware, for his Money.
If he should enter now? -- Ile see the issue.
You know my comming: to speak with your Lady, M..
But shee's not at leasure to heare you.
I hope you doe but jeast.
Beleeve me Sir, in earnest.
But I'le not take't in earnest.
But you must. -- Then you'll beindeed Sir. Though you be a Citizen, you are not free of this Hall, And therefore must have no admittance.
Give you much joy of your faire hopes. Another?
Save you Gentlemen: how is't M.?
As well as we may, M..
You have got the start of me, I see that Gentlemen. A Suit, brought me home this morning, made me lye so much the longer: but, my Taylors long Bill, like a Woodcock, as hee is, shall be so much the longer a paying. -- You have beene within?
In our time Sir.
I meane, this morning.
But -- the Lady meanes no such thing Sir.
We heard of your Worships new Suit, and would not goe in before it.
I'le lead the way then.
M.? good morrow good morrow sweet M..
That sweet, to your sweetest selfe Sir.
And where's thy Lady? -- You see, we come, to come to her. --
By your favour Sir, you are too hasty.
Why, is not thy Lady up yet?
Why, doe you meane to take her downe Sir? -- Buy Sir.
This Fellow's sawcie.
Minds not your Worships new Suit Sir. -- But we must be content.
We may be patient Sir, but not content; for nothing contents me, but the Lady.
Nor me, but that beautifull Lady.
Who have wee here? Sweet and soft, M.. M.! -- I dare be so bold as embrace you too. -- But my Noble Sir. My Sir, of a thousand.
Why, I can be a Knight, an I lust Sir.
An I can be a Knight, an I lust Sir.
Dubd, with the Citie Dagger. -- Then, would be rash indeed. You come to see my Sister?
With all our hearts we would Sir.
'Las good hearts. Me thinks the Gates should of themselves flye ope, To such brave men as you are.
You have the old heart, still Sir.
The young heart still Sir; -- tho mad heart, -- the merry heart; the light heart, with the candle of conceit, burning in it, as bright as. You have not bin within? I will make out this paire of Aces, And then you shall see my Sister. I perceive by your melancholy looks, My melancholy, pettish, peevish Sister, Is not at this time to be spoke withall. 'Tis such a foolish thing; -- She knowes not worth, Nor how to entertain't: suffice it Gentlemen, I doe; -- And shall not goe behind her back To let her know your merit.
Will you Sir?
And in a just proportion to that merit, That Masse of Merit, you shall finde her favour: So M., and worthy M., I shall desire you leave us.
You'll remember.
Shall I remember (Gentlemen) to eat? To drink? to sleep? -- Then Ile remember you.
Then? -- When Sir?
When I am asleepe. -- Awake, I shall nevermind e'm. For their Worships are hardly worth it.
Yet in a just proportion, to their merit.
Yes, that's just nothing: -- Hang e'm gloworms, hang e'm.
Here's another rub in our Ally Sir.
A Tennants sonne o' mine. -- And how does my honest.
The better your good Worship is well Sir. I was to seeke your good Worship, at your Right Worshipfull house Sir: but, missing you there, I rejoyce I have met with you here.
Why, what's the matter, what's the matter?
In the way of love, as they say: from my father, and my suster; and my tother suster too; -- You know who I meane, Sir.
Thy scolding sister.
You are in the right, Sir.
And how does, my pretty Tennant?
That pretty one, is prettily well Sir.
Remember me to her by this. --
Within these two or three dayes, at the furthest, I should breath a Gelding; It may be, that wayes, and visit my pretty Tennant.
Long may your Worships Gelding breathe, and your Worshipfull selfe also. I am in hast Sir.
Take your own time good.
Thank your good Worship Sir.
I have done your patience wrong; indeed I have; But, in the best, that lyes in me to right it
You shall command me Sir: Now to my Sister. Now, where's my Sister?
Shee's within Sir.
Come then, let's to her.
You must pardon me, Shee's so retyr'd to solitude; and set So deep in grief, that till her sighs, and teares, Will give her leave to give that entertain That shall become such worthy Visitants, (Which yet, they will not) tis her strict commandThat no man enter.
Not my self?
Your self, Sir, if you would not swell her grief too big For her faint breast to carry, give her way. A little time may change her.
Tis enough. -- You see Sir.
Your Love, Sir.
But, as her Gentleman discreetly said, A little time may change her: We must still In such a kind humour a womans will. But, she's thine own, be bold on't. --
Come, thou mak'st such a Matter, of Nothing.
Nothing, doe you call it, Master? I know not, but I am sure, I feel it something -- Tis almost, kicking ripe already.
Almost, kicking ripe already, -- Come, come, thou art, A Chamber-maid still; -- And I prethee, whats this, but a work that belongs to the Chamber? Kicking ripe already, This is not the first time, that thou hast been kickt with an urchin. Once, Twice, -- this is the third time of kicking.
Well, you wo'not, marry me?
And hazard my place, wo my Lady? -- and yet, Now I think on't. -- I will --
Marry me?
To some of my old acquaintance. There be a hundred in the City, that have swallowed worse bits then thou art. Hist.
I know, my danger, and shall have a care, according.
Beseech you. Let the love you seeme to shew In these perswasions, be exprest in words, That better suit with such a robe as this, And my immutable resolve.
Immutable? -- then we perswade, in vain.
I am bound to say You have lost a worthy Gentleman; -- My selfe, A noble Master; -- one that was a Man Worth your best memory: the multitude Of sighs you have sent after him, worth all The expence of teares, you have bestowed upon him. But when we look into his Tombe and there See him lock'd up in Marble; -- in the still, And sad imagin'd language of the Grave, We are instructed, Nay, commanded Lady, To period our vain grievings.
He has told you the naked truth on't. 'Tis but in vaine to grieve; -- For, is't not sed The quick must live byth' quick, and not byth' dead? He's gone, -- Heaven be with him; -- He was a Gentleman; An honest man; -- and, which is more; -- a proper Gentleman: But, when Gentility, -- Honesty, -- and proportion, Lye in the Grave once, I ha' done with 'em.
Thy tongue's my ceaslesse torment.
Let me tell you, That infinite of love you seeme to have fixt, Upon the heart of your departed Husband, Loses no scruple, of the worth it has, Plac'd on a second Husband.
Mark you that now?
Nay, I dare tell you, that in a second Match, You love him more; more love, more honour him, Then, in your mourning Widdowhood.
Mark you that now?
Ile make it open to you: whilst you keepe Incompast, with this solitude, a Widow, You seeme, to voyce, to the ill-censuring world, Some imperfection in your selfe; some staine Makes you unworthy of a second Match: At lest, unworthy, of a worthy Husband, And in th' opinion, (which is easily rais'd) Question your Husbands judgement. -- Or, it may be,The estate he left you Lady; -- pulling so Upon the Name, you strive to dignifie, Disgrace, defames, and scandall.
Mark you that now?
If you so lov'd him living, love him dead, As I advise you Lady.
I, I, doe.
'Tis the best Tomb-stone you can lay upon him; The noblest Monument, you can erect; And to that Monument, an Epitaph, Shall make him live for ever.
Law you there now! -- Shal make him live for ever! You are not dumb tro? -- are you?
Would thou wer't. Or I had lost my hearing. -- I can wish Nothing more adverse to me, then your tongues: And therefore, if your visits bring with them Nothing, but these perswasions.
Keepe away.
Nay, as good speak't as think it. -- Here's a coyle for a Husband, I have had for mine owne part, -- 1. -- 2. -- 3. -- 4. And yet if the fift come up handsomly to me, -- I know what I know, I warrant you.
How five?
Fifteene, an the Destinies so have decreed it.
Madame, there be Suiters below would see you: M., the Mercer; -- one, a humorous Gallant; -- and a spick and span new Suiter, a Country Gentleman, -- one, M..
Spruce M.I know.
And I M., a notable humorous Coxcomb. But what's that?
Unknowne to me: but beleeve me, together, They make up, a delicate motion. -- Is your Ladiship pleas'd to see 'em?
Present your Motion some-where else, our griefes give way to no such lightnesse.
Very good. -- I'le tell e'm what you say?
Pray stay a little. I know these Suiters are but empty things; Not worth one serious entertaine; yet Sister, I wo'd not have you beat e'm back, at dore: Pray let e'm enter; Let e'm looke upon you.
Still your desire's, my anguish.
Come, come, pray. -- You are so melancholly.
Why, their mirth -- will be a means to cure you.
Kill me rather.
Goe, prethee bid e'm come.
Bid e'm be gone.
Nay, then, y'are too too cruell. -- Prethee stay.
Nay, an you know no other merriment, Then what you raise from my vexation, take it; I will not hinder your desires; pray take it.
You will not leave us, will you?
Leave this roome.
And goe mew your selfe up in your Chamber? An you will needs: -- Let me entreat one favour.
Well, what is't?
That, in your absence you'd be pleas'd to let Your wayting Gentlewoman, Mistris, Appeare in your apparrell: Tis but slipping off This upper garment; and this mourning Veile, And shee's my Lady.
How? -- My Bab, my Lady!
It will be sport to us; and to your selfe A rare advantage Sister: for this trick Keepes all your foolish Suiters at that distance, Their trouble shall ne're touch you. -- Will you?
Will you?
Though pleasure, be no pleasure to this bosome, Since you propose th'acquittance of that trouble, Your desire's granted.
But be speedie then With your directions for her carriage in it,
And we shall fit 'em neatly. -- Call e'm in.
Did you ever see such a self-will'd thing as this is? -- a widdow these two moneths, and yet not heare of a Suiter.
The Gentlemen, an't please you.
Yes indeed, an't please you.
Master.
Your servant, good deed law, Gentlewoman.
Master.
My name is; Master my Title, and Sir, a Title, that may be.
And my name is--
: thy sound is out o' season. -- But where's the Lady?
I, where's the Lady?
Wee would see the Lady.
I hope she has done mourning now, -- has she not?
Why, dos the Lady mourne?
Indeed shee dos.
Tis a delicate thing to mourne. -- Well, an my Father wou'd but dye once! Would we could see this Lady.
You have your wish already.
Beautious Lady!
Most beautious Lady!
Most beautifull Lady, that may be: for yet, I see no such matter.
Thine eyes are veyl'd with ignorance, or else, Through this thin veile, thou might'st, as we, -- behold Matter of admiration! -- You'll vouchsafe; -- Not yet.
Alas: -- upon their Captive heart, My sorrowes yet have set too strong a Guard For such delights to enter.
I could wish.That Conquerour of thy heart, and all his Guard Were visible, that I might challenge them.
I marry sir; that were a challenge indeed.
Me thinks I could -- doe --
What, doe you think you could doe Sir?
O -- my most delicate Lady!
Doe, -- his -- most delicate Lady. -- A terrible doe, indeed law.
Well Lady; if this be the man shall have you, You shall have a man, I can tell you.
If I be the man that shall have her, Shee shall have a man, I can tell you.
But, hee's a fighting man.
A fighting man? -- Let him play at the ancient weapon, an he were a Fencing man, I'll have a Bout with him.
The ancient weapon? -- What weapon's that?
Why this?
As wise, as valiant! 'tis the ancientst weapon indeed Sir.
And why not this?
I am better acquainted with this.
Well, wee shall meet?
And meet agen: -- Tell me of fighting Lady!
I see you are valiant Sir; -- and you are happy In having so much valour as you see Attend your beauty.
I must confesse them, worthy Gentlemen; But they must pardon me: -- the worth I ha' lost, With my dead husband, is so full, and fresh, Upon my understanding, that all else Have yet but homely entertaine: -- And yet, Y'are welcom Gentlemen. --
For that, we thank you.
We must hope still.
Well, an my Father would but dye once! I live in hope too Lady.
You see their valour Sir: -- and what's your weapon?
I am no man of the sword, -- I have no weapon.
How Sir? -- No weapon! --
What shouldyou do infencing Schoole, And have no weapon?
There was a time, -- I could have crost a cudgell.
And that you Sir?
Good sooth sometimes I can tell you: -- yet, if any man strike me, I have a weapon too Sir.
The coldest flint, has fire I see: What weapon?
One, that is indeed, -- All weapons. -- Long-Sword; Sword and Dagger; -- Sword and Buckler; Single Rapier, Rapier and Dagger; Case o' Rapiers; Halbert, Halfe-Pike; Quarter-Staffe; Short-Sword and Gauntlet; and that terrible Fly-flap, the Fauchion.
All these in one? --
Or one that's worth all these; -- and that, -- in a word, is the Law Sir.
A terrible weapon indeed Sir.
There, let mee firk 'em, and jerk 'em: There, Let mee stand upon Tearmes; -- There, Let me play the Master, and M. Atturny, my Vsher, and then, -- with all the weapons in that School, have at 'em.
This goes beyond your Rapier; or your ancient weapon, the Fist.
Body o' me, my husband, and Sir.
What's to be done?
Doe, as thou hast done Wench.
Play the Lady, a little longer.
Handsomly, and I'le promise thee, it shall cost me a Chamblet Pettycoat.
I'll do't as well as I can then.
Come, come, we will speake, and speed too, my Knight, of a thousand, where's this mourning Lady? -- What, my? -- and my Lady Littleworth. Hoyday? Thisof Coxcombs too!
Sir.
One. --
Kind Sir.
Two. --
Worthy Sir. --
Three, yet never a wise word amongst 'em. -- What, still in Dumbs, and dolors? -- An ye were as heavy as Lead, 'twas but a light trick of you to deny Accesse to such a brave man as this is, and allow't to such Mimicks as these are. -- Death, I could kick e'm out o' the roome. And you, though you bee my wives sister, for lodging such basenesse within you.
Why, you are not out of your wits?
You have no wit to be out of. Gentlemen, you are all -- Hobbyhorses. An it please you, to leave the house now; and come agen, -- when you are sent for, -- you shal be -- heartily glad, to be welcome.
You see his humour Gentlemen; pray leave us.
There's no resisting of him; for he has Rapier, fist, the law, and all, for any man, that shall thwart him.
Why, but I hope --
Not one word more, an you love me.
Off, ere the flame grow higher.
Come, take my counsell, and forget him.
Never.
Still looking downward, to your husbands grave?
To those that weare so sad a suit as this, The Grave's the glasse they use to deck e'm by. Pray give me leave.
Shee dos it to a haire.
Prethee look up a little; -- I can shew thee A Glasse, shall shew thee better things; -- a Glasse, That shall reflect, no such affrighting shadowes --
Nor shadowes (beautious Lady) but the same True, and essentiall comforts.
O. -- O. -- O.
Excellent, mourning Lady.
The Nuptiall knot, binds loving Paires together, Only for terme of life, has no extent O're the divorce of Death.
Pray, pray no more.
That onely binds the living to the living, And not the living to the dead.
That flesh that has a soul within it, the indowments, And excellencies, bounteous Heaven bestowes, To that, has nothing but the frightfull shape, And key-cold figure of a man.
Yet this, While thus, you dote upon your husbands dust, You doe sweet Lady; and this beauty bindTo stenches, and corruption; so imposing Upon your selfecruelty.
You have my resolution; so, pray leave me.
An you be buried in your Husbands grave, I see my suit must dye too.
Yes, and let it For ever, Let it die to her, and live To one that better shall deserve it: come, I'le bring thee, though shee be mine owneSister, My Knight, of a thousand, to her betters: -- one that is younger, fairer, richer, and it may be, -- Honester too Sir.
How Sir? Honester.
Honester?
An shee prostrate her selfe to a set o' Morris-dancers; -- and neglect such aas this is. -- Come Sir, come, let's away.
Nay, but heark you, heark you Sir; and worthy Sir; that you may see this Lady, Is not the woman that you take her for; Looke, doe you know this Lady?
How, Mistris?
My Ladies Chambermaid!
A trick o' mirth they put upon these Coxcombs.
Were you my Lady?
So, your Lady would have it, Sir.
Why, god-a-mercie faith.
There's all the comfort they are like to have.
This cloud's like; the poore shadow Sir. The substance, wee'll court for you.
My Lady. -- How like you this Sir?
This change, has put some life into me Sir. And I must tell you, betterd my opinion Both of the Ladies wisedome, and her goodnesse.
But heark you wife, may we not see my Sister?
Faith, yet her temper is not as Wee'd have it: But we shall win her by degrees, and turne Her melancholy to a sprightly humour.
A day, or two dayes passage.
Come Sir. Meane time wee'll see what mirth my house can yield To entertaine you with. -- A ha, my Girle! Why such a Wench is worth her weight in Pearle.
Well, thou hast played my Lady, like a Lady. I have a trick from this conceit, to doe, Shall make us sport, and help thy swelling too.
Sir, I have spoke my danger.
A dangerous case beleeve me. And yet, me thinks, there's no great danger neither. For, say a man offer to blowe thee up with Love-powder, If his traine lie so open, you may see it, you have the wit I hope to shun it; -- h'an't you.
I have done hitherto.
And doest thou feare, -- thou shalt hold out no longer?
Sir, I doe not. For, all the pollicies, and power he has, Can ne're prevaile to conquest. -- No, tho feare Be to our Sex a common attribute; In such a fight as this, my resolution Has that Heroick temper, I dare meet My death, e're my dishonour: -- my dishonour! For vertue's vertue, in what breast soere, And her great splendour, equall.
Splend? -- Heyday! But to the point, what is he? -- Do I know him?
Yes, if you know Sir, Your Landlord Father.
How Sir?
He. -- Sometimes, -- (tho clouded in a course disguise) He layes temptations to mine eare himselfe: Sometimes by deputy; sometimes by Letters; And sometimes by rich gifts. -- As if that Jemme (Once gone) can never be bought back againe, Were to be sold so basely. -- Here's my sore, Assist me in the remedie.
Sir! He ayme against thy chastity? Alas. Has he bestowed upon thine Infancie, That care, and cost, that he has done? -- Maintain'd thee Among his owne? -- Fed thee among his owne? Apparrel'd thee, as he has cloth'd his owne? In the same Schoole, in the same qualities, Had thee instructed with his owne? -- Has he So beautified thy mind? -- So grac'd thy body! So many yeares in his owne house! -- And now -- (So close his favours follow thee) -- does he Maintaine thee here? -- Here in this homely Roofe, A starre to that poore glimmering candle light, My poverty could afford thee! -- And for this, Is this the best you can returne him?
No -- Father, for these should I forget to pay, The most obsequious duties I can tender, 'Twere just in heaven I should forget my selfe.
Had this beene spoke of any other man. I might have lent an eare to't: -- but, Sir! Noble Sir! -- that brave man, Sir! Our bountious Benefactor! -- Say he have Scatter'd some words ith' way of merriment, Some pleasant, idle, -- wanton, -- what d'yee call't? Sprinkled a little Bawdry in his speech? (As Courtiers may, and ne'r be question'd for it) That cuts not off a Maydenhead. -- Nay, perchance The merriment, that you interpret lust, Was his meere love to vertue.
Vertue!
Yes. -- Tis my conceit, that all his talk, -- his Letters, and all the gifts he sent thee, were imployed, Ith' way of triall: -- Not to make thee naught; But so to sound thy goodnesse.
Sound my goodnesse!
Not to o'recome thy chastity; but to try If any other should assaile the Fort, How stoutly thoud'st maintaine it.
Think you so? I'le think so too then Father: -- Let him try me. But jest, or earnest, he shal ne'r come nye me.
Why, this is fine, you have the golden time on't.
What golden time? -- You'll still be scolding.
Scolding! -- Mary come up Mistris Jinnie-Pinnie; We cannot speak to you, but we scold. -- Well, I say little.
Nothing at all were better.
But I'll say something; Has a woman a tongue to say nothing?
Prethee be patient Sister.
Yes I waun't you. I must wash, and scowre; And Brew, and Bake, and doe this thing, -- and doe that thing; and doe every thing, while such a beautifull Blowse as you are, must sit still o' your taile, and doe nothing.
Why, doest thou not see her at her work?
At work! -- A greate peyce o' work, a deed law!-- Prick, prick, prick. -- As if she had nothing in the world to mind -- but Prick, Prick, Prick. -- But 'tis no matter, -- tis but my hard fortune; I am a foole indeed, and so you make me.
What, what, a shower after this peale of thunder? -- Nay, doe not crie good.
O, Father, Father.
Now Boy, what newes with you now?
Brave newes Father, -- News of the brave Sir.
Pursue me still? -- Good Father give me leave, While hee's come in, and gone agen. --
What leave?
To absent my selfe; -- but in some neighbours house: I have a trick to passe him -- You may tell him, I'm gone to London.
When I have told him already, you are here in the Parlor a sewing.
Come, y'are a Baggage; y'ar a foolish Baggage, To injure with such frivolous suspitions, A Gentleman of his repute, and goodnesse! Come, let me heare no more on't.
Sister, -- I have the rarest newes for you!
For me tis wel; -- And what news have you got for me Sir?
Skipping news, lipping news, tripping news.
How, Dancing brother? -- Dancing!
Prancing, advancing, dancing! Nay, 'tis a Match; -- a Match upon a Wager.
A Match. -- Who be they?
Why, all the Maids of our Town, And all the mad Wenches of.
A Match, and leave me out? -- When, when is't Brother?
Mary, ee'n this morning; -- they are now going to't, helter skelter.
And leave me out? -- Where brother? where?
Why there, Sister; there. -- At our owne dore almost: On the Greene there, close by the May-pole. Heark, you may heare them hither.
Ta la la la leero, ta la, la leero -- &c. An I be not one. --
Thou't never be two, I think; -- For on my conscience, there is no man that knowes her, has valour enough, to come neere her
Why, well said Girle, keepe but that resolution,
And let his purposes, be what they can, They cannot hurt thee. -- Look, hee's come already.
Good morrow Tennant; -- good morrow beautiful Tennant.
As much to my worthy Landlord.
As much to my worthy Landlord.
My Tennant! -- God-a-mercy good Tennant. I want your welcome faire one.
Sir, you are welcome.
Had this bin spoke, with smiles upon thy cheek, I durst have sworne the Syllables had beene The Language of thy heart; thy heart, sweet. What, still so adverse to my pleasure? -- Tennant -- And my young Tennant; -- shall I crave the Roome? I have something to deliver from my Lady, That she would have a secret to the Eare Of any, But faire.
The Roome? Our poverty possesses nothing Sir, But what is yours; you may command it. -- Come.
I smell my Landlord; but, -- no words but mum.
Still, still this cloud upon thy brow sweet? You know my minde.
And you know mine Sir.
I meane, I love thee, my sweet.
Doe you? -- Not halfe so well as I love you.
Love me! Then there's some hope agen. -- Why, god-a-mercy, Let's see how handsomly thou't give thy body To my embraces Girle. -- How, fly e'm? Not kisse me neither? -- such a thing deni'd, How canst thou say thou lovest me?
Yes Sir: I love you in your Name: your Reputation; The dignity you carry in your yeares; The goodnesse should goe with e'm; -- In your Lady; I love you Sir, ith' faire Benevolence You owe her vertues.
Hoyday; -- Love me quotha! -- Nay, come , come.
I love you in your vowes.Those Nuptiall vowes, that whilst you live should live Unstain'd between you: -- In a word Sir, I love you in that purity, -- that shall, When death shall threaten your last minute to you, Make you look boldly on him; smile upon him; And in conclusion, seale you, one of those, That, from this veyle of trouble, he conveyes To th' purity of Angels: -- Thus, I love you.
This is not that I look for: heark you; Your Father is my Tennant.
Sir, he is.
Nay, since you vrge it, let me tell you Minion, He's not my Tennant, neither; but my Beadsman.
And like an humble Beadsman, in his Prayers Remembers all your Charity.
He does: -- But you forget it faire one.
Then let heaven, Whence we Petition, the Reward it merits, Forget me too.
Is't not forgetfulnesse When all the love, -- the tender cares, and cost, That from thy Infancie, to this Ripe groweth, I have bestowed upon you, cannot gaine me Such a request as this is!
This? Alas. Your greatest gaine's in losing. -- Nay, I'le tell you, The love, the care, -- that cost, that Noble breeding, That seemes to you a winning Argument, Is my best Argument against you.
How?
Why Sir, the Education; -- that faire breeding You have bestowed upon my poverty, Has made me what I am: -- So copiously Furnish'd my soule, with all that best adornes her, That whatsoere's in opposition to't, Has no admittance to her; -- Neere her; -- No, -- But, -- most deservedly, doe rank themselvesWith things, that most displease her. -- Such a thing, -- is --
What? -- My Love?
No, but your lust Sir. -- I am bold, But I can kneele to beg your mercy for it.
What, she imagines water to my flame, Is oyle t'encreas't: the more she puts me off, The more she pulls me to her. -- Come, come rise, Though you be so unkind; -- Come, prethee kis me.
Why, God a mercy; -- agen, agen; Why, this is somewhat yet: Wee must not look At once, to have so great a happinesse As that we ayme at. We must use degrees. Lock me, once more, in thy embrace, and busse me, And then. --
What then?
For this timeI'll leave thee. -- What, leave thee, and leave nothing with thee Wench? Nay, that were foule play: there, -- Nay, take it. Indeed you shall.
Indeed, indeed I wonot: For any service, I can doe you Sir, Your favour's price sufficient. -- No, not yet? I see, mine eye's a: -- I ha't. How I forget my duty? -- Here so long, And ne'r a Chaire to ease you? --, -- Brother. Pray pardon me Sir.
How, a Chaire? -- Kinder, and kinder still.
Come, come, a Chaire there for Sir.
She pitties your standing Sir. -- But I have a Chaire, Almost at my fingers end. -- Look you Sir, Will it please you. Bum this Cushion?
How, Bum it Tennant?
Yes, Bum it Landlord: -- Looke you Sir, o' this fashion.
Come, you'll be foolish stil. -- You know my mind. Goe, bring e'm in.
An I bring e'm not in, let Sirkick me out.
Lord, how forgetfull I have beene Sir? But, I beseech your pardon.
Pardon thee? And seal't upon thy lip; -- Come prethee sit.
Nay, nay, sit by me; -- Ne'r a stoole? -- Sit here then.
Be fairely civill Sir; -- Nay, good Sir.
How now, -- what's that?
Musick Sir.
Musick? -- Rot on their fiddle, and their fiddle strings, Thou art my Musick. -- Hoyday, here's a Morice.
You see we swet to make your Worship merry. How doe you like our pastime?
I like it so well, I could wish you were furder off with't.
Have we this for our kindnesse Sir?
Mary, come up Sir.
Nay, there's no talking to e'm. Come, in the heat, and height, of all her kindnesse!
Shall I entreat you, Leave the Roome?
The Roome!
So she sed: but I know shee meanes no such matter, -- onely a trick: Tell her, you wonnot goe.
Pray leave the Roome.
We wonnot.
Wonnot?
No.
Wee were sent for in; and wee wonot goe out agen yet.
An your Knighthood were --
-- An 1000 pounds purchase.
Hoyday, they'l bayt me, -- and they wonot I must.
Out? -- Marry gip there, ne'r a good inch of a thousand. -- Fidler, strike. I strike you else; -- and cut your begging bowstrings.
I must be gone I see: these miserably impudent stallions -- Do but remember me, as I shall thee; -- and -- Nothing greeves me, -- but --
But what Sir?
That, -- we cannot kisse at parting --
Come, -- wee'll een have the tother Bout, -- and then. --
Nay, wee'll no more at this time there's enough.
For you: -- But 'tis not enough for me then: You shall command us, shall you?
Nay, be not angry Sister: 'Tis no command, but my entreat: -- Good Sister.
Well, since you entreat me, and seem to know your betters, -- you shall have your will, for once. -- Fid. lead the way; -- and Wenches follow your Leader.
Leader. -- An scolding were fighting, what a Leader wouldst thou be? -- Thoudst bring 'em on, with a pouder. O Father, Father.
Ne'r a wise word, for a wager. -- Sirgone I see.
Yes Sir, he is.
And how do'st find him Girle? I doe not think The man, that thy suspition seem'd to make him.
You have a good opinion of him Father, And, I'll not stand to crosse it.
Nay, nay, come; In plaine termes, tell me how didst find him? -- ha?
As good conceal't, and languish, as reveal't, And find no comfort.
Th'art a pertish thing: And -- I'm afraid, have beene distastfull to him: I'm halfe afraid on't Girle: -- we must be wise; By's frown we fall Wench; by his favours rise.
Distilling still, salt water to deface That Master-peece of Nature? -- Can the heart Thus feast it selfe, upon the Baine of hearts? For such is griefe sweet Lady.
Good enough, To make this flesh as my dead Husbands is, A banquet to corruption.
Still that Note? Touch onely that dull string of death?
When life Would willingly exchange it selfe with Death, What Musick sweeter?
I must tell you Lady, I thought the Musick of your Husbands end, Those heavenly Notes he entertain'd it with, Taught him by Angels, had instructed you, To looke upon that Being that he has, As hee's a glorious Chorister with them! And not upon that Burden of the flesh Left in the Grave behind him. -- Or at least, Not so, to looke upon your Husband dead, As thus, to dye your selfe. For what is't, while Of Lifes best hopes, you shall your Life deprive, But what I tell you? -- to be dead, alive.
Sir, as I am, pray leave me.
Only so? -- Out-ryvald by the dead.
To me hee lives: And in so vive a figure, every houre's Presented to me, that I feele no lesse Command o're my affections in that shape; Nor lesse Attraction of my duty to it, Then when he had that heat, gave all those parts, That now lye uselesse, their peculiar motion. Nay, so that shapes imprest upon my soule, That he appeares so really mine owne,As, all the embraces of a second Match Would stick upon me, like the leaprous staines Of Lust, and base Adultry. In a word, That figure fills this bosome: -- And in this Pray understand the vainenesse of your suit, And so, conclude it.
This command upon it, It dies, though I dye with it. -- Yet thus much Lady, I have not, in this eagernesse of Suit, Pursued, what's yours, But you. -- The gifts of Fortune; The state your birth allowed you, or th'addition, By your lost husband, left you; But the indowments Of your faire soule, -- your vertues, -- And of those The amplest Dower, (I cannot flatter here) Beauty was ever blest withall! These Lady Have beene the object of my Love.
A Love, That, could I love, I should ee'n dote upon; And in a Title, farre beneath your owne, Prefer't, above all Title; though it came Roab'd in the state of Princes. -- But --
No more. I have my answer, and am married.
Married!
As you are Madam; never to be married: Be that the witnesse of my Love.
Admir'd! I should not be a woman, should I not Love such a Love as this is!
Doe you Lady? Then, I revoke that Vow, and dare embrace you.
But understand me Sir; I love your Love: And -- as your selfe, have pleas'd to speak of me Those singular Vertues, it is built upon: That, I am fixt on; with that estimate, That, next the memory of my dead husband, It shall be my best comfort. -- Thus I love you;But, must not marrye.
I ha' done. -- Yet Lady In this; -- this purest, Imateriall things There may be made a contract; and the assurance Of such a Love, as this is, Interchang'd And fairelie seald betweene vs.
Sir, how meane you?
Fair'st, you have vowed your widowhood to the grave, At least, you have so protested: yet because Our hearts, and purposes, are not our owne; And, that no Bosome has that Constancie, But Heav'ns may alter, the resolve it has, And make it follow, what it fled; -- it may. My Love Petitions, that if ere hereafter, You find that alteration, in your soule, And againe Fancie Wedlocke, -- I -- your servant, May - for that second hapinesse to heaven, Stand fair'st in your Election.
Pray no more.
Give my request an answer: -- If you doe.
A fruitlesse promise: and suppose it made, This would but --
What? -- I vnderstand you Lady. It shall not make me bolder, in my suite; Nor prompt my love, in any treacherous way To gaine, what it so followes. -- No; I know The man, would basely, compasse such a Ioy, Like him that fishes with a poyson'd Bayte, Infects the meat should feed him. -- fair'st, I wo'not; Nor vex you with one syllable; but Live, Vowed, like your selfe, till such a change shall be To amorous Language, silent. -- Is it graunted? If my best thoughts merit but this, expresse it
That satisfaction take. -- If ere I Marry It shall be you; so helpe me heav'n.
To which I am rapt in this sweete tone. -- If ere I knowThe sweetes of Hymen, I must find 'em here; So helpe me heav'n! -- So, we are maried now: And in this Ioy I leave you.
What Sir? going As we are entring?
Does your Lady, drive you hence with a frowne?
My smiles may tell you, here has bin no frowning. Shee's faire and noble; and in these sweet hopes, That she has given me, I am pleased.
'Tis well.
A vengeance of all morrice dauncers I am sure, they h'a mar'd, my dancing: that delicate dance That I should have had with my tenant.
All Ioy be with you Ladies; I must leave you.
Here's a rub in your way a while, my brave Knight, of a 1000.. And how do'st find her? -- is she comming? ha?
You see my hopes set smiles upon my cheeke, Let them resolve you sir.
I vnderstand you: Why? god a mercy sister: when's the day?
Nay, question that no farther, we shall talk on't.
When a things done, 'tis done.
You'd faine be doing to then.
Wo'd I not? Do you think I am all dead flesh? -- I warrant you.
Now? -- what good tidings now sir?
My newes is, worthie sir, thatThat stout sea Captaine, is return'd from sea: Is come to London, and that yesterday He was upon th' Exchange.
That Gentleman: -- and but this morning Lady, He was seene at the Phaenix, in fleet-street.
Body o' me I should have told you so -- but, I Have such a Memory -- !
How i'st? -- ha? -- you lose colour Madam.
Lady.
Sister
Beshrew the name, and owner of that name That has disturbed you. -- whats that name to you?
Sir, nothing but my trouble.
A troublesome Captaine indeed sir, A suytor once, in her virgin dayes And Rivall to her husband, Sir. But, mis'd the marke he aymed at -- he shot faire; Butfairer. -- upon which, SirHe went to sea; where having bin three yeares, And now Returning, hearing, (as it seemes) That she's a widow, hee'd renew his suite, Give her a broad-side sir, and boord her! Nay Yave a hot Ryvall, I can tell you that. One that will Quarrel; -- fight -- and -- by my say -- I'm halfe afraid of danger.
If he be not, All valour, and no judgement, I feare none; And yet, that heate, that has not judgement with it, Cannot be counted valour, but a rash Unknowing wildnesse, -- which I wo'not thinke Him guilty of; -- But whatsoe'r he be, I'll be, but what becomes me.
Leave the Roome.
Good truth now, but you shall not.
Leave the Roome? -- What feare you Lady?
I have cause enough, For hee'll but trouble me with that, heaven knowes I have no mind to heare of.
If he have No power upon you Lady by some promise, Formerly past betweene you --
I had never, That unprepar'dnesse in me, to doe that In cause of such a Consequence as this, And breake it sir.
Such Beauty, and untruthWere ne're companions: 'tis beleev'd.
Come, come, It may be, some new Beautie has him now: Some Forraigne Mistris.
Or, it may be sister, This time of service in the warres, had made him Onely in love, with fighting.
More vexation?
This Mountaine, bring forth a Mouse! Have we talk'd all this while of a Captaine, And now, must be troubled, with Coxcombs?
The gods, protect you Lady.
Thanke you sir.
I spoake to that sweet Beauty.
But I must speake to you sir; for you see she has other imployment, Pray, stand aside a little.
If I must -- I shall attend her leasure.
You must attend her too sir: -- doe you not see, shee's busie?
I would not interrupt her.
I would not interrupt her? -- Is that the resolution of a Lover? Let me come to her.
But, you shall not sir.
Why? if I shall not sir, -- I wo'not sir.
Is that the resolution of a Lover?
A man can do, no more then a can do, But, an my father would but dye once!
Make nyce to me of entrance? Where's the Widow? For so I heare shee's now: what mourning still? I'm a bold gamester: -- Save you all at once, All suiters Gentlemen?
Yes indeed sir; we are all suitors.
Y'are a little too rash in that sir; I am none.
And, what, are you sir?
Why sir, -- I am, -- a Citizen, and a Mercer.
A Citizen, and a Mercer, -- Cheapside?
No Captain; -- but he's perfect in his Pater noster.
One of that row? -- I know't sir.
Not very farre from it: -- In Creed sir.
Does he beleeve? that's seldome found in a Broker.
How sir, -- a Broker?
I know you, by this wheele. -- you have a great many Bags, and a great many buildings to sir. -- But, dare you for all that, presume in the way of Matrimonie, to looke so high as a Lady?
He that can purchase a Lordship --
Thinks, he may purchase a Ladiship: -- you my Rivall? Can you fight sir?
It may be I, it may be no sir.
Then I'le try, whether you can or no sir. Not a word, as you love your Coxcombe.
Nay, let him alone; let him alone, I beseech you, For hitherto he has done but Justice.
Are you a Suiter too sir?
Too sir?
Y'are an Asse sir: -- Can you fight?
Fight? in a Ladyes chamber?
Why, where would you fight sir?
Why, the truth on't is; -- I would -- fight, -- no where.
Why, I thought as much; -- and therefore, -- I will kick you -- any where; good master outside of a Gentleman; follow your valiant Leader.
You will not kill him, will you?
Ha' you so much Tongue, and nev'r a good Tooth, Madam Fumble!
Fumble, fumble! -- y'are a most --
Peace, an you love your old Carkasse, -- peace.
You bind me to a patience --
Nay, good Sister: -- He does you a great deale a right, And saves me a great deale of labour. For I should have don't, if he had not.
One post support another? -- What are you sir?
Why, -- I am -- a Gentleman. --
Will your Armes beare you out in the Title?
My Legs, shall beare me out sir.
Then -- you wo'not be beat out -- as they were?
-- Beat, I should be very loath to be beaten?
-- good truth, I thinke you would sir.
Doe I looke like one that would be beaten?
An you stay, you must.
Why therefore, -- I meane, -- to be gone sir. -- But -- If my father, -- would but dye once. --<|endoftext|>Pray, Sister, where are the best Fields and Woods, to walk in in?
A pretty Question; why, Sister!, and St.; and for close walks the.
Pray, Sister, tell me why my Husband looks so grum here in Town? and keeps me up so close, and will not let me go a walking, nor let me wear my best Gown yesterday?
O he's jealous, Sister.
Jealous, what's that?
He's afraid you shou'd love another Man.
How shou'd he be afraid of my loving another man, when he will not let me see any but himself.
Did he not carry you yesterday to a Play?
Ay, but we sate amongst ugly People, he wou'd not let me come near the Gentry, who sate under us, so that I cou'd not see'em: He told me, none but naughty Women sate there, whom they tous'd and mous'd; but I wou'd have ventur'd for all that.
But how did you like the Play?
Indeed I was aweary of the Play, but I lik'd hugeously the Actors; they are the goodlyest proper'st Men, Sister.
O but you must not like the Actors, Sister.
Ay, how shou'd I help it, Sister? Pray, Sister, when my Husband comes in, will you ask leave for me to go a walking?
A walking, hah, ha; Lord, a Country Gentlewomans leasure is the drudgery of a foot-post; and she requires as much airing as her Husbands Horses.
But here comes your Husband; I'll ask, though I'm sure he'l not grant it.
He says he won't let me go abroad, for fear of catching the Pox.
Fye, the small Pox you shou'd say.
Oh my dear, dear Bud, welcome home; why dost thou look so fropish, who has nanger'd thee?
Your a Fool.
Faith so she is, for crying for no fault, poor tender Creature!
What you wou'd have her as impudent as your self, as errant a Jilflirt, a gadder, a Magpy, and to say all a meer notorious Town-Woman?
Brother, you are my only Censurer; and the honour of your Family shall sooner suffer in your Wife there, than in me, though I take the innocent liberty of the Town.
Hark you Mistriss, do not talk so before my Wife, the innocent liberty of the Town!
Why, pray, who boasts of any intrigue with me? what Lampoon has made my name notorious? what ill Women frequent my Lodgings? I keep no Company with any Women of scandalous reputations.
No, you keep the Men of scandalous reputations Company.
Where? wou'd you not have me civil? answer'em in a Box at the Plays? in the drawing room at? in St.?? or --
Hold, hold, do not teach my Wife, where the Men are to be found; I believe she's the worse for your Towndocuments already; I bid you keep her in ignorance as I do.
Indeed be not angry with her Bud, she will tell me nothing of the Town, though I ask her a thousand times a day.
Then you are very inquisitive to know, I find?
Not I indeed, Dear, I hate; our Place-house in the Country is worth a thousand of't, wou'd I were there again.
So you shall I warrant; but were you not talking of Plays, and Players, when I came in? you are her encourager in such discourses.
No indeed, Dear, she chid me just now for liking the Player Men.
Nay, if she be so innocent as to own to me her liking them, there is no hurt in't --
Come my poor Rogue, but thou lik'st none better then me?
Yes indeed, but I do, the Player Men are finer Folks.
But you love none better then me?
You are mine own Dear Bud, and I know you, I hate a Stranger.
Ay, my Dear, you must love me only, and not be like the naughty Town Women, who only hate their Husbands, and love every Man else, love Plays, Visits, fine Coaches, fine Cloaths, Fidles, Balls, Treates, and so lead a wicked Town-life.
Nay, if to enjoy all these things be a Town-life,is not so bad a place, Dear.
How! if you love me, you must hate.
The Fool has forbid me discovering to her the pleasures of the Town, and he is now setting her a gog upon them himself.
But, Husband, do the Town-women love the Player Men too?
Yes, I warrant you.
Ay, I warrant you.
Why, you do not, I hope?
No, no, Bud; but why have we no Player-men in the Country?
Ha -- Mrs. Minx, ask me no more to go to a Play.
Nay, why, Love? I did not care for going; but when you forbid me, you make me as't were desire it.
So 'twill be in other things, I warrant.
Pray, let me go to a Play, Dear.
Hold your Peace, I wo'not.
Why, Love?
Why, I'll tell you.
Nay, if he tell her, she'l give him more cause to forbid her that place.
Pray, why, Dear?
First, you like the Actors, and the Gallants may like you.
What, a homely Country Girl? no Bud, no body will like me.
I tell you, yes, they may.
No, no, you jest -- I won't believe you, I will go.
I tell you then, that one of the lewdest Fellows in Town, who saw you there, told me he was in love with you.
Indeed! who, who, pray who wast?
I've gone too far, and slipt before I was aware; how overjoy'd she is!
Was it anyGallant, any of our Neighbours? I promise you, I am beholding to him.
I promise you, you lye; for he wou'd but ruin you, as he has done hundreds: he has no other love for Women, but that, such as he, look upon Women like Basilicks, but to destroy'em.
Ay, but if he loves me, why shou'd he ruin me? answer me to that: methinks he shou'd not, I wou'd do him no harm.
Hah, ha, ha.
'Tis very well: but I'll keep him from doing you any harm, or me either.
But here comes Company, get you in, get you in.
But pray, Husband, is he a pretty Gentleman, that loves me?
In baggage, in.
What all the lewd Libertines of the Town brought to my Lodging, by this easie Coxcomb! S'death I'll not suffer it.
Here, do you approve my choice? Dear, little Rogue, I told you, I'd bring you acquainted with all my Friends, the wits, and --
Ay, they shall know her, as well as you your self will, I warrant you.
This is one of those, my pretty Rogue, that are to dance at your Wedding to morrow; and him you must bid welcom ever, to what you and I have.
Monstrous! --
how dost thou like her, Faith? Nay, Dear, do not look down; I should hate to have a Wife of mine out of countenance at any thing.
Wonderful!
Tell me, I say,, how dost thou like her? thou hast star'd upon her enough, to resolve me.
So infinitely well, that I cou'd wish I had a Mistriss too, that might differ from her in nothing, but her love and engagement to you.
Sir, Masterhas often told me, that his Acquaintance were all Wits and Raillieurs, and now I find it.
No, by the Universe, Madam, he does not railly now; you may believe him: I do assure you, he is the honestest, worthyest, true hearted Gentleman -- A man of such perfect honour, he wou'd say nothing to a Lady, he does not mean.
Praising another Man to his Mistriss!
Sir, you are so beyond expectation obliging, that --
Nay, I gad, I am sure you do admire her extreamly, I see't in your eyes. -- He does admire you Madam. -- By the World, don't you?
Yes, above the World, or, the most glorious part of it, her whole Sex; and till now I never thought I shou'd have envy'd you, or any Man about to marry, but you have the best excuse for Marriage I ever knew.
Nay, now, Sir, I'm satisfied you are of the Society of the Wits, and Raillieurs, since you cannot spare your Friend, even when he is but too civil to you; but the surest sign is, since you are an Enemy to Marriage, for that I hear you hate as much as business or bad Wine.
Truly, Madam, I never was an Enemy to Marriage, till now, because Marriage was never an Enemy to me before.
But why, Sir, is Marriage an Enemy to you now? Because it robs you of your Friend here; for you look upon a Friend married, as one gone into a Monastery, that is dead to the World.
'Tis indeed, because you marry him; I see Madam, you can guess my meaning: I do confess heartily and openly, I wish it were in my power to break the Match, by Heavens I wou'd.
Poor!
Wou'd you be so unkind to me?
No, no, 'tis not because I wou'd be unkind to you.
Poor, no gad, 'tis only his kindness to me.
Great kindness to you indeed; insensible Fop, let a Man make love to his Wife to his face.
Come dear, for all my Wife there that shall be, thou shalt enjoy me sometimes dear Rogue; by my honour, we Men of wit condole for our deceased Brother in Marriage, as much as for one dead in earnest: I think that was prettily said of me, ha? -- But come, be not melancholy for me.
No, I assure you I am not melancholy for you.
Prethee,, dost think my Wife that shall be there a fine Person?
I cou'd gaze upon her, till I became as blind as you are.
How, as I am! how!
Because you are a Lover, and true Lovers are blind, stockblind.
True, true; but by the World, she has wit too, as well as beauty: go, go with her into a corner, and trye if she has wit, talk to her any thing, she's bashful before me.
Indeed if a Woman wants wit in a corner, she has it no where.
Sir, you dispose of me a little before your time. --
Nay, nay, Madam let me have an earnest of your obedience, or -- go, go, Madam --
How, Sir, if you are not concern'd for the honour of a VVife, I am for that of a Sister; he shall not debauch her: be a Pander to your own VVife, bring Men to her, let'em make love before your face, thrust'em into a corner together, then leav'em in private! is this your Town wit and conduct?
Hah, ha, ha, a silly wise Rogue, wou'd make one laugh more then a stark Fool, hah, ha: I shall burst. Nay, you shall not disturb'em; I'll vex thee, by the World.
The writings are drawn, Sir, settlements made; 'tis too late, Sir, and past all revocation.
Then so is my death.
I wou'd not be unjust to him.
Then why to me so?
I have no obligation to you.
My love.
I had his before.
You never had it; he wants you see jealousie, the only infallible sign of it.
Love proceeds from esteem; he cannot distrust my virtue, besides he loves me, or he wou'd not marry me.
Marrying you, is no more sign of his love, then bribing your Woman, that he may marry you, is a sign of his generosity: Marriage is rather a sign of interest, then love; and he that marries a fortune, covets a Mistress, not lovesher: But if you take Marriage for a sign of love, take it from me immediately.
No, now you have put a scruple in my head; but in short, Sir, to end our dispute, I must marry him, my reputation wou'd suffer in the World else.
No, if you do marry him, with your pardon, Madam, your reputation suffers in the World, and you wou'd be thought in necessity for a cloak.
Nay, now you are rude, Sir. -- Mr., pray come hither, your Friend here is very troublesom, and very loving.
Hold, hold --
D'ye hear that?
Why, d'ye think I'll seem to be jealous, like a Country Bumpkin?
No, rather be a Cuckold, like a credulous Cit.
Madam, you wou'd not have been so little generous as to have told him.
Yes, since you cou'd be so little generous, as to wrong him.
Wrong him, no Man can do't, he's beneath an injury; a Bubble, a Coward, a sensless Idiot, a Wretch so contemptible to all the World but you, that --
Hold, do not rail at him, for since he is like to be my Husband, I am resolv'd to like him: Nay, I think I am oblig'd to tell him, you are not his Friend. -- Master, Master.
What, what; now dear Rogue, has not she wit?
Not so much as I thought, and hoped she had.
Mr., do you bring People to rail at you?
Madam --
How! no, but if he does rail at me, 'tis but in jest I warrant; what we wits do for one another, and never take any notice of it.
He spoke so scurrilously of you, I had no patience to hear him; besides he has been making love to me.
True damn'd tell-tale-Woman.
Pshaw, to shew his parts -- we wits rail and make love often, but to shew our parts; as we have no affections, so we have no malice, we --
He said, you were a Wretch, below an injury.
Pshaw.
Damn'd, sensless, impudent, virtuous Jade; well since she won't let me have her, she'l do as good, she'l make me hate her.
A Common Bubble.
Pshaw.
A Coward.
Pshaw, pshaw.
A sensless driveling Idiot.
How, did he disparage my parts? Nay, then my honour's concern'd, I can't put up that, Sir; by the World, Brother help me to kill him; (I may draw now, since we have the odds of him: -- 'tis a good occasion too before my Mistriss) --
Hold, hold.
What, what.
I must not let'em kill the Gentleman neither, for his kindness to me; I am so far from hating him, that I wish my Gallant had his person and understanding: -- (Nay if my honour --
I'll be thy death.
Hold, hold, indeed to tell the truth, the Gentleman said after all, that what he spoke, was but out of friendship to you.
How! say, I am, I am a Fool, that is not wit, out of friendship to me.
Yes, to try whether I was concern'd enough for you, and made love to me only to be satisfy'd of my virtue, for your sake.
Kind however --
Nay, if it were so, my dear Rogue, I ask theepardon; but why wou'd not you tell me so, faith.
Because I did not think on't, faith.
Come,does not come,, let's be gone to the new Play. -- Come Madam.
I will not go, if you intend to leave me alone in the Box, and run into the pit, as you use to do.
Pshaw, I'll leavewith you in the Box, to entertain you, and that's as good; if I sate in the Box, I shou'd be thought no Judge, but of trimmings. -- Come away, lead her down.
Well, go thy wayes, for the flower of the true Town Fops, such as spend their Estates, before they come to'em, and are Cuckolds before they'r married. But let me go look to my own Free-hold -- How --
Your Servant, Sir, where is your Lady? we are come to wait upon her to the new Play.
New Play!
And my Husband will wait upon you presently.
Damn your civility --
Madam, by no means, I will not see Sirhere, till I have waited upon him at home; nor shall my Wife see you, till she has waited upon your Ladyship at your lodgings.
Now we are here, Sir --
No, Madam.
Pray, let us see her.
We will not stir, till we see her.
A Pox on you all --
she has lock'd the door, and is gone abroad.
No, you have lock'd the door, and she's within.
They told us below, she was here.
(Will nothing do?) -- Well it must out then, to tell you the truth, Ladies, which I was afraid to let you know before, least it might endanger your lives, my Wife has just now the Small Pox come out upon her, do not be frighten'd;but pray, be gone Ladies, you shall not stay here in danger of your lives; pray get you gone Ladies.
No, no, we have all had'em.
Alack, alack.
Come, come, we must see how it goes with her, I understand the disease.
Come.
Well, there is no being too hard for Women at their own weapon, lying, therefore I'll quit the Field.
Here's an example of jealousy.
Indeed as the World goes, I wonder there are no more jealous, since Wives are so neglected.
Pshaw, as the World goes, to what end shou'd they be jealous.
Foh, 'tis a nasty World.
That Men of parts, great acquaintance, and quality shou'd take up with, and spend themselves and fortunes, in keeping little Play-house Creatures, foh.
Nay, that Women of understanding, great acquaintance, and good quality, shou'd fall a keeping too of little Creatures, foh.
Why, 'tis the Men of qualities fault, they never visit Women of honour, and reputation, as they us'd to do; and have not so much as common civility, for Ladies of our rank, but use us with the same indifferency, and ill breeding, as if we were all marry'd to'em.
She says true, 'tis an errant shame Women of quality shou'd be so slighted; methinks, birth, birth, shou'd go for something; I have known Men admired, courted, and followed for their titles only.
Ay, one wou'd think Men of honour shou'd not love no more, than marry out of their own rank.
Fye, fye upon'em, they are come to think cross breeding for themselves best, as well as for their Dogs, and Horses.
They are Dogs, and Horses for't.
One wou'd think if not for love, for vanity a little.
Nay, they do satisfy their vanity upon us sometimes; and are kind to us in their report, tell all the World they lye with us.
Damn'd Rascals, that we shou'd be only wrong'd by'em; to report a Man has had a Person, when he has not had a Person, is the greatest wrong in the whole World, that can be done to a person.
Well, 'tis an errant shame, Noble Persons shou'd be so wrong'd, and neglected.
But still 'tis an erranter shame for a Noble Person, to neglect her own honour, and defame her own Noble Person, with little inconsiderable Fellows, foh! --
I suppose the crime against our honour, is the same with a Man of quality as with another.
How! no sure the Man of quality is likest one's Husband, and therefore the fault shou'd be the less.
But then the pleasure shou'd be the less.
Fye, fye, fye, for shame Sister, whither shall we ramble? be continent in your discourse, or I shall hate you.
Besides an intrigue is so much the more notorious for the man's quality.
'Tis true, no body takes notice of a private Man, and therefore with him, 'tis more secret, and the crime's the less, when 'tis not known.
You say true; y faith I think you are in the right on't: 'tis not an injury to a Husband, till it be an injury to our honours; so that a Woman of honour looses no honour with a private Person; and to say truth --
So the little Fellow is grown a private Person -- with her --
But still my dear, dear Honour.
Ay, my dear, dear of honour, thou hast still so much honour in thy mouth --
That she has none elsewhere --
Oh, what d'ye mean to bring in these upon us?
Foh, these are as bad as Wits.
Foh!
Let us leave the Room.
Stay, stay, faith to tell you the naked truth.
Fye, Sir, do not use that word naked.
Well, well, in short I have business at, and cannot go to the play with you, therefore wou'd have you go --
With those two to a Play?
No, not with t'other, but with Mr., there can be no more scandal to go with him, than with Mr., or Master.
With that nasty Fellow! no -- no.
Nay, prethee Dear, hear me.
Ladies.
Stand off.
Do not approach us.
You heard with the wits, you are obscenity all over.
And I wou'd as soon look upon a Picture ofand, without fig leaves, as any of you, if I cou'd help it, therefore keep off, and do not make us sick.
What a Divel are these?
Why, these are pretenders to honour, as criticks to wit, only by censuring others; and as every raw peevish, out-of-humour'd, affected, dull, Tea-drinking, Arithmetical Fop sets up for a wit, by railing at men of sence, so these for honour, by railing at the Court, and Ladies of as great honour, as quality.
Come, Mr., I must desire you to go with these Ladies to the Play, Sir.
I! Sir.
Ay, ay, come, Sir.
I must beg your pardon, Sir, and theirs, I will not be seen in Womens Company in publick again for the World.
Ha, ha, strange Aversion!
No, he's for Womens company in private.
He -- poor Man - he! hah, ha, ha.
'Tis a greater shame amongst lew'd fellows to beseen in virtuous Womens company, than for the Women to be seen with them.
Indeed, Madam, the time was I only hated virtuous Women, but now I hate the other too; I beg your pardon Ladies.
You are very obliging, Sir, because we wou'd not be troubled with you.
In sober sadness he shall go.
Nay, if he wo'not, I am ready to wait upon the Ladies; and I think I am the fitter Man.
You, Sir, no I thank you for that -- Masteris a privileg'd Man amongst the virtuous Ladies, 'twill be a great while before you are so; heh, he, he, he's my Wive's Gallant, heh, he, he; no pray withdraw, Sir, for as I take it, the virtuous Ladies have no business with you.
And I am sure, he can have none with them: 'tis strange a Man can't come amongst virtuous Women now, but upon the same terms, as Men are admitted into the great Turks Seraglio; but Heavens keep me, from being an hombre Player with'em: but where is--
Come, come, Man; what avoid the sweet society of Woman-kind? that sweet, soft, gentle, tame, noble Creature Woman, made for Man's Companion --
So is that soft, gentle, tame, and more noble Creature a Spaniel, and has all their tricks, can fawn, lye down, suffer beating, and fawn the more; barks at your Friends, when they come to see you; makes your bed hard, gives you Fleas, and the mange sometimes: and all the difference is, the Spaniel's the more faithful Animal, and fawns but upon one Master.
Heh, he, he.
O the rude Beast.
Insolent brute.
Brute! stinking mortify'd rotten French Weather, to dare --
Hold, an't please your Ladyship; for shame Master,your Mother was a Woman -- (Now shall I never reconcile'em)
Hark you, Madam, take my advice in your anger; you know you often want one to make up your droling pack of hombre Players; and you may cheat him easily, for he's an ill Gamester, and consequently loves play: Besides you know, you have but two old civil Gentlemen (with stinking breaths too) to wait upon you abroad, take in the third, into your service; the other are but crazy: and a Lady shou'd have a supernumerary Gentleman-Usher, as a supernumerary Coach-horse, least sometimes you shou'd be forc'd to stay at home.
But are you sure he loves play, and has money?
He loves play as much as you, and has money as much as I.
Then I am contented to make him pay for his scurrillity; money makes up in a measure all other wants in Men. -- Those whom we cannot make hold for Gallants, we make fine.
So, so; now to mollify, to wheedle him, --
Masterwill you never keep civil Company, methinks 'tis time now, since you are only fit for them: Come, come, Man you must e'en fall to visiting our Wives, eating at our Tables, drinking Tea with our virtuous Relations after dinner, dealing Cards to'em, reading Plays, and Gazets to'em, picking Fleas out of their shocks for'em, collecting Receipts, New Songs, Women, Pages, and Footmen for'em.
I hope they'l afford me better employment, Sir.
Heh, he, he, 'tis fit you know your work before you come into your place; and since you are unprovided of a Lady to flatter, and a good house to eat at, pray frequent mine, and call my Wife Mistriss, and she shall call you Gallant, according to the custom.
Who I? --
Faith, thou sha't for my sake, come for my sake only.
For your sake --
Come, come, here's a Gamester for you, let himbe a little familiar sometimes; nay, what if a little rude; Gamesters may be rude with Ladies, you know.
Yes, losing Gamesters have a privilege with Women.
I alwayes thought the contrary, that the winning Gamester had most privilege with Women, for when you have lost your money to a Man, you'l loose any thing you have, all you have, they say, and he may use you as he pleases.
Heh, he, he, well, win or loose you shall have your liberty with her.
As he behaves himself; and for your sake I'll give him admittance and freedom.
All sorts of freedom, Madam?
Ay, ay, ay, all sorts of freedom thou can'st take, and so go to her, begin thy new employment; wheedle her, jest with her, and be better acquainted one with another.
I think I know her already, therefore may venter with her, my secret for hers --
Sister, I have provided an innocent Play-fellow for you there.
Who he!
There's a Play-fellow indeed.
Yes sure, what he is good enough to play at Cards, Blind-mans buff, or the fool with sometimes.
Foh, we'l have no such Play-fellows.
No, Sir, you shan't choose Play-fellows for us, we thank you.
Nay, pray hear me.
But, poor Gentleman, cou'd you be so generous? so truly a Man of honour, as for the sakes of us Women of honour, to cause your self to be reported no Man? No Man! and to suffer your self the greatest shame that cou'd fall upon a Man, that none might fall upon us Women by your conversation; but indeed, Sir, as perfectly, perfectly, the same Man as before your going into, Sir; as perfectly, perfectly, Sir.
As perfectly, perfectly, Madam; nay, I scorn you shou'd take my word; I desire to be try'd only, Madam.
Well, that's spoken again like a Man of honour, all Men of honour desire to come to the test: But indeed, generally you Men report such things of your selves, one does not know how, or whom to believe; and it is come to that pass, we dare not take your words, no more than your Taylors, without some staid Servant of yours be bound with you; but I have so strong a faith in your honour, dear, dear, noble Sir, that I'd forfeit mine for yours at any time, dear Sir.
No, Madam, you shou'd not need to forfeit it for me, I have given you security already to save you harmless my late reputation being so well known in the World, Madam.
But if upon any future falling out, or upon a suspition of my taking the trust out of your hands, to employ some other, you your self shou'd betray your trust, dear Sir; I mean, if you'l give me leave to speak obscenely, you might tell, dear Sir.
If I did, no body wou'd believe me; the reputation of impotency is as hardly recover'd again in the World, as that of cowardise, dear Madam.
Nay then, as one may say, you may do your worst, dear, dear, Sir.
Come, is your Ladyship reconciled to him yet? have you agreed on matters? for I must be gone to.
Why, indeed, Sir, Masteris a thousand, thousand times a better Man, than I thought him: Cosen, Sister, I can name him now, truly not long ago you know, I thought his very name obscenity, and I wou'd as soon have lain with him, as have nam'd him.
Very likely, poor Madam.
I believe it.
No doubt on't.
Well, well -- that your Ladyship is as virtuous as any she, -- I know, and him all the Town knows -- heh, he,he; therefore now you like him, get you gone to your business together; go, go, to your business, I say, pleasure, whilst I go to my pleasure, business.
Come than dear Gallant.
Come away, my dearest Mistriss.
So, so, why 'tis as I'd have it.
And as I'd have it.
Sister, what ailes you, you are grown melancholy?
Wou'd it not make any one melancholy, to see you go every day fluttering about abroad, whil'st I must stay at home like a poor lonely, sullen Bird in a cage?
Ay, Sister, but you came young, and just from the nest to your cage, so that I thought you lik'd it; and cou'd be as chearful in't, as others that took their flight themselves early, and are hopping abroad in the open Air.
Nay, I confess I was quiet enough, till my Husband told me, what pure lives, theLadies live abroad, with their dancing, meetings, and junketings, and drest every day in their best gowns; and I warrant you, play at nine Pins every day of the week, so they do.
Come, what's here to do? you are putting the Town pleasures in her head, and setting her a longing.
Yes, after Nine-pins; you suffer none to give her those longings, you mean, but your self.
I tell her of the vanities of the Town like a Confessor.
A Confessor! just such a Confessor, as he that by forbidding a silly Oastler to grease the Horses teeth, taught him to do't.
Come Mistriss, good Precepts are lost, when bad Examples are still before us; the liberty you take abroad makes her hanker after it; and out of humour at home, poor Wretch! she desired not to come to, I wou'd bring her.
Very well.
She has been this week in Town, and never desired, till this afternoon, to go abroad.
Was she not at a Play yesterday?
Yes, but she ne'er ask'd me; I was my self the cause of her going.
Then if she ask you again, you are the cause of her asking, and not my example.
Well, to morrow night I shall be rid of you; and the next day before 'tis light, she and I'll be rid of the Town, and my dreadful apprehensions: Come, be not melancholly, for thou sha't go into the Country after to morrow, Dearest.
Great comfort.
Pish, what d'ye tell me of the Country for?
How's this! what, pish at the Country?
Let me alone, I am not well.
O, if that be all -- what ailes my dearest?
Truly I don't know; but I have not been well, since you told me there was a Gallant at the Play in love with me.
Ha --
That's by my example too.
Nay, if you are not well, but are so concern'd. because a lew'd Fellow chanc'd to lye, and say he lik'd you, you'l make me sick too.
Of what sickness?
O, of that which is worse than the Plague, Jealousy.
Pish, you jear, I'm sure there's no such disease in our Receipt-book at home.
No, thou never met'st with it, poor Innocent -- well, if thou Cuckold me, 'twill be my own fault -- for Cuckolds and Bastards, are generally makers of their own fortune.
Well, but pray Bud, let's go to a Play to night.
'Tis just done, she comes from it; but why are you so eager to see a Play?
Faith Dear, not that I care one pin for their talk there; but I like to look upon the Player-men, and wou'd see, if I cou'd, the Gallant you say loves me; that's all dear Bud.
Is that all dear Bud?
This proceeds from my example.
But if the Play be done, let's go abroad however, dear Bud.
Come have a little patience, and thou shalt go into the Country on Friday.
Therefore I wou'd see first some sights, to tell my Neighbours of. Nay, I will go abroad, that's once.
I'm the cause of this desire too.
But now I think on't, who was the cause ofcoming to my Lodging to day? that was you.
No, you, because you wou'd not let him see your handsome Wife out of your Lodging.
Why, O Lord! did the Gentleman come hither to see me indeed?
No, no; -- You are not cause of that damn'd question too, Mistriss? -- (Well she's in the right of it; he is in love with my Wife -- and comes after her -- 'tis so -- but I'll nip his love in the bud; least he should follow us into the Country, and break his Chariot-wheel near our house, on purpose for an excuse to come to't; but I think I know the Town.
Come, pray Bud, let's go abroad before 'tis late; for I will go, that's flat and plain.
So! the obstinacy already of a Town-wife, and I must, whilst she's here, humour her like one.
Sister, how shall we do, that she may not be seen, or known?
Let her put on her Mask.
Pshaw, a Mask makes People but the more inquisitive, and is as ridiculous a disguise, as a stage-beard; her shape, stature, habit will be known: and if we shou'd meet with, he wou'd be sure to take acquaintance with us, must wish her joy, kiss her, talk to her, leer upon her, and the Devil and all; no I'll not use her to a Mask, 'tis dangerous; for Masks have made more Cuckolds, than the best faces that ever were known.
How will you do then?
Nay, shall we go? thewill be shut, and I have a mind to see that.
So -- I have it -- I'll dress her up in the Suit, we are to carry down to her Brother, little Sir; nay, I understand the Town tricks: Come let's go dress her; a Mask! no -- a Woman mask'd, like a cover'd Dish, gives a Man curiosity, and appetite, when it may be, uncover'd, 'twou'd turn his stomack; no, no.
Indeed your comparison is something a greasie one: but I had a gentle Gallant, us'd to say, a Beauty mask'd, lik'd the Sun in Eclipse, gathers together more gazers, than if it shin'd out.
Engag'd to Women, and not Sup with us?
Ay, a Pox on'em all.
You were much a more reasonable Man in the morning, and had as noble resolutions against'em, as a Widdower of a weeks liberty.
Did I ever think, to see you keep company with Women in vain.
In vain! no -- 'tis, since I can't love'em, to be reveng'd on'em.
Now your Sting is gone, you look'd in the Box amongst all those Women, like a drone in the hive, all upon you; shov'd and ill-us'd by'em all, and thrust from one side to t'other.
Yet he must be buzzing amongst'em still, like other old beetle-headed, lycorish drones; avoid'em, and hate'em as they hate you.
Because I do hate'em, and wou'd hate'em yet more, I'll frequent'em; you may see by Marriage, nothing makes a Man hate a Woman more, than her constant conversation: In short, I converse with'em, as you do with rich Fools, to laugh at'em, and use'em ill.
But I wou'd no more Sup with Women, unless I cou'd lye with'em, than Sup with a rich Coxcomb, unless I cou'd cheat him.
Yes, I have known thee Sup with a Fool, for his drinking, if he cou'd set out your hand that way only, you were satisfy'd; and if he were a Wine-swallowing mouth 'twas enough.
Yes, a Man drink's often with a Fool, as he tosses with a Marker, only to keep his hand in Ure; but do the Ladies drink?
Yes, Sir, and I shall have the pleasure at least of laying'em flat with a Bottle; and bring as much scandal that way upon'em, as formerly t'other.
Perhaps you may prove as weak a Brother amongst'em that way, as t'other.
Foh, drinking with Women, is as unnatural, as scolding with'em; but 'tis a pleasure of decay'd Fornicators, and the basest way of quenching Love.
Nay, 'tis drowning Love, instead of quenching it; but leave us for civil Women too!
Ay, when he can't be the better for'em; we hardly pardon a Man, that leaves his Friend for a Wench, and that's a pretty lawful call.
Faith, I wou'd not leave you for'em, if they wou'd not drink.
Who wou'd disappoint his Company at, for a Gossiping?
Foh, Wine and Women good apart, together as nauseous as Sack and Sugar: But hark you, Sir, before you go, a little of your advice, an old maim'd General, when unfit for action is fittest for Counsel; I have other designs upon Women, than eating and drinking with them: I am inlove withMistriss, whom he is to marry to morrow, now how shall I get her?
Why, here comes one will help you to her.
He! he, I tell you, is my Rival, and will hinder my love.
No, a foolish Rival, and a jealous Husband assist their Rivals designs; for they are sure to make their Women hate them, which is the first step to their love, for another Man.
But I cannot come near his Mistriss, but in his company.
Still the better for you, for Fools are most easily cheated, when they themselves are accessaries; and he is to be bubled of his Mistriss, as of his Money, the common Mistriss, by keeping him company.
Who is that, that is to be bubled? Faith let me snack, I han't met with a buble since Christmas: gad; I think bubles are like their Brother Woodcocks, go out with the cold weather.
A Pox, he did not hear all I hope.
Come, you bubling Rogues you, where do we sup -- Oh,, my Mistriss tells me, you have been making fierce love to her all the Play long, hah, ha -- but I --
I make love to her?
Nay, I forgive thee; for I think I know thee, and I know her, but I am sure I know my self.
Did she tell you so? I see all Women are like these of the, who to enhance the price of their commodities, report to their fond Customers offers which were never made'em.
Ay, Women are as apt to tell before the intrigue, as Men after it, and so shew themselves the vainer Sex; but hast thou a Mistriss,? 'tis as hard for me to believe it, as that thou ever hadst a buble, as you brag'd just now.
O your Servant, Sir; are you at your raillery, Sir? but we were some of us beforehand with you to day at thePlay: the Wits were something bold with you, Sir: did you not hear us laugh?
Yes, But I thought you had gone to Plays, to laugh at the Poets wit, not at your own.
Your Servant, Sir, no I thank you; gad I go to a Play as to a Country-treat, I carry my own wine to one, and my own wit to t'other, or else I'm sure I shou'd not be merry at either; and the reason why we are so often lowder, than the Players, is, because we think we speak more wit, and so become the Poets Rivals in his audience: for to tell you the truth, we hate the silly Rogues; nay, so much that we find fault even with their Bawdy upon the Stage, whilst we talk nothing else in the Pit as lowd.
But, why should'st thou hate the silly Poets, thou hast too much wit to be one, and they like Whores are only hated by each other; and thou dost scorn writing, I'am sure.
Yes, I'd have you to know, I scorn writing; but Women, Women, that make Men do all foolish things, make'em write Songs too; every body does it: 'tis ev'n as common with Lovers, as playing with fans; and you can no more help Rhyming to your, than drinking to your.
Nay, Poetry in love is no more to be avoided, than jealousy.
But the Poets damn'd your Songs, did they?
Damn the Poets, they turn'd'em into Burlesque, as they call it; that Burlesque is a, they have got, which by the virtue of,, they make a wise and witty Man in the World, a Fool upon the Stage you know not how; and 'tis therefore I hate'em too, for I know not but it may be my own case; for they'l put a Man into a Play for looking a Squint: Their Predecessors were contented to make Serving-men only their Stage-Fools, but these Rogues must have Gentlemen, with a Pox to'em, nay Knights: and indeed you shall hardly see a Fool upon the Stage, but he's a Knight; and to tell you the truth, they have kept me these six years from being a Knight in earnest, for fear of being knighted in a Play, and dubb'd a Fool.
Blame'em not, they must follow their Copy, the Age.
But why should'st thou be afraid of being in a Play, who expose your self every day in the Play-houses, and as publick Places.
'Tis but being on the Stage, instead of standing on a Bench in the Pit.
Don't you give money to Painters to draw you like? and are you afraid of your Pictures, at length in a Play-house, where all your Mistresses may see you.
A Pox, Painters don't draw the Small Pox, or Pimples in ones face; come damn all your silly Authors whatever, all Books and Booksellers, by the World, and all Readers, courteous or uncourteous.
But, who comes here,?
Oh hide me, there's my Mistriss too.
She sees you.
But I will not see her, 'tis time to go to, and I must not fail the drawing Room.
Pray, first carry me, and reconcile me to her.
Another time, faith the King will have sup't.
Not with the worse stomach for thy absence; thou art one of those Fools, that think their attendance at the King's Meals, as necessary as his Physicians, when you are more troublesom to him, than his Doctors, or his Dogs.
Pshaw, I know my interest, Sir, prethee hide me.
Your Servant,, -- what he knows us not --
Come along.
Pray, have you any Ballads, give me six-penny worth?
We have no Ballads.
Then give me, and a Play or two -- Oh here'sWiles, and the Slighted Maiden, I'll have them.
No, Playes are not for your reading; come along, will you discover your self?
Who is that pretty Youth with him,?
I believe his Wife's Brother, because he's something like her, but I never saw her but once.
Extreamly handsom, I have seen a face like it too; let us follow'em.
Come,, your Mistriss saw you, and will be angry you go not to her; besides I wou'd fain be reconcil'd to her, which none but you can do, dear Friend.
Well that's a better reason, dear Friend; I wou'd not go near her now, for her's, or my own sake, but I can deny you nothing; for though I have known thee a great while, never go, if I do not love thee, as well as a new Acquaintance.
I am oblig'd to you indeed, dear Friend, I wou'd be well with her only, to be well with thee still; for these tyes to Wives usually dissolve all tyes to Friends: I wou'd be contented, she shou'd enjoy you a nights, but I wou'd have you to my self a dayes, as I have had, dear Friend.
And thou shalt enjoy me a dayes, dear, dear Friend, never stir; and I'll be divorced from her, sooner than from thee; come along --
So we are hard put to't, when we make our Rival our Procurer; but neither she, nor her Brother, wou'd let me come near her now: when all's done, a Rival is the best cloak to steal to a Mistress under, without suspicion; and when we have once got to her as we desire, we throw him off like other Cloaks.
Sister, if you will not go, we must leave you --
The Fool her Gallant, and she, will muster up all the youngsanterers of this place, and they will leave their dear Seamstresses to follow us; what a swarm of Cuckolds, and Cuckold-makers are here?
Come let's be gone Mistriss.
Don't you believe that, I han't half my belly full of sights yet.
Then walk this way.
Lord, what a power of brave signs are here! stay -- the Bull's-head, the Rams-head, and the Stags-head, Dear --
Nay, if every Husbands proper sign here were visible, they wou'd be all alike.
What d'ye mean by that, Bud?
'Tis no matter -- no matter, Bud.
Pray tell me; nay, I will know.
They wou'd be all Bulls, Stags, and Rams heads.
Come, dear Madam, for my sake you shall be reconciled to him.
For your sake I hate him.
That's something too cruel, Madam, to hate me for his sake.
Ay indeed, Madam, too, too cruel to me, to hate my Friend for my sake.
I hate him because he is your Enemy; and you ought to hate him too, for making love to me, if you love me.
That's a good one, I hate a Man for loving you; if he did love you, 'tis but what he can't help, and 'tis your fault not his, if he admires you: I hate a Man for being of my opinion, I'll ne'er do't, by the World.
Is it for your honour or mine, to suffer a Man to make love to me, who am to marry you to morrow?
Is it for your honour or mine, to have me jealous? That he makes love to you, is a sign you are handsome; and that I am not jealous, is a sign you are virtuous, that I think is for your honour.
But 'tis your honour too, I am concerned for.
But why, dearest Madam, will you be more concern'd for his honour, than he is himself; let his honour alone for my sake, and his, he, he, has no honour --
How's that?
But what, my dear Friend can guard himself.
O ho -- that's right again.
Your care of his honour argues his neglect of it, which is no honour to my dear Friend here; therefore once more, let his honour go which way it will, dear Madam.
Ay, ay, were it for my honour to marry a Woman, whose virtue I suspected, and cou'd not trust her in a Friends hands?
Are you not afraid to loose me?
He afraid to loose you, Madam! No, no -- you may see how the most estimable, and most glorious Creature in the World, is valued by him; will you not see it?
Right, honest, I have that noble value for her, that I cannot be jealous of her.
You mistake him, he means you care not for me, nor who has me.
Lord, Madam, I see you are jealous; will you wrest a poor Mans meaning from his words?
You astonish me, Sir, with your want of jealousie.
And you make me guiddy, Madam, with your jealousie, and fears, and virtue, and honour; gad. I see virtue makes a Woman as troublesome, as a little reading, or learning.
Monstrous!
(Well to see what easie Husbands these Women of quality can meet with, a poor Chamber-maid can never have such Lady-like luck; besides he's thrown away upon her, she'l make no use of her fortune, her blessing, none to a Gentleman, for a pure Cuckold, for it requires good breeding to be a Cuckold.
I tell you then plainly, he pursues me to marry me.
Pshaw --
Come, Madam, you see you strive in vain to make him jealous of me; my dear Friend is the kindest Creature in the World to me.
Poor fellow.
But his kindness only is not enough for me, without your favour; your good opinion, dear Madam, 'tis that must perfect my happiness: good Gentleman he believes all I say, wou'd you wou'd do so, jealous of me! I wou'd not wrong him nor you for the World.
Look you there; hear him, hear him, and do not walk away so.
I love you, Madam, so --
How's that! Nay -- now you begin to go too far indeed.
So much I confess, I say I love you, that I wou'd not have you miserable, and cast your self away upon so unworthy, and inconsiderable a thing, as what you see here,
No faith, I believe thou woud'st not, now his meaning is plain: but I knew before thou woud'st not wrong me nor her.
No, no, Heavens forbid, the glory of her Sex shou'd fall so low as into the embraces of such a contemptible Wretch, the last of Mankind -- my dear Friend here -- I injure him.
Very well.
No, no, dear Friend, I knew it Madam, you see he will rather wrong himself than me, in giving himself such names.
Do not you understand him yet?
Yes, how modestly he speaks of himself, poor Fellow.
Methinks he speaks impudently of your self, since -- before your self too, insomuch that I can no longer suffer his scurrilous abusiveness to you, no more than his love to me.
Nay, nay, Madam, pray stay, his love to you: Lord, Madam, has he not spoke yet plain enough?
Yes indeed, I shou'd think so.
Well then, by the World, a Man can't speak civilly to a Woman now, but presently she says, he makes love to her: Nay, Madam, you shall stay, with your pardon, since you have not yet understood him, till he has made an eclaircisment of his love to you, that is what kind of love it is; answer to thy Catechisme: Friend, do you love my Mistriss here?
Yes, I wish she wou'd not doubt it.
But how do you love her?
With all my Soul.
I thank him, methinks he speaks plain enough now.
You are out still.
But with what kind of love,?
With the best, and truest love in the World.
Look you there then, that is with no matrimonial love, I'm sure.
How's that, do you say matrimonial love is not best?
Gad, I went too far e're I was aware: But speak for thy self, you said you wou'd not wrong me, nor her.
No, no, Madam, e'n take him for Heaven's sake.
Look you there, Madam.
Who shou'd in all justice be yours, he that loves you most.
Look you there, Mr., who's that?
Who shou'd it be? go on.
Who loves you more than Women, Titles, or fortune Fools.
Look you there, he means me stil, for he points at me.
Ridiculous!
Who can only match your Faith, and constancy in love.
Ay.
Who knows, if it be possible, how to value so much beauty and virtue.
Ay.
Whose love can no more be equall'd in the world, than that Heavenly form of yours.
No --
Who cou'd no more suffer a Rival, than your absence, and yet cou'd no more suspect your virtue, than his own constancy in his love to you.
No --
Who in fine loves you better than his eyes, that first made him love you.
Ay -- nay, Madam, faith you shan't go, till --
Have a care, lest you make me stay too long --
But till he has saluted you; that I may be assur'd you are friends, after his honest advice and declaration: Come pray, Madam, be friends with him.
You must pardon me, Sir, that I am not yet so obedient to you.
What, invite your Wife to kiss Men? Monstrous, are you not asham'd? I will never forgive you.
Are you not asham'd, that I shou'd have more confidence in the chastity of your Family, than you have; you must not teach me, I am a man of honour, Sir, though I am frank and free; I am frank, Sir --
Very frank, Sir, to share your Wife with your friends.
He is an humble, menial Friend, such as reconciles the differences of the Marriage-bed; you know Man and Wife do not alwayes agree, I design him for that use, therefore wou'd have him well with my Wife.
A menial Friend -- you will get a great many menial Friends, by shewing your Wife as you do.
What then, it may be I have a pleasure in't, as I have to shew fine Clothes, at a Play-house the first day, and count money before poor Rogues.
He that shews his wife, or money will be in danger of having them borrowed sometimes.
I love to be envy'd, and wou'd not marry a Wife, that I alone cou'd love; loving alone is as dull, as eating alone; is it not a frank age, and I am a frank Person? and to tell you the truth, it may be I love to have Rivals in a Wife, they make her seem to a Man still, but as a kept Mistriss; and so good night, for I must to. Madam, I hope you are now reconcil'd to my Friend; and so I wish you a good night, Madam, and sleep if you can, for to morrow you know I must visit you early with a Canonical Gentleman. Good night dear.
Madam, I hope you will not refuse my visit to morrow, if it shou'd be earlyer, with a Canonical Gentleman, than Mr..
This Gentle-woman is yet under my care, therefore you must yet forbear your freedom with her, Sir.
Must, Sir --
Yes, Sir, she is my Sister.
'Tis well she is, Sir -- for I must be her Servant, Sir. Madam --
Come away Sister, we had been gone, if it had 
not been for you, and so avoided these lewd Rakehells, who 
seem to haunt us.<|endoftext|>?
?
Sir, I perceive, by the Book in my hand, that I am Condemned to die, and after that to come to Judgement; and I find that I am not willing to do the first, nor able to do the second.
Why not willing to die? since this life is attended with so many evils?
Because I fear that this burden that is upon my back, will sinck me lower then the Grave, and I shall fall into. And Sir, if I be not fit to go to Prison, I am not fit (I am sure) to go to Judgement, and from thence to Execution; And the thoughts of these things make me cry.
If this be thy condition, why standest thou still?
Because I know notwhither to go.
Whither must I fly?
Do you see yonder?
No.
Do you see yonder shining light?
I think I do.
Keep that light in your eye, and go up directly thereto, so shalt thou see the Gate; at which when thou knockest, it shall be told thee what thou shalt do.
Life, Life, Eternal Life:
Neighbours,?
To perswade you to go back with us;
That can by no means be: You dwell,
in the City of(the place also where I was born,) I see it to be so; and dying there, sooner or later, you will sink lower then the Grave, into a place that burns with Fire and Brimstone; Be content good Neighbours, and go along with me.!
! Yes,
because that all is not worthy to be compared with a little of that that I am seeking to enjoy,and if you will go along with me, you shall fare as I my self; for there where I go, is enough, and to spare; Come away, and prove my words.
I seek an; and it is laid up in Heaven, and fast there, to be bestowed at the time appointed, on them that diligently seek it.
,
?
No, not I, said the other; because I have laid my hand to the Plow.
Pliable,.
Then said, Don't revile; if what the goodsays is true, the things he looks after, are better then ours: my heart inclines to go with my Neighbour.
Come with me Neighbour; there are such things to be had which I spoke of, and many more Glories besides; If you believe not me, read here in this Book; and for the truth of what is exprest therein, behold all is confirmed by the blood of him that made it.
Obstinate
?
I am directed by a man whose name is, to speed me to a little Gate that is before us, where we shall receive instruction about the way.
,
And I will go back to my place,
I will be no Companion of such miss-led, fantastical Fellows.
Come Neighbour, how do you do? I am glad you are perswaded to go along with me; and had evenhimself, but felt what I have felt of the Powers and Terrours of what is yet unseen, he would not thus lightly have given us the back.
Christian,?
I can better conceive of them with my Mind, then speak of them with my Tongue: But yet since you are desirous to know, I will read of them in my Book.
Yes verily, for it was made by him that cannot lye.
There is an endless Kingdomto be Inhabited, and everlasting life to be given us; that we may Inhabit that Kingdom for ever.
There are Crowns of Glory to be given us; and Garments that will make us shine like the Sun in the Firmament of Heaven.
There shall be no more crying, nor sorrow; For he that is owner of the places, will wipe all tears from our eyes.
There we shall be with, and, Creatures that will dazle your eyes to look on them: There also you shall meet with thousands, and ten thousands that have gone before us to that place; none of them are hurtful, but loving, and holy: every one walking in the sight of God; and standing in his presence with acceptance for ever: In a word, there we shall see the Elders with their Golden Crowns: There we shall see the Holy Virgins with their Golden Harps. There weshall see Men that by the World were cut in pieces, burned in flames, eaten of Beasts, drownded in the Seas, for the love that they bare to the Lord of the place; all well, and cloathed with Immortality, as with a Garment.
The Lord, the Governour of that Countrey, hath Recordedin this Book: The substance of which is, If we be truly willing to have it, he will bestow it upon us freely.
I cannot go so fast as I would, by reason of this burden that is upon my back.
Christian,?
Truly,
I do not know.
Sir,
I was directed this way by a Man called; who directed me also to yonder Gate, that I might escape the wrath to come: And as I was going thither, I fell in here.
followed me so hard, that I fled the next way, and fell in.
:
Sir, Wherefore, since over this place, is the way from the City of, to yonder Gate, is it, thatPlat is not mended, that poor Travellers might go thither with more security?
thisis such a place as cannot be mended: It is the descent whither the scum and filth that attends conviction for sin,dothcontinually run, and therefore is it called the: for still as the sinner is awakened about his lost condition, there ariseth in his soul many fears, and doubts, and discouraging apprehensions, which all of them get together, and settle in this place: And this is the reason of the badness of this ground. It is not the pleasure of the King, that this place should remain so bad; his Labourers also, have by the direction of His Majesties Surveyors, been for above these sixteen hundred years, imploy'd about this patch of ground, if perhaps it might have been mended: yea, and to my knowledge,
hath been swallowed up, at least Twenty thousand Cart Loads; Yea Millions of wholesom Instructions, that have at all seasons been brought from all places of the Kings Dominions; (and they that can tell, say, they are the best Materials to make good ground of the place;) If so be it might have been mended, but it is thestill; and so will be, when they have done what they can. True, there are by the direction ofthe Law-giver, certain good and substantiall Steps, placed even through the very midst of this; but at such time as this place doth much spue out its filth, as it doth against change of weather, these steps are hardly seen; or if they be, Men through the diziness of their heads, step besides; and then they are bemired to purpose, notwithstanding the steps be there; but the ground is good when they are once got in at the Gate.
Surely since you began to venture, I would not have been so base to have given out for a few difficulties.
Here is a poor burdened sinner, I come from the City of, but am going to Mount, that I may be delivered from the wrath to come; I would therefore, Sir, since I am informed that by this Gate is the way thither, know if you areto let me in.
I amwith all my heart,
what means that?
a little distance from this Gate, there is erected a strong Castle, of whichis the Captain: from thence both he, and them that are with him Shoot Arrows at those that come up to this Gate; if happily they may dye before they can enter in.
I rejoyce and tremble.
bid me come hither and knock, (as I did;) And he said, that you, Sir, would tell me what I must do.
Now I begin to reap the benefits of my hazzards.
Because none of my Neighbours saw their danger as I saw mine.
Yes, my Wife and Children saw me at the first, and called after me to turn again: Also some of myNeighbours stood crying, and calling after me to return; but I put my Fingers in mine Ears, and so came on my way.
Yes, both, and: But when they saw that they could not prevail,went railing back; butcame with me a little way.
We indeed came both together, until we came at the Slow of, into the which, we also suddenly fell. And then was my Neighbourdiscouraged, and would not adventure further. Wherefore getting out again, on that side next to his own House; he told me, I should possess the brave Countrey alone for him: So he went his way, and I came mine.after, and I to this Gate.
Alas poor Man, is the Caelestial Glory of so small esteem with him, that he counteth it not worth running the hazards of a few difficulties to obtain it. Well, good, comea little way with me, and I will teach thee about the way thou must go. Look before thee; dost thou see this narrow way? That is the way thou must go. It was cast up by the Patriarchs, Prophets, Christ, his Apostles; and it is as straight as a Rule can make it: This is the way thou must go.
But
?
Yes, there are many waysdown upon this; and they are Crooked, and Wide: Butthou may'st distinguish the right from the wrong,only being straight and narrow.
As to the burden, be content to bear it, untill thou comest to the place of Deliverance; for there it will fall from thy back it self.
Sir, here is a Travailer, who was bid by an acquaintance of the Good-man of this House, to call here for my profit: I would therefore speak with the Master of the House:
Sir,
I am a Man that am come from the City of, and am going to the Mount, and I was told by the Man that stands at the Gate, at the head of this way; that if I called here, you would shew me excellentthings. Such as would be an help to me in my Journey.
Come in, I will shew thee that which will be profitable to thee.
?
The Man whose Picture this is, is one of a thousand, he can beget Children, Travel in birth with Children, and Nurse them himself, when they are born. And whereas thou seest him with eyes lift up to Heaven, the best of Books in his hand, and the Law of Truth writ on his lips: it is to shew thee, that his work is to know, and unfold dark thingsto sinners; even as also thou seest him stand as if he Pleaded with Men: And whereas thou seest the World as cast behind him, and that a Crown hangs over his head; that is, to shew thee that slighting and despising the things that are present, for the love that he hath to his Masters service, he is sure in the World that comes next to have Glory for his Reward: Now,
I have shewed thee this Picture, first, because the Man whose Picture this is, is the only Man, whom the Lord of the Place whither thou art going, hath Authorized, to be thy Guide in all difficult places thou mayest meet with in the way: wherefore take good heed to what I have shewed thee, and bear well in thy mind what thou hast seen; lest in thy Journey, thou meet with some that pretend to lead thee right, but their way goes down to death.
Bring hither Water, and sprinkle the Room;
?
this Parlor is the heart of a Man that was never sanctified by the sweet Grace of the Gospel: The, is his Original Sin, and inward Corruptions that have defiled the whole Man; He that began to sweep at first, is the Law; but She that brought water, and did sprinkle it, is the Gospel: Now, whereas thou sawest that so soon as the first began to sweep, the dust did so fly about that the Room by him could not be cleansed, but that thou wast almost choaked therewith. This is to shew thee, that the Law, instead of cleansing the heart (by its working) from sin, doth revive, put strength into, and increase it in the soul, as it dothdiscover and forbid it, but doth not give power to subdue. Again, as thou sawest thesprinkle the Room with Water, upon which it was cleansed with pleasure: This is to shew thee, that when the Gospel comes in the sweet and precious influences thereof to the heart, then I say, even as thou sawest the Damsel lay the dust by sprinkling the Floor with Water, so is sin vanquished and subdued, and the soul made clean, through the Faith of it; and consequently fit for the King of Glory to inhabit.
What is the reason of the discontent of?
The Governour of them would have him stay for his best things till the beginning of the next year; but he will have all now: Butis willing to wait.
.
These two Lads are Figures;, of the Men ofWorld; and, of the Men ofwhich is to come: For as here thou seest,, this year; that is to say, inWorld;are the Men of this World: they must have all their good things now, they cannot stay till next; that is, untill theWorld, for their Portion of good. That Proverb,, is of more Authority with them, then are all the Divine Testimonies of the good of the World to come. But as thou sawest, that he had quickly lavished all away, and had presently left him, nothing butRaggs; So will it be with all such Men at the end of this World.
PatienceHis,.
Nay, you may add another; to wit, The glory of theWorld will never wear out; but these are suddenly gone. Thereforehad not so much reason to laugh at, because he had his good things first, aswill have to laugh at, because he had his best things; formust give place to, becausemust have his time to come, butgives place to; for there is not another to succeed: he therefore that hath his Portion, must needs have a time to spend it; but he that has his Portion, must have it lastingly. Therefore it is said ofLazarus.
now;come.
You say the Truth;Temporal;Eternal: But though this be so; yet since things present, and our fleshly appetite,; and again, because things to come, and carnal sense, are such strangers one to another: therefore it is, that the first of these so suddenly fall into, and thatis so continued between the second.
?
This fire is the work of Grace that is wrought in the heart; he that casts Water upon it, to extinguish and put it out, is the: but in that thouseest the fire notwithstanding burn higher and hotter, thou shalt also see the reason of that:
?
This is, who continually with the Oyl of his Grace, maintains the work already begun in the heart; By the means of which, notwithstanding what the Devil can do, the souls of his People prove gracious still. And in that thou sawest, that the Man stood behind the Wall to maintain the fire; this is to teach thee, that it is hard for the tempted to see how this work of Grace is maintained in the soul.
I think verily I know the meaning of this. Now,
let me go hence: Nay stay
till I have shewed thee a little more, and after that thou shalt go on thy way.
What means this?
?
.
I was once a fair and flourishing Professor, both in mine own eyes, and also in the eyes of others: I once was, as I thought, fair for the Coelestial City, and had then even joy at the thoughts that I should get thither.
I ama Man of Despair, and am shut up in it, as in this Iron Cage. I cannot get out; OI cannot.
I left off to watch, and be sober; I laid the reins upon the neck of my lusts; I sinned against the light of the Word, and the goodness of God: I have grieved the Spirit, and he is gone; I tempted the Devil, and he is come to me; I have provoked God to anger, and he has left me; I have so hardened my heart, that I cannot repent.
But is there no hopes for such a Man as this? Ask him,
Nay,
pray Sir, do you.
?
No, none at all.
I have Crucified him to my self, a fresh. I have despised his Person, I have despised his Righteousness, I have counted his Blood an unholy thing, I have done despite to the Spirit of Grace: Therefore I have shut my self out of all the Promises; and there now remains to me nothing but threatnings, dreadful threatnings, faithful threatnings of certain Judgement, which shall devour me as an Adversary.
For the Lusts, Pleasures, and Profits of this World; in the injoyment of which, I did then promise my self much delight: but now even every one of those things also bite me, and gnaw me like a burning worm.
God hath denied me repentance; his Word gives me no encouragement to believe; yea, himself hath shut me up in this Iron Cage; nor can all the men in the World let me out. O Eternity! Eternity! how shall I grapple with the misery that I must meet with in Eternity!
Let this mans misery be remembred by thee, and be an everlasting caution to thee.
Well,
this is fearful; God help me to watch and be sober; and to pray, that I may shun the causes of this mans misery. Sir, is it not time for me to go on my way now?
Tarry till I shall shew thee one thing more, and then thou shalt go on thy way.
Why doth this Man thus tremble?
This night as I was in my sleep, I Dreamed, and behold the Heavens grew exceeding black; also it thundred and lightned in most fearful wise, that it put me into an Agony. So I looked up in my Dream, and saw the Clouds rack at an unusual rate; upon which I heard a great sound of a Trumpet, and saw also a Man sit upon a Cloud, attended with the thousands of Heaven; they were all in flaming fire, also the Heavens was on a burning flame. I heard then a voice, saying,; and with that, the Rocks rent, the Graves opened, & the Dead that were therein, came forth; some of them were exceeding glad, and looked upward; and some sought to hide themselves under the Mountains: Then I saw the Man that sat upon the Cloud, open the Book; and bid the World draw near. Yet there was by reason of a Fiery flame that issued out and came from before him, a convenient distance betwixt him and them, as betwixt the Judge and the Prisoners at the Bar. I heard it also proclaimedto them that attended on the Man that sat on the Cloud;; and with that, the Bottomless pit opened, just whereabout I stood; out of the mouth of which there came in an abundant manner Smoak, and Coals of fire, with hideous noises. It was also said to the same persons;. And with that I saw many catch't up and carried away into the Clouds, but I was left behind. I also sought to hide my self, but I could not; for the Man that sat upon the Cloud, still kept his eye upon me: my sins also came into mind, and my Conscience did accuse me on every side. Upon this I awaked from my sleep.
Why I thought that the day of Judgement was come, and that I was not ready for it: but this frighted me most, that the Angels gathered up several, and left me behind; also the pit of Hell opened her mouth just where I stood: my Conscience too within afflicted me; and as I thought,the Judge had always his eye upon me, shewing indignation in his countenance.
?
Yes, and they put me inand.
Well, keep all things so in thy mind, that they may be as ain thy sides, to prick thee forward in the way thou must go.
The Comforter be always with thee good, to guide thee in the way that leads to the City.
.
You are like them that sleep on the top of a Mast, for the dead Sea is under you, a Gulf that hath no bottom: Awake therefore and come away, be willing also, and I will help you off with your Irons.
If he that goeth about like a roaring Lion comes by, you will certainly become a prey to his teeth.
;
:
?
We were born in the Land of Vain-glory, and are going for praise to Mount.
,
?
And besides,
so be we get into the way, what's matter which way we get in; if we are in, we are in: thou art but in the way, who, as we perceive, came in at the Gate; and we are also in the way, that cametumbling over the wall: Wherein now is thy condition better then ours?
I walk by the Rule of my Master, you walk by the rude working of your fancies. You are counted thieves already, by the Lord of the way; therefore I doubt you will not be found true men at the end of the way. You come in by your selves without his direction; and shall go out by your selves without his mercy.
Therefore
We see not wherein thou differest from us, but by the Coat that is on thy back, which was, as we tro, given thee by some of thy Neighbours, to hide the shame of thy nakedness.
By Laws and Ordinances, you will not be saved, since you came not in by the door. And as for this Coat that is on my back, it was givenme by the Lord of the place whither I go; and that, as you say, to cover my nakedness with. And I take it as a token of his kindness to me, for I had nothing but rags before. And besides, thus I comfort my self as I go: Surely, think I, when I come to the Gate of the City, the Lord thereof will know me for good, since I have his Coat on my back; a Coat that he gave me freely in the day that he stript me of my rags. I have moreover a mark in my forehead, of which perhaps you have taken no notice, which one of my Lords most intimate Associates, fixed there in the day that my burden fell off my shoulders. I will tell you moreover, that I had then given me a Roll sealed to comfort me by reading, as I go in the way; I was also bid to give it in at the Coelestial Gate, in token of my certain going in after it: all which things I doubt you want, and want them, because you came not in at the Gate.
Sirs, what's the matter you run the wrong way?
but,
the further we go, the more danger wemeet with, wherefore we turned, and are going back again. Yes,
for just before us lye a couple of Lyons in the way, whether sleeping or wakeing we know not; and we could not think, if we came within reach, but they would presently pull us in pieces.
You make me afraid, but whither shall I fly to be safe? If I go back to mine own Countrey,is prepared for Fire and Brimstone; and I shall certainly perish there. If I can get to the Coelestial City, I am sure to be in safety there. I must venture: To go back is nothing but death, to go forward is fear of death, and life everlasting beyond it. I will yet go forward.
Now,
I see the dangers thatand, were driven back by.
Is thy strength so small? fear not the Lions, for they are Chained: and are placed there for trial of faith where it is; and for discovery of those thathave none: keep in the midst of the Path, and no hurt shall come unto thee.
Sir, What house is this? and may I lodge here to night?
This House was built by the Lord of the Hill: and he built it for the relief and security of Pilgrims.
I am come from the City of, and am going to Mount, but because the Sun is now set, I desire, if I may, to lodge here to night.
My name is now; but my name at the first was: I came of the Race of, whom God will perswade to dwell in the Tents of.
I had been here sooner, but that, wretched man that I am! I slept in thethat stands on the Hill side; nay, I had notwithstanding that, been here much sooner, but that in my sleep I lost my Evidence, and came without it to the brow of the Hill; and then feeling for it, and finding it not, I was forced with sorrow of heart, to go back to the place where I slept my sleep, where I found it, and now I am come.
Well, I will call out one of the Virgins of this place, who will, if she likes your talk, bring you in to the rest of the Family, according to the Rules of the House.
This Man is in a Journey from the City ofto Mount, but being weary, and benighted, he asked me if he might lodge here to night; so I told him I would call for thee, whoafter discourse had with him, mayest do as seemeth thee good, even according to the Law of the House.
It is; and I have so much the more a desire to lodge here to night, because, by what I perceive, this place was built by the Lord of the Hill, for the relief and security of Pilgrims.
I will call forth two or three more of the Family.
Come in thou blessed of the Lord; this House was built by the Lord of the Hill, on purpose to entertain such Pilgrims in.
Christian,.
With a very good will, and I am glad that you are so well disposed.
I was driven out of my Native Countrey, by a dreadful sound that was in mine ears, to wit, That unavoidable destruction did attend me, if I abode in that place where I was.
It was as God would have it, for when I was under the fears of destruction, I did not know whither to go; but by chance there came a Man, even to me, (as I was trembling and weeping) whose name is, and he directed me to the Wicket-Gate, which else I should never have found; and so set me into the way that hath led me directly to this House.
Yes, and did see such things there, the remembrance of which will stick by me as long as I live; specially three things,, How Christ, in despite of Satan, maintains his work of Grace in the heart; how the Man had sinned himself quite out of hopes of Gods mercy; and also the Dream of him that thought in his sleep the day of Judgement was come.
Yes, and a dreadful one it was. I thought it made my heart ake as he was telling of it, but yet I am glad I heard it.
No, he took me and had me where he shewed me a stately Palace, and how the People were clad in Gold that were in it; and how there came a venturous Man, and cut his way through the armed men that stood in the door to keep him out; and how he was bid to come in, and win eternal Glory. Methought those things did ravish my heart; I could have staid at that good Mans house a twelve-month, but that I knew I had further to go.
Saw! Why I went but a little further, and I saw one, as I thought in my mind, hang bleeding upon the Tree; and the very sight of him made my burden fall off my back (for I groaned under a weary burden) but then it fell down from off me. 'Twas a strange thing to me, for I never saw such a thing before: Yea, and while I stood looking up, (for then I could not forbear looking) three shining ones came to me: one of them testified that my sins were forgiven me;another stript me of my Rags, and gave me this Broidred Coat which you see; and the third set the mark which you see, in my forehead, and gave me this sealed Roll (and with that he plucked it out of his bosom.)
The things that I have told you were the best: yet some other small matters I saw, as namely I saw three Men,,, and, lye a sleep a little out of the way as I came, with Irons upon their heels; but do you think I could awake them! I also sawandcome tumbling over the wall, to go, as they pretended, to, but they were quickly lost; even as I my self did tell them, but they would not believe: but, above all, I found itwork to get up this Hill, and asto come by the Lions mouths; and truly if it had not been for the good Man, the Porter that stands at the Gate, I do not know, but that after all, I might have gone back again: but now I thank God I am here, and I thank you for receiving of me.
Yes, but with much shame and detestation;.
Yes, but greatly against my will; especially my inward and carnal cogitations; with which all my Countrey-men, as well as my self, were delighted; but now all those things are my grief: and might I but chuse mine own things, I would chuse never to think of those things more; but when I would be doing of that which is best, that which is worst is with me.
Yes, but that is but seldom;but they are to me Golden hours, in which such things happens to me.
Yes, when I think what I saw at the Cross, that will do it; and when I look upon my Broidered Coat, that will do it; also when I look into the Roll that I carry in my bosom, that will do it; and when my thoughts wax warm about whither I am going, that will do it.
Zion?
Why, there I hope to see him, that did hangon the Cross; and there I hope to be rid of all those things, that to this day are in me, an anoiance to me; there they say there is no death, and there I shall dwell with such Company as I like best. For to tell you truth, I love him, because I was by him eased of my burden, and I am weary of my inward sickness; I would fain be where I shall die no more, and with the Company that shall continually cry,.
let us go again into the Armory,
Pray did you know him?
I asked his name, and he told me it was.
O,
I know him, he is my Towns-man, my near Neighbour, he comes from the place where I was born: how far do you think he may be before?
He is got by this time below the Hill.
Well,
good Porter the Lord be with thee, and add to all thy blessings much increase, for the kindness that thou hast shewed to me.
As it wascoming up, so (so far as I can see) it isgoing down. Yes,
so it is; for it is an hard matter for a man to go down into the valley of, asthou art now, and to catch no slip by the way; therefore,
are we come out to accompany thee down the Hill.<|endoftext|><|endoftext|>To you, as well of the Manufacture, as the Matronship, I speake to all in generall, I haue knowe a Lord contented with one Lackey, a Master with one man, a Tenant with one Land-lord, a Bird with one mate, a Cow with one Milk-mad, and shall a man desire to have two wives, that (alas) with al he can do, can hardly please one? nay, grant them two, in time they will grow to ten, from ten to twentie, and then what a racket there would be who should rule the roast? Nay, I have heard of one that had at once a 1000. wives & concubines: Now out upon him for a
Methinks they should rather have consulted, that woe~n might have had 2 strings to their Bow, that if one slipt the other might hold, one for weeke dayes to drudge within doors, another for Holy-dayes to walke abroad with her, and usher her in his best cloaths; keeping one for delight, the other for her drudgery;
our sexe is now of late grown Cowards, carpet and curtaine hearted: Where be those magnanimous and Masculine spirited Matrons? Those valiant Viragoes? those lusty Ladies? those daringDamsels,and the rest? who made Coxecombes of, Puppets of Princes, Captives of Captains, Fooles of Philosophers, and Hench men of their husbands? but though we want weapons, and are abridged of their armes, yet they shall know, thatwe have the Law in our owne hands, and in our own cases we will be our owne Lawyers, and plead our own rights. For wee have tongues to tell our own Tales, and our Tales shall be heard and handled, when some of theirs shall not: What, give these Cocks leave to crow, and we shall have the Ravens follow after.
I thinke the Proverb may be very well verified in my husband; which is, that many Taylors goe to the making up of one man; for he hath no more mettle in him then a Mouse; he works altogether with hot needle, and burnt thread: for nothing he doth prospers with me. I thinke the reason is, because he uses an unlawful Yard, and wants that handfull which belongs to the Citie measure, or else because he sits crosse leg'd on his shop-board, like a dead Hare on a Poulterers stall, and no good work can be done that way. If at any time he make me a new peticoate, he will threaten to sit upon my skirts, and that's all: He will sow and sow, and yet when he hath done all hee can, it proves but so and so,
I take it, your best course Mistris, is to acquaint yourselfe with some Courtier his Customer, and when any Masque or show is to be presented at Court, he may helpe you to a good standing.
my name is, a Felt-makers wife, and know no more from my husband of the three parts that belong to a Noune Substantive but the first, and that is felt, and nothing else worthy to be heard or understood.
Nay, you may take me too in your number, for my case is as much to be condoled as any's, who have a very pea-goose and patch-pannell to my good man: well, his girthes or Latchets may passe for currant, but I could never see a good stirre-up from him since he was my husband: I confesse he is saddle-nos'd and saddlebackt too, but never could set the saddle on the right horse since I knew him:
my good man is his customer, who keepes the saddle to himselfe, but gives me the bit and the bridle: he can teach his horses to pace as he list; but for himself he hath neither good amble, trot, nor gallop.
for
was not every woman born with two legges, two hands, two eyes, two eares: and every deepe Well ought to have two Buckets, while one is comming up, the other going down? have not most great houses two doores? likewise have not most Tavernes a fore-door & a backe-door, with two signes and two bushes, every ship a fore-Mast and a maine-Mast: most Cities two or three gates, and every gate three or foure Watch-men; and every Beadle three or foure men every night in his Lanthorne, or else their money? hath not every stoole or chaire three or foure legges, and every bed-stead two posts, (and three or four Curtains) the better to support the other parts of them, and therefore in conscience every Woman may have two husbands: for have not we women six Sences, and men but five? the major part wee know includes the minor: therefore the case is cleare on our sides, for wee have nothing to offend and defend our selves but our tongues, which wee bring in for another sence; for the tongue tells whatthe eare heares, what the eye sees, what the hand handles, what the palat tasteth, what the nose smelleth, therfore the tongue ought to be the sixth Sence, which we must maintain for our own safety: though woman was taken out of the side of man, yet let men know, that they cannot, nor shall not alwayes keepe us under. I put the case to you, suppose a handsome Lasse marries a Sea-faring man, perchance his occasions call him to goe a long voyage to SEA, as to the East or West Indies, or to the straights of, the Reed or Red SEA, or to theGulfe: he is bound to stay a yeare, two or three, before he can returne: doe you (nay prethee good sister, let mee not bee interrupted in my speech: pray silence, or I will say no more; for I now speak to the purpose) as I have said, doe you think it convenient such a prettie soule should lye alone, having been wedded so short a time, and only tasted of you know what, and having been a fellow feeler, and helper in most cases, for the Common-wealths good, that she can be content to lye alone tumbling and tossing in a good featherbed, sometimes to the Wall, sometimes to the doore, sometimes of one side, and somtimes of the other: sighing and groaning, as if her very twatling strings would breake; making her moane to the Curtaines, fumbling and biting, or tearing the sheets, and by that meanes ease her oppressed body and minde: nay, I should not say oppressed bodie for there I was mistaken, there my tongue wenttoo fast, I should have said her troubled and perplexed spirit, heart, or what you terme it, Ought not, I say, such women to have two or three husbands? yes, yes,
being alwayes provided, and for the good of the Common-wealth: So likewise the Souldier and Captain when they are gone to the Wars, the Merchant, the Factor, & the Mariner when they are gone to Sea, a foolish Plaintiffe and his Defendant, that will come up post two or three hundred miles to spend his money, and stay a whole Terme before he return to his beloved: ought not these (and many more which I could name, which for brevites sake I omit) to leave one husband at home, while the other being at Sea, lookes to the maine boling, and that the fore-Mast and maine-yard, and all other tackling be fit and compleat for his occations: The Facter while he looks to cast up his accompts abroad, shee may looke and cast up hers at whome: the Plaintiffe and Defendant while they be spending mony at Law shee may get some at home by love. All these cases are to be considered; for every musket must have -- scouring sticke, and every Gun must have a rammer, and every pen must be dipped in inke before it will write: Has not every Constable his Beadle, every Serjeant his Yeaman? hath not every Officer in a ship his mate: as the Surgeon he hath his mate, the Master his mate; and the Gunner his mate: It is good to have two strings to ones Bow, if one break the other may hold: that if one be dogged and surly, the other may be pleasant and joviall; that whileone be off the hooks, the other may be on the hinges; Upon which motion it is fully agreed upon by us women, who are here present, which find it better for us woman to have two husbands, that if one be sick, the other may be well, one abroad and another at home:
but let mee tell you one thing, which might put a rub in our way: What if our husbands object and say, that we promised to love & obey them at the day of our marriage, & that we must be tyed to that promise? By our Lady that is true
what must be our plea for that? Ile tell you
Let us answer thus much in that behalfe; that we had a mentallreservation, when the wisest of us said so; for though our husbands expect it at our hands all our life time, we must say that we ment it only for that day, and the first night, and no longer; and therefore by this meanes we may wave the businesse, and repeale that Law:
let it be likewise enacted, that since maids for the most part mary in hast, and repent at leisure, that we may be hasty also in our own houses, that if ourhusbands be peevish, we may pout; when they are harsh, we may be humorous: they curst we crabbed; and when they think to make us melancholy, we in requitall strive to make them horne mad, by making our Petticoates our Purlewes: at which if they grudge or grumble, wee may finde answers, by looking upon our apron-strings; knowing by experience, that most men are of a strange kidney, and will never bee at quiet full nor fasting;
the want of which reformation,
I have endured to my great prejudice:
my husband
in anger said, he would thump me, to whom I answered; thump me? where wilt thou thump mee? thump me but where thou shouldst thu~p me, or Ile make it the dearest thumping that ever thou didst thumpe in thy life: and I thinke I hit him home, which was more than ever he did to me, and thenI had him on the hip: and you should have kept him so when you had him there
if you had been wise: But concerning your great thumpers, concerning him who said that a Law might be made, that no woman should suffer her self to be thumpt but as she ought to be;
Thus
I hold it requisite also, that every woman of sence, should take delight to please her eye with the most curious objects, either of such pictures as wee like, or such men as wee love: Her eare rather with curious and choyse Musicke, or have some Courtship that may content her, or somewhat publisht in her praise: Her smell rather with sweet and redolent flowers at home, or precious odours and perfumes fetcht from abroad: her touch either with the Pluch and Taffates of her owne gay garments, or by the griping of his smooth & soft hand whom she most dearly affected: Her taste with all dainty and deare fare, with either fowle or Fish, with sweete Wines and sweete meats, banqueting and junkets, and every variety that can taste the appetite, or please the palate. And for our more ease let us lie a bed till ten of the clocke, and the~ have a Candlebrought to our bed side for our break-fast; and be ready by dinnertime, and then walke abroad to take the ayre till supper-time; and so spend the weeke about; and if they aske the reason thereof, tell them it must bee so, because it must be so; and let them understand, that Mo~dayis Sundayes brother, and that Tuesday is such another, Wednesday they must goe to Church & pray, and Thursday is halfe holy day, Friday it is too late to begin to spin, and Saturday all the world knows is half holy-day agen. You speak wel in that
for why should we toyl and turmoyl for our horn-headed and hard-headed husbands, and not taste of the sweet as well as of the sowre, of the gaine as the paine, the pleasure as the puzzle. If the husbands be ours, then be their goods ours, their lands ours, their Cash and Coine ours, and all their moveables, (howsoever seldome in motion ours too) and at our command; then why should we be niggards, and not spend freely of our owne? or why, when they be prodicall abroad, should we be penurious at home? nay, let us eate good fare, keepe good fires, want nothing that Women should have, good cates after good company: we can then bid any God-speed without good gossips. It is fit wee should bee merie so it fall within compasse of meanes: and for my owne part, I make use of the old proverb.
Further let it be enacted,
that whosoever shall hereafter take a Wife, shall doe it with the intent to please her, serve her, and obey her, and the first day of their Bridals, as a signe and token of duty to her, and all the rest, place here at the upper end of the Table; or if she like not that place, put her in the middle, and with his hat in his hand wait on her till she hath halfe, or at the most three quarters dined; and then (if he have leave) to sit down, which must be done by her licence, that he place himself at the lower end of the Table, and make a short meale tell they be ready to take away, and that at supper he doe the like, and after that she goe to bed first, and rise last, and not attempt any thing but that stands with her good liberty and liking,
I intreat that I may have a finger in the pye too as well as the rest: a fooles bolt (like my hasbads) is soon shot, and so is mine: when I was as well in health as any here, I complained to my good man of my heart and head, my Liver and my Lungs, & (indeed) I know not of what: who comming home said, wife how doe you doe? I answered sick, good man, very sicke: then the fond Coxcomb bid me speake for any thing I had a minde unto; for saith he, no question but thou dost breed; I, I, said I, I do breed, but you never get me any thing: no, saith he, who gets it then? I told him againe that it was no matter to him who gets it; for sure said I, I maylong and long, but shall be sure to come short of what I long for; why what dost thou long for, said my husband? For that (quoth I) which is beyond your reach, I wisse: Silke Gowne, and Sattin Petticoate of the fashion, an Italian cut-worke Handkercheif, and a black bag, with al the appurtenances thereto belonging. I but said he, sweete Wife, these are above my calling: why then said I, mine own calling shall serve; for the next gallant Player I will call in, who, what he cannot adde to the happinesse of your memory, shall strive to augme~t in your honourable state of Matrimony:
therfore
adde this to the other, let women from hence forward, if they be shreerish or shie, try it out with them at sharp, or if beetle-head and blockish, with blunter weapons.
yet
my husband is a Gamester, and as he games abroad, so I play at home: if hee bee atbowles and kisse the Mistris, I can for recreation play at rubbers with his man: when he hath beene all the day at passage, & hazard, at night he comes home, and playes with me at Doublets, Barramesace, and Back-gammon, but I am sometimes even with him, for when he with his sweet-hearts ventures his state at the hole, I with his servant can passe away the time at In and In:
as I hold Mistris, that lawfull which you doe, so I hope, that I bringing my sack to the mill, it may be ground among the rest: that is, when our hausbands trouble us, we may likewise torment them: if they fret, wee frowne: they grudge, we grumble, they prate, we glout, they crosse, wee curst; if they bend their browes, we may bend our fists; and be they never so outragious, we to carry no coals in any case. But let it then be added
that no reconcilement without some reward, and no pardon may be granted without a new gowne and Peticoate; which if demurr'd upon, at the first or second demand, it shall bee in her choyce to aske him the third: and if he cog and offer to kisse you, and tell you that he will kisse you, bid him take you about the middle and kisse the heaviest end: or if he faile, she may reade him a, as far as the scope of her invention,. Or if hee notwithstanding all this, be pevish and perverse, she may also continue proud and peremptory, till she raile him into reconcilement, and make himprovide a feast to entertaine her Gossips, and make his peace that way.
if she have a mind to take the aire, or walke to Green-goose Fair, or to any merrie meeting, or Market: if she desire his company, that hee new blacke his shooes, and put on his best hat and cloake to wait on her thither, ushering her before, or take her gently by the arme, and lovingly to leade her: or if (for some reasos best known to her selfe) she would have his abscence, that he patiently put money in her purse, and stay at home without grumbling.
let not maides stay from marriage till they are troubled with the greene-sicknesse:
But one thing we have forgot,
which is a main matter, that is, to seeke out cure for any old or young:
my good man came home drunk the other day, and because I should not see him in that manner, he hid himselfe in the house of speciall Office, and their he began to ease his stomacke, and lay about him like a Hog, when he hath eaten so much that he is ready to burst: & because I should not heare him: hee thrusts his head into the hole; and whether it was his large Asses eares, or his Bul necke, I cannot tell, but he could not get his necke out again, but needs must pull up the seate about his necke, so that he looked as if he had been on the Pillorie.
For
put his head out of the window well enough, but could not get it back again, which was long of his Hornes: this
is your husbands case. I pray you Mistris,
tell me, and the rest of oursisters the cure and remedie for it. Thus you must doe
my deare and loving sisters, because
the effect lyes at the heart, & the cause in the head,
you must first remove the cause, and the effect will
follow.Mistris Doe-litle)Pump-water,Cloves, Mace, Nut-megs:Suger-candy,Hearts-easedainty Content,Candid Forgetfulnesse,Beter Conceit,Rubarb,Colaquintida,Stibium,Long white Pepper,.
 Now the inward remedie being applyed, he mustthen observe the outward meanes: he must conceit
himselfe a Batchelour or widower againe, as he
was at the first state when he came a wooing to her:
the~ must he make himself a mourning suit & cloak,
& walk as demurely and as sad, as if his Wife were
dead indeed: he must likewise be so well conceited
of himselfe, as if no such thing had ever beene or
thought of: then he must refraine her company: &
the house where she is, eight or ten dayes together,
then begin to enquire of her, as if she were a
stranger to him, afterwards visit her, and then send her
presents, and make much of her, then make good
cheere, and when you are in a merry veine, aske
her if she can love you? then will she say presently,
yes, if you can affect her: then get a licence, and
forthwith marry her: that beeing done, see then if
any dear so much as point at you with their 
fingers, or call you Cuckold as formerly they did, if
they doe, then have you the Civill Law on your
side to punish them there, & an action at the
Common Law for defamation, and their punish their
purses and bodie too; and this is the only cure for
old and new Cuckolds: and withall take notice,
that this must bee done when the Moone is
encreasing, and in the second quarter, for it will help
their businesse forward, and cause them better to
conclude their intended purposes:<|endoftext|>Madam, are you invited to Mr. such a ones Wedding.
Sir, he did me that honour.
I am very glad of it, Madam, we shall have the honour of your conversation.
It shall be I that shall receive the honour of yours, whereof I make great account.
Madam, I know that the honour you do me in loving my company is not a new thing, therein it is that I place all my happiness.
Yet, Sir, I do not observe that my approbation can be much advantagious to you.
I know by experience, that all those that are in your esteem, are reputed persons of honour.
You have as much civility as Mr.hath love for his Mistris.
I could wish it were so, Madam: for I know he loves her passionately.
All mens love is such, they are all fire and flame when they are a wooing.
Truly, Madam, a man of parts that hath made chose of a Gentlewoman of merit and of good education, ought to have as much love for her, as she hath good qualities.
I say nothing to the contrary: but they should also continue the same after their mariage.
Questionless, Madam, every man of honour doth so.
All men are generally guilty of inconstancy in this point.
I grant you that men love generally less that which is purchased: but you accuse men of a crime whereof women are guilty as well as men.
Pray, Sir, do not say so, a woman hath alwaies more love for her husband, then her husband hath for her.
I believe it Madam, but she hath less amity, because her imagination is stronger, and her apprehension less perfect.
What so great difference do you think there is between amity and love.
Love and amity do differ, in that love is a passion, andamity is a virtue which doth consist in acquaintance. Therefore the passion of love is to be excused in young people: but it is ridiculous in old men, in whom amity is commendable.
However I can prove it to you by several examples, that women love more then men.
Will you not grant me, Madam, that those which have more knowledg, are more capable of a solid amity?
What do you gather from thence?
I conclude, that men love more, having more knowledg and learning then women, and more light of their lives and behaviours, then they have of their husbands.
Examples being stronger then reasons, I can prove you my words that way.
I will hear you, Madam.
You know that from all times, women have been contented with a single husband, to keep their whole affection unto him. But in time past, as now with the Turks, a man having many wives, it followeth, that the more their affection is common, the less strong it is.
We are not in disputeof the time past, nor of the Turks custome.
True, but if it was the custome among Christians, every man would have more then one wife.
This is not a sufficient proof of that which you affirm, because a man may have as much affection for many, as for a single one.
I agree to that but it doth not follow, that he should do so.
I will prove it you my self by the effects, seeing that you will not believe my reasons.
I shall be very glad to hear what examples you can bring of men mens affection towards their wives.
Can there be a greater love then that of, who choosed to die, thathis wife might live, having killed the male of the two Serpents which he found in his Chamber: because the Oracle had assured him, that if he should kill the female, he would expose the life of his dear half to the rigour of death.
Can a love be like unto that ofQueen of, who after her husbands death swallowed down his ashes, being willing to be his grave, and joyn her self unto him.
But, Madam, can a cruelty be greater then that of, who having had the Power but one day in her hands, caused her husbandto be murdered, who had been so far indulgent unto her, and that had loved and cherished her so much all his life time.
That is a particular example of a wicked woman: but how many Emperours and Kings have been known, that have put their wives to death, to marry others?
Let us break off, Madam, undoubtedly you have a great affection for your husband. If I did not fear of being guilty, I would envy his happiness: but I will content my self in wishing for a wife who deserts might equal yours, if it be possible to find such another again.
You jear me, Sir, I wish you one worthy of your merits.
Madam, I am a thousand times obliged to you for your good wishes.
Madam, I come to have the honour to render you my respects.
Sir, you know that you are very welcome, and that I receive an unspeakable honour in your visits.
Madam, the knowledg that I have of your generosity, doth not permit me to doubt of my welcome: but for the rest I must contredict you.
How, Sir, I have heard you say formerly, that you would never contredict Ladies.
I grant it, Madam, but it is when they do not laugh at me.
Do you find that I jear you, Sir? do you think that I am so incivil?
Madam, I believe that you are the most civil Lady in the world.
Why then do you reprehend me of a crime, by accusing me of jesting.
I do not believe it to be a crime, and without doubt, Madam, you do not repute it such.
Truly, Sir, I do not hold it to be a great crime amongst friends: but if a body use it very often, I should blame him.
I would do the same, Madam, but confess that you jear when you tell me that you receive an unspeakable honour by my visits: for I rather believe, that I put too much trouble upon you.
I never saw a man like you, you would be the only civil person: you name civility a jearing in every body else but you.
I crave your pardon, Madam, it is not a jearing when you use it towards them that deserve it.
Sir, the French Gentlemen are pleased to cross the Ladies: but let us talk no more of it, do me the favour to take a seat, and to tell me some news.
Madam, I know not any that may be worthy relating to you.
Do you know any thing that is unworthy the relating?
To speak in earnest, Madam, every thing is unworthy of you, and if men would take heed of this, they would never be able to say any thing to you.
Sir, oblige me so much as to speak freely with me, andand without complement: for I asseure you that I have no skill that way.
Methinks, Madam, I perceive no complements in my discourses.
They are full of them, Sir, in fine will you inform me of nothing to day?
Madam, I'le tell you that there will be gallant company in the Park this evening.
What Company?
Master such a one wil be there with his Mistris, will you be pleased to be there, Madam?
No, Sir, I do not care to be where there is so much company.
Madam, if you please to go thither, I shall have the honour to wait upon you.
Not to day, Sir, I give you thanks for your civility.
You love nothing but solitariness, Madam, that you may entertain your self with the objects of your love.
Yet I am not in love, Sir.
I believe you are, Madam.
You surprise me very much, Sir, to make me believe thatam in love.
Be not offended at it, Madam, but asseuredly you are so, I read it in your eyes.I wonder very much at what you say, and I do not apprehend it: therefore I intreat you to explain your self.
I will obey you, Madam: is it not true that there are several sorts of love.
How manysorts?
Madam, I believe you know that as well as I: for I am certain that you are ignorant of nothing.
Excuse me, Sir, you shall oblige me in instructing me.
Madam, it is not to instruct you: for asseuredly you do not doubt that we have only one love, but that it hath several objects.
You will make me a Philosopher, Sir: but how many objects hath it?
Many, Madam: but chiefly these three, God, Man, and brutish Creatures.
What love do you think I am possessed with?
With all, Madam: for I am sure you love God well, and consequently all vertues, and your neighbours likewise.
You are very obliging, Sir, to have so good opinion of me.
I should be to blame, if I had an ill opinion of you.
But you, Sir, you have some particular Mistris which you love better then your ordinary friends.
It may be so, Madam, I should not be a man, if I should not love the finest thing in the world.
In your opinion, Sir, your Mistris is the handsomest in the world.
I do not say so, Madam, although she that I most honour is extreamly well furnished with good qualities.
Sir, I find you very happy to have a Mistris so well accomplished, I pray God give you good success in your love.
Madam, I give you many thanks with all my heart.
Sir, shall I not have the honour to know the name of her that hath the glory to captivate you?
I beseech you, Madam, hold me excused in naming of her, until she knows it her self.
How, Sir, is she ignorant of your affection?
Yes, Madam, because I durst not as yet give her notice of it.
Who hindered you?
Madam, it is for fear that she should not love me.
Fear is a passion that sogenerous a heart as yours is, ought not to be possessed with.
Madam, it is a hard matter to be very much in love without having some of every passion.
I thought, Sir, that fear was onely the passion of a cowardly man.
True, Madam.
Yet I see it not alwaies true.
It is so in one sense: for it is the fear of death that takes away courage, and that makes Cowards run away.
I find that that fear is very necessary for to preserve ones life.
It is very true: but it is much contrary to a State. For if all the subjects of a King were possessed with it, he would have but few soldiers.
It is true: but if a soldier did not fear correction, he would be very insolent.
You are in the right, Madam, it is the use that is made of it, that makes it profitable or dangerous in all manner of waies
None can be righteous without the fear of God.
The Wise man saith, that it is the beginning of wisdom.
It seems to me that Lovers live alwaies in more fear then hope: which proves true in you.
I'le tell you, Madam, that love is alwaies mingled with hope and fear.
Hope hath made more men unfortunate, then fear ever made unhappy.
It is true that hope is very deceitful.
After having hoped a long while, one doth despair.
It is a prudence to forsake hope, when one cannot attain unto his end.
One must have a great wit, and know well how to use it right, and withal one must be very discreet to govern himself in all manner of occurrences.
You possesse all these qualities in the highest degree. Therefore you are esteemed the wonder of your age.
Sir, do not flatter me, I pray you; I know my self well enough to know what I am.
I do not question it, Madam, it is that which makes you unequal: for it is the highest degree of wisdom to know ones self.
Truly, Sir, there is a great deal of satisfaction in your conversation, do me the honour to let me see you oftner.
I shall not fail to come and render you my service, as well to obey you, as for the extream pleasure that I take inyour company.
I can asseure you, Sir, that you shall alwaies be very welcome.
Madam, I give you a thousand thanks for your favors, and shall be all my life time your most affectionate servant.
Sir, I am your most humble servant.
What shall we do to day, Gentlemen? how shall we pass away this day?
What you please.
Let us walk as far as Greenwich.
Ah, Gentlemen, let us go thither, I intreat you, I have never been there.
And what do you intend to do at Greenwich?
That is a fine question, & what should we do elswhere?
Let us go thither if you please, I am content to do as the rest.
I know an honest man there, that hath good wine in his Cellar.
Let us go thither then,which way shall we go, Gentlemen?
Let us go thither by water
Let us rather take a Coach.
No, no, there is more pleasure by water.
The Gentleman saith right, we may smoke in the boat, and drink a merry cup.
For my part, you know I never smoak: but I'le be glad to drink a cup of good Canary.
Shall we not drink and smoak enough when we come thither?
Gentlemen, if we will go thither, let us not loose time, whilst the Tide serves.
Go you before, Gentlemen, I am going to the Rose for a couple of Bottles and some Pipes.
Do not stay then, we will stay for you athouse.
Go on, I'le overtake you by and by.
We should have told him that he should bring an ounce of good Spanish Tobacco.
He hath some in his Box, he is never without it.
Gentlemen, let us agree for a Boat.
Shall we take a man or two?
Let us take two.
Honest men, what shall we give you to carry us to Greenwich, and to bring us back again? Sir, you shal give vs a Crown if you please. It is too much, you shall have four Shillings. We cannot carry you for less.
We must give them five Shillings, they are honest men, they must get their living.
Well, you shall have what you ask. Where is your Boat? There it is, Gentlemen. Will you be pleased to step in?
Presently, we stay for a Gentleman.
There's Mr.coming, he hath made haste.
He goeth like a lean Cat.
Well, Gentlemen, have not I dispatcht?
Truly you are so, you shal drink first.
Have you brought good Wine?
If it be not good, I will drink it all my self.
You understand the matter very well.
Come then, Gentlemen, let us step into the Boat.
Step in first, we will follow you.
Without ceremony, Gent. let him follow me that loves me.
What needs so many complements? for my part I never use any; I take my place by you, for you keep the bottles.
Sir, I intreat you not to let me commit an incivility.
Faith, Sir, I will not go before you, I know very well the respect that is due to you.
But, Sir, you laugh at me, we will stay here then till to morrow.
I must confess, Gentlemen, you are very ceremonious.
Come, come, Gentlemen, let us make haste, what needs so many ceremonies among friends.
I beseech you, Sir, let us not make these Gentlemen stay.
Sir, I had rather commit an incivility, then to disobey you.
Seriously, Gentlemen, this is a fine River.
It is the finest in the world.
The water is very calm at present.
We could not have pitcht upon a finer day to go by water.
But Mr.you have brought Tobacco and Pipes with you: but where will you have fire?
Truly, I have forgot a match, I am giddy-headed.
So much the better, for indeed I do not love smoaking, but when I am at my journies end
Really, Gentlemen, our conversation is better then smoak.
We are very near the Bridg, is there no danger to shoot it?
No more then in this place, the water is smooth now.
I go through it two or three times a day, whether the water be high or low.
You are mighty bold, I went through it once when the water was low, the boat had like to have been sunk.
There is not too much safety, I will not trust too much to it.
Nor I neither.
What, Gentlemen, cannot you swim?
I swim like a fish, but not in my cloaths.
I have swimmed many times over the River with a Boat after me.
I'le lay a wager, that I can swim from hence to Greenwich.
Pray let us have that passtime a little.
I believe he would drink water whilst we drink wine.
Some other time, Gentlemen, the water is not hot enough now.
I wish I could swim on purpose to bathe my self now: but I swim like a stone.
We are now under Bridg.
This is a fine Bridg.
It is the finest in Europe.
How long is it since it was built, it is above --
We are now going to see a great many ships.
We shall see many of them: but they are almost all Merchant men.
Where are then the Men of War?
They are most of them now at Sea
A little before the War was proclaimed, I went toby water with some Gentlemen of, we saw the finest of the Kings ships in the River of.
Did you see the Soveraign?
Yes, and twenty more of the biggest next it.
They say it is a prodigious ship.
It is the biggest that ever I saw, you would think that you are in a Castle.
Methinks that those are very great ships.
They are big enough for Merchant Men.
Is there no Men of War upon the Thames at this time.
There may be some, I suppose.
I have heard his Majesty hath caused many Fregats to be built at& at.
I saw them begun.
Is there no way to go see them?
Yes, if we have but time enough.
We will come on purpose another time, to see the ships.
If we have time, we may land atas we come back.
As the company shal think fitting.
We shall see, we shall see.
We are almost at.
I wish we were there already: for I begin to be dry.
To the business in hand, we do not mind our bottles.
Sir, pull your Cup out of your pocket.
Truly, you have done well to put me in mind: for I did not think upon it.
Come, Gentlemen, to your health.
Tope it.
Drink to me, for I am almost choakt.
To me, Sir, I will pledg you.
Sir, I drink the Kings health.
I accept of it with all my heart.
It must go round.
Sir, it is his Majesties good health, I drink it to you, Sir.
You do not drink it up.
I cannot, Sir, the glass is too big, and you have filled it so full, that I cannot hold it without spilling.
Truly, I drunk it so.
Excuse me, I cannot drink so much at a draught.
The Gentleman is very sober.
Here, Sir, pledg me.
I desire no better.
I have drunk but one cup, make haste then, that I may drink at my turn.
Let me see the cup, Sir, I will help you.
I will help my self, give me the bottle.
Hold, here it is, it is almost empty.
There is enough still for me.
He draws pretty well for a little man.
Come, let us open the other bottle, I am so dry, that I could drink the Sea and fishes.
You spill, have a care what you do.
You cannot make so much as you have lost.
I am to blame, I confess: but seeing I have committed a fault, I must drink it.
This wine will make a Cat speak.
Gentlemen, let us empty our bottle, before we come out of the Boat.
Give a glass to these poor Watermen, that have taken so much pains to row
Here, friends, this is for you. Thanks, Gentlemen.
Gentlemen, shall we pay for Boat now, or shall we pay them when we come back?
Do as you please, as you think good.
No, no, we will pay when we come back.
This is a very fine and delightful place.
So it is.
Gentlemen, will you have me carry you to that honest mans house I spoke to you of, when we came away.
Hath he got good wine?
He hath some excellent.
Let us go there then.
Besides, he is a man of good company too. He hath been in, he can speak good French. He is altogether merry, he doth alwaies sing. He hath many drinking songs He will make you burst with laughing. One is never weary of his company.
Let us go there quickly then, he is such a man as I would have.
Your servant, Landlord. Sir, your most humble servant. How do you do? Well at your service. We are come to take a little divertisement here these Gentlemen and I. I have commended to them both your self, & your good wine Sir, I am much obliged to you, I give you thanks for it. Gentlemen, you are all very welcome. Will you be pleased to walk up staires, I have some ho-go that I wil send you up, with some of the best wine, of a high colour, it is like me? For although I am not high-minded, I love to drink high, chiefly about the higher time ofthe day (the evening) and yet I never stumble, nor am never more impertinent nor insolent.
Faith, Landlord, you speak very good French. Excuse me, Sir, I understand it more then I do high German.
Well, Gentlemen, did not I tell you, that this man was very good company.
Truly he is very merry.
He is a good Fellow, I must scrape acquaintance with him.
You will delight in his company when you know him. Gentlemen, I bring you somthing that was never eaten yet. Do you see this Neats-tongue? You never saw it before. Though it were for the Kings mouth, it could not be better.
Faith, Landlord, we are ingaged to you, come, sit down here by me. I love you, you are of a good humour, I am going to drink your health. Will you do me reason. Yes indeed, Sir, I do reason to all the world.And especially unto honest people.
Landlord, you and I must be better acquainted. Faith, Sir, if you get acquaintance with me, you will do well: for I love greatness. And though I am no great man, I do as my Granfather did, I rise betimes in the morning, before it be broad-day, and I drink a great glass of wine.
You do as an honest man ought to do. Alas, Sir, I did it formerly: but now I am not able to do it any longer, I am like my old cloaths, I have had my time.
Landlord, here's to you. Sir, I thank you. I have heard that you have a great many good songs, pray sing us one. Yes, Sir: but pray cut this Neats tongue, I asseure you that it is an exceeding good one.
Lend me a knife, Landlord, and I will cut it.
Truly, it looks well.
It is exceeding good. Gentlemen, did not I tell you so, another time you will believe me.
We did not doubt but it that it was good upon your word.Gentlemen, one word draws another, tast a little of this white wine, I believe you will like it.
I will pledg you, Landlord, it is in a good hand, well, Sir, it is the health of your inclinations. Sir, I drink it to you.
I receive it with all my heart, I will pledg you presently.
Landlord, I find this tongue a little too salted, have you got nothing else for me? For I love not things that are so salted. I have a couple of good Pullets below on the spit. Well, bring them up to us, if you please.
Ah, ah, you have then a mind to feast.
The Gentleman is of my humour, he is not dainty-mouth'd but he loves good victuals well.
Our Landlord saith right: but I'le tell you more when my belly is full, I want but few things to satisfie my hunger.
Sir, I blow this cup from you, you preach too long over the vintage. Well, well, like for like. But, Gentlemen, you do not mind that it begins to be late.
Do not trouble your self, we shall have time enough. Gentlemen, here are the two Pullets, they are tender as --
Sit you down there, Landlord, and eat a bit with us.
Gentlemen, I will tell you one thing, I eat not much: but I make it up in drink.
We must do so, little eating, much drinking.
I act my part well enough: for I do really believe, that as long as I drink, I shall never die.
You say right, but otherwise when you are dead, you shall drink no more.
Alas, what misfortune, when I think upon it; come, let us drink then while we live.
Drawer, go and draw us of the same white wine. I will, Sir. Make haste.
Come, Landlord, sing a fudling song. I will, Sir: but I must first drink a glass.
This Drawer is long a coming.
He would be fit to fetch death. Why dost thou make us stay so long?
Come, Landlord, this is to your health, and to thank youfor your good company.
Sir, I am your most humble servant. I am to give you thanks for the honour you have been pleased to bestow upon me.
What do we owe you,
Landlord?
 Gentlemen, there is eight
Shillings for Wine, pay what
you please for the rest.
 Here, Landlord, there is
fifteen Shillings for all, are you
content?
 Yes, Sir, and give you many
thanks besides.
 Farewel, Landlord, till we
see you again.
 Gentlemen, your most humble
servant, I hope you will do me
the favour to come and see me
when you come to divertise your
selves in these parts.
 Yes, yes, we will.
 You shall alwaies command
the best Wine.
 We thank you, Landlord.
 Gentlemen, I wish you well
home every one to his own house,
I pray God to keep you in good
health.
 We thank you, Landlord.
 God keep you so.
 We have staid there a long
while, it is very late.
 Let us go quickly to find out
our Boat.
 Truly, this man is good
company.So he is.
 We were not weary of his
company.
 Truly, he is very merry.
 He deserves that people should 
go to his house.
 He receives people very kindly
 Come, honest friends, we
have staid a little longer then
we thought.
 You are welcome, 
Gentlemen.
 You must make a little haste,
if you please, as much as we can
possible, Gentlemen.
 Do then, you shall have
another Shilling to drink.
 I think we shall have time
enough.
 It is fine weather, we have
wind and tide, we shall come
home in good time.
 The Moon shines bright, we
go a great pace, we shall quickly
be atBridg.
 These men are strong, they
row with all their strength.
 How pleasant it is now upon
the Water!
 Are not those fishers?
 Yes, Sir.
 Do you think they have got
any fish?
 Yes truly, they have.
 Let us buy some.
 No, no, let us not stay, we
have not too much time.What should we do with that
fish?
 We will eat it.
 There is enough at the 
Fish-market.
 You say right: but it is not
so good, and it is dearer.
 It is as good every jot, what
matter is it how dear it is? it is
not too dear neither.
 I do not love fish, I love flesh
better.
 You are a great flesh-eater.
 I love fish better then flesh.
 There is nothing better then
a good stewed Carp.
 You have reason.
 I love Tenches extreamly
when they are well season'd.
 So do I.
 Methinks that they do dress
fish better inthen here.
 That is true, the French are
better Cooks then we are.
 Yet I have eaten some well
dressed in this Country.
 I believe it.
 I was ata while
ago with a Gentleman a friend 
of mine, that carried thither
two great Carps from:
we had them drest for us very
well, in our Inn. I did never eat
any thing so good.In what Inn did you lodg?
 At the Castle.
 It is true, it is a good Inn, 
there is a handsom maid which is
a very good Cook.
 Ah, ah, we are come already
to the Tower.
 If it were not so late, we
would go to visit a Gentleman a
friend of mine in the Tower that
would entertain us nobly.
 It is too late, it must be some
other time.
 When you please, we shall go
there.
 Oh God be thanked we are
arrived.
 Softly, Gentlemen, step out
one after another, we are come
in good time.
 It is not too late, let us pay
the Boat, it is good reason.
 Here, honest men, here is your
money, here is another Shilling
that we promised you to drink.
 We thank you, Gentlemen.
 Now, Gentlemen, it is time
for us to take leave one of
another.
 Gentlemen, before we part, 
will you be pleased to let me give
you a glass of Sack?
 No, Sir, we thank you, it
shall be another time.
 Come, come, it is not so late.For my part, I must go home,
I will not drink to day, they stay
for me at home.
 Well, Sir, since you are not
pleased, farewel, I rest your
servant.
 I thank you for your good
company
 Gentlemen, your most humble
servant.
 I wish you a good evening
and a good night. My Dear, what shall we
do this evening?
 We will do any thing that you 
please.
 Let us take a walk.
 I will.
 Whither shall we go?
 Let us go into the Park.
 We have never a Coach.
 Let us hire one.
 I will not go into the Park in
a Hackney Coach.
 Why not?
 Because it is not the custome for
persons of our quality.
 People would take us to be
nought.
 Let us go see my Brother.
 He will lend us his Coach.
 Is he in Town?
 Yes.Since when?
 Since yesterday.
 How doth he do?
 He is very well,
 God be thanked for it.
 Let us go then and desire him to
lend us his Coach.
 Do you think he will be willing
to lend it us.
 I am certain he will not deny it 
me.
 But I believe he will go along
with us.
 I should be very glad of it.
 And I also.
 Brother, I come to beg a favour
of you.
 What favour, Sister?
 But will you not refuse me?
 No, if it be any thing I can do.
 If it be in your power, will you
promise me to do it?
 What need so many words?
 Do I use to deny you any thing?
 Tell me what it is.
 I will tell it you, Brother.
 Mrs.and I would fain go
walk in the Park: but we
want a Coach.
 I understand you.
 That is as much as to say you
would gladly have mine.
 You have guess'd right, Brother.
 And where is Mrs.?
 She is below in the Hall.
 You shall have my Coach, andsomething more.
 What, Brother?
 My Company.
 What a good Brother you are.
 How well you flatter, Sister!
 I love you too much, Brother.
 Can you love me too much?
 No, I confess I cannot love you
so much as you are aimable.
 And I for my part I do not
love you.
 I do not believe you.
 I know you love me well.
 I have very certain proves of
it.
 I am very sure of it.
 Let us stop here, Sister.
 What you please, Brother.
 But if you will go with us into
the Park, it is time to be
going.
 Well, well, walk down stairs.
 You leave Mrs.all alone.
 That is not civil.
 It is not for long.
 She will have the goodness to
excuse me.
 Go & intreat her to pardon me,
I wil be with you presently.
 I am going to give order for the
Horses to be put to the Coach.
 Pray do so, Brother.
 Do not make us stay too long.Mrs., my Brother is
coming down.
 He desires you to excuse him.
 He was a little busie.
 We shall have his Coach.
 He will go along with us.
 Truly? In good earnest?
 He told me so.
 Oh! what a good Brother you
have.
 He is the best young man in the
world.
 I would I had one like him.
 Really he is very civil and very
courteous.
 He is altogether gallant.
 Every body loves him.
 He is also very lovely, there he
comes.
 Madam, I intreat you to excuse
me.
 My Sister did not tell me at first
that you were here.
 Sir, your most humble servant.
 There needs no excuse where 
there is no fault.
 Madam, I think my self happy
in having the honour of
waiting upon you in the
Park.
 Sir, it shall be I that shal have
that happiness.
 Would to God, Madam, that you
would esteem it so, my desires
should be accomplished.
 I pray you, Brother, leave off
these Complements, and let 
us go into the Coach.I must obey my Sister.
 Come Madam, give me leave to
take you by the hand.
 Your servant, Sir.
 Do you leave me behind, 
Brother?
 Give me your hand.
 Sit you there.
 I will be in the Boot.
 Where you will.
 My Sister will be seen.
 She may well, Sir.
 Yes, yes, I will be seen, I fear
nothing.
 I must confess, Madam, here is
very pleasant place.
 Altogether, Sir.
 How many Coaches!
 What Coach is that?
 It is the French Embassadors.
 And that other?
 It is the Spanish Embassadors.
 Good God, what a dust here is!
 Let us go out of the dust, it
blinds me.
 Whether run all those Horses?
 There is a Race.
 Do you see that little white
Horse?
 How frolick he is!
 He runs like a little Devil.
 Here would be a great of
pleasure, were it not for the dust.
 Let us return again.
 It begins to be late.
 It is not so late as you think
it is.
 What a clock is it?
 Look on your Watch.It is not six a clock.
 It is a good hour.
 It is time to draw homewards.
 Lady, you shall not go
away.
 You shall lie with me.
 I thank you, Madam.
 What would my mother say?
 What should she say?
 It is not the first time you have
done me that honour.
 I confess I have had the honour 
to lie with you, my dear.
 But it doth follow that I must
needs lie with you this 
night.
 Why not?
 I durst not without my mothersleave.
 Madam, pray refuse not my 
Sister that favour.
 I will go my self and intreat
your Lady-mother to give you
leave.
 I thank you, Sir.
 That cannot be for this time.
 Let it alone for another time.
 We have some company to sup
with us to night.
 I must needs be at home.
 Besides, my Dancing-master
comes to night.
 How, so late?
 He comes alwaies at six a clock.
 What is his name.
 His name is Mr..
 How, is it Mr.that
teaches you?Yes, it is the same.
 I know him very well.
 I did learn of him.
 He is a very able man.
 He is an excellent Master.
 He teaches very well.
 He takes a great deal of pains.
 I love that man.
 He is mighty civil.
 How much do you give him a 
month?
 Forty Shillings.
 I did give him so much.
 Where doth he dwell?
 He dwells in, &c.
 I must go and see him.
 He spoke to me of you.
 He will be glad to see you.
 He esteems you very much.
 He saith you are very
generous.
 He is a man that knows the
world. 
 He knows what belongs to
civility.
 I am much obliged to him.
 Madam, durst I intreat you to
present my service to him?
 I shall, Sir.
 Brother, we draw near home.
 I know it very well, Sister.
 Seeing Madamwill not
go home with us, we must
wait upon her home.
 That's understood.
 Sir and Madam, I give you
thanks for the honour youhave done me.
 Farewel, my Dear.
 It is we that have received it.
 Madam, oblige me with the
honour of your commands.
 Sir, I am to obey you, not to
command you.
 What do you say, Madam? you
deserve to command all men. Sir, your Servant.
 Where are you going so?
 I do not go, I come.
 Whence come you then?
 I come from a Play.
 I did never laugh so much in my
life at the end of the Play.
 They have plaid a Farce, a Jig
the most jestful in the world.
 You never saw such a piece.
 Pray see it.
 It will give you content.
 You will laugh your belly full.
 You'l see there a pleasant Jester.
 He will make you burst with
laughter.
 He will make you shit in your
breeches for laughing.
 There are fools every where.
 There are as many in this world,
as in any place we can go.You are right.
 You have it.
 You have said wel to the purpose.
 You have hit the mark.
 You understand it.
 For whom do you take me?
 For a man of business.
 Do you speak in earnest?
 You are merry.
 You are pleased to say so.
 Who saith the contrary?
 No body speaks to you.
 Be not surly.
 Are you afraid of your shadow?
 Do not put your self in a passion.
 You would make me afraid.
 This is a fine weather.
 The finest weather in the world.
 If this weather did last long, I
should be gone quickly.
 I would suddenly depart.
 To go where?
 In.
 No to stay there?
 You intend to come again?
 Alas! God knows.
 It is true, we are all mortal.
 We do not know whether we
shall be alive to morrow.
 I am an old man already.
 I begin to grow old.
 How old may you be?
 Fifty.
 You do not seem so old.
 I could not think you to be
above forty.
 I am in good health, that is the 
chiefest.God be thanked.
 Health is a precious thing.
 It is the richest treasure we
enjoy in this world.
 Nothing more true.
 But what, do not you like this 
Country?
 Pardon me, excuse me, it is not
for that.
 A man must go and see his
friends.
 That is right.
 I wish I could travel along with
you.
 Would to God your mind were
bent that way.
 I would be huge glad of it.
 I would die even for joy.
 It would be a great honour for
me.
 Without Complement.
 If such a thing could be done.
 That is not impossible.
 It is not an thing impossible.
 I defie you.
 You dare not.
 If I should receive some monies
due to me.
 I might resolve thereupon.
 Is it but want of money?
 How! is it not necessary for
such a journey?
 I have enough for us both.
 Do not trouble your self about it.
 I give you thanks.
 I am ingaged to you.
 You are too generous.
 Think upon it then, farewel.
 You know what I am to you. Sir, your Servant.
 I am yours.
 How do you do?
 You see, Sir.
 I was never in better health.
 I am glad of it.
 I am glad that I have met with
you.
 So am I.
 Come along with me.
 Whether are you going?
 I am going to see my daughter.
 In what place?
 At.
 What doth she do there?
 What, do not you know that I
have put her at a 
Boarding-school?
 With whom?
 At onethat
keeps a French School.
 Truly I did not know it.
 What doth she learn there?
 She learns to write.
 To read.
 To speak French.
 To sing. 
 To dance. 
 To play upon the Guitarre and
Virginals.
 All those things?
 Yes.
 What do you give a year?
 Five and twenty pounds.It is not dear.
 It is very cheap.
 I have a great mind to put mine
there also.
 I advise you to it.
 It is a good School.
 They are good people.
 Mr.is a very honest
man, very courteous and
civil.
 He takes a great deal of pains to
teach his Scholars.
 He brings them to speak very
good French in a little time.
 My daughter begins to speak
already.
 How long hath she been there?
 Three months since.
 What, she can speak French
already!
 Yes truly.
 Are Children well used?
 Mighty well.
 Mrs.is a very brave
woman, she takes great care 
of Maids.
 She giveth them good
instructions.
 She keeps them very neat.
 What Religion are they of?
 They are good Protestants.
 I am glad of it.
 Mr.reads Prayers at
the French Church.
 In earnest?
 Yes I assure you.
 I must put my daughter there, I 
am resolved.You cannot do better.
 It is a thing concluded and
sure.
 I am going to speak to him now
about it.
 You will do very well.
 There is the House.
 Which?
 The first of all.
 It is a very fine House.
 Well seated.
 In a fine place.
 In a good Air.
 Is there a Garden?
 There are two.
 Is there any French Maid in
the house, to converse with
the Gentlewomen in French?
 Mr.hath his daughter
which is very handsom, who
keeps company alwaies with
Gentlewomen, and talks
with them in French.
 What do you tell me.
 I tell you nothing but what is
true.
 She is a young Maid that is very
well qualified.
 She hath a very fine voice.
 She sings rarely.
 She dances perfectly.
 She understands the Art of 
Musick very well.
 She playes upon the Virginals.
 She is very well bred, very
discreet.
 Those are fine qualities. Good morrow, my Dear.
 How dost thou do?
 Very well, my dear, at thy
service.
 Prethee take a seat, and sit
down by the fire.
 I shall have soon done.
 What art thou busie about then?
 What art thou doing then?
 I am writing a Sonnet fair.
 What Sonnet?
 A Sonnet I composed
yesterday.
 How canst thou make Verses?
 Somtimes I divert my self to
make some, to pass my time.
 When I have no other 
business.
 Thou dost jest, it belongs to none
but men to make Verses.
 Why not to women as well as to
men?
 Because men have more wit then
we have.
 At least they will have it so.
 I am not of that opinion.
 I believe that women in 
general have as much wit as
men.But generally men go beyond
us.
 Why dost thou believe that?
 Because it is men that do all.
 They make war.
 They rule all.
 They do possesse Offices.
 They get womens livelihood.
 They know Sciences.
 They compose Books, and do all
manner of other things,
which women are not capable
of.
 And thou dost infer out of all
that, that men have more wit
then women.
 It seems so, and they prove it
themselves by Scripture.
 Which way?
 They say that man was created
first, and that the woman was
made of one of his ribs, as it
is true.
 It doth not follow for all that,
that they have got more wit
then we: for beasts that
have got none, were created
before man.
 God created the noblest last of 
all.
 But God made the woman
subject unto man, and he will
have her obey him, as being
the most worthy of the two.
 But rather, it is because the
woman is the most worthy, that
God would have her obey
man, as a fierce and proud 
creature.For there is more force of wit
to yield and obey, then to
command imperiously.
 Thou speakest wonderful wel:
but yet S.saith, that the
man is the head of the woman.
 It is true.
 But are not women members
of Christ as well as men?
 There is no doubt.
 Doth the image of God
consist in the body, or in the Spirit
or mind?
 I rather believe that it is in
the Spirit: for God is not a 
body.
 Why then should not the wit
of women be as good as that of 
men, seeing that the woman is
the image of God as well as
man?
 But S.will not have
women speak in the Church.
 It is a sign that he doth not
hold them so capable as men.
 No, it is not that. The thing
only is, that he doth not hold it
so convenient, that women be
mixt with men in a 
Church-counsel. For he foresaw that
this might cause some disorder
by reason of the small accountthat men make of womens
judgment and wit.
 But it doth not follow, that
they are not capable of all
functsons of spirit as men are.It is a thing that we could 
hardly perswade them.
 That would be easie enough,
if they would hear reason.
 Is not the good behaviour of
women a sufficient proof of their
wisdom?
 Are they seen to fuddle, and
commit murders as men do?
 It is true, their Sex is much
more vicious then ours.
 But they do prevail above us,
because they go beyond us in
strenth of body.
 And that thing should bring
them to the knowledg of truth.
 How so?
 Because we see that among all
creatures, those which nature
gave less strength to, she hath
furnished them with more skill
and understanding.
 And those that are the
strongest, are the more stupid.
 Truly thou art in the right.
 That is commonly observed,
that the weakest are nearer to
reason, and have a more
powerful instinct then those whom
Nature hath endued with other
advantages.
 For a proof thereof, are there
any creatures seen lesser and
more industrious the Silk worm
the Bee, and the Ant?
 Thou dost understand then,that according to this rule,
Nature having given more
strength unto men then to 
women, she ought also to have
given us more wit and more
judgment.
 Thou dost argue strongly.
 And if it be so, why should
we not addict our selves to the
study of good letters as well as
men?
 But however, it seems
notwithstanding, that it is not the
part of a woman to make use of
a pen.
 What we must have a 
clear-sighted mind, and solid
judgment, and we must not imploy
them but only to curl our hair!
 That would be to abuse those
favours we have received from
heaven.
 The greatwas of
another mind.
 For as he did not judg our
sex less capable of Philosophy
then his own, he kept his School
open for maids and women.
 Who was that greatthou speakest of?
 He was the greatest
Philosopher of his time.
 He was experienc'd in all
manner of Sciences and
Disciplines, both Divine & humane.
 In what Country did he
teach.
 In.
 Hast thou been in his School?I should be very old to have
been there.
 He hath then been dead a
long time.
 He died in the year of our 
Lord 260.
 We were not yet born.
 Sure enough.
 Certainly thou must needs
have been at some good School:
for methinks thou dost discourse
altogether like a Philosopher.
 Alas! my dear, my knowledg
is but little. But in spight of
all men I will study to go beyond
them, or at least to equalize 
them.
 How happy art thou to have
so much wit!
 I have no more then another:
but I hope by cultivating it, to
bring it to maturity.
 If I thought to do any good 
in study, as well as thou hast
done, I would practise it.
 It is a very easie matter.
 Reading of good Books gives
us great instructions.
 But how comes it to pass, 
that men will not have us to be
Scholars?
 I cannot imagine the reason
of it.
 Sure it is to gain our
admiration.
 That would not be the way to
come where they aime at, seeinga body cannot admire a thing
unknown.
 It may be it is to make us the 
more subject.
 If it be for that end, they have
but little generosity. And if
they have dominion or command
over us, it is but little glorious,
to rule over stupid and ignorant
creatures.
 I cannot then imagine why
they approve not learning in our
Sex as well as in their own.
 The best reason they give for
it, it is (say they) that study
doth not agree with the care a
woman ought to have of her
children, and of her house.
 Yet that reason hath no place
but with them that have a mind
to marry.
 But how shall a woman bring
up her children in the fear of
God, and in the love of vertue
if she be ignorant?
 Some men are so stupid as to
say that a woman is learned
enough, when she can distinguish
her husbands bed from anothers.
 They think that honesty and
learning are things that cannot
agree together.
 Those that are of that foolish
opinion, are quite ignorant.
 They love that which they
enjoy, and that which is like them.There are some men that are
more rational, and that esteem
vertu where it is.
 Methinks that a learned man
that should have a stupid woman
could not have much content in
her company.
 How can a stupid woman
know vertue and distingish it
from vice?
 Certainly learning bring one
to the knowledg of vertue better
then ignorance.
 Ignorance is the mother of all
vices.
 Thou art in the right: for
it is the cause of idleness, and
idleness is the root of all evil.
 Ignorance is alwaies
contemptible in what sex soever it is
seen: but learning attracts the
esteem and love of every body.
 Thou hast wholly perswaded
me to apply my self to study, in
shewing me that women are no
more incapable of it then men.
 I am glad I have given thee
a better opinion of our sex then
thou hadst before.<|endoftext|>Sir, I hope you'l
excuse mee, if I make
bold to aske you one 
question.
 What is't Lady?
 Are you not a Frenchman?
 Yes, Lady, at your service.
 I believe I have seene you
some where else before
now.
 That may be.
 Do you know such a 
Gentleman? 
 Yes, Lady, I am in his
company very often.
 He is a very welcomGentleman to all companies.
 Hee is a Gentleman that
keeps the best company 
in.
 Hee's a very handsome
Gentleman, and one
that understands 
himselfe very well.
 Are ye Countrey-men, Sir?
 Wee are not above tenne 
leagues asunder.
 All the world proclaimes 
his worth.
 He is a man well
descended, well accomplisht, of
good education, very
civill, courteous,
merry, affable, witty,
understands himselfe very
well, of good repute,
and estimation.
 Lady, I shall tell him what
a good opinion you 
have of him.
 Do you meet him often?
 Yes, Lady.
 Hee is one to whom I am
very much engaged.VVhere learnt you to
speak French, Lady?
 Sir, I do not speak it at all,
I only hack at it a little.
 I protest to you, at first I
thought you had beene 
a naturall 
French-woman.
 It is impossible for an
English-woman to get
your Language 
perfectly.
 Excuse me, Lady, there 
are many that have 
done it.
 I had the honour not
long since, to converse
with a Gentlewoman
that speaks as exactly as
any French woman.
 I perceive you have a
great desire to the
French Tongue.
 Very great.
 You give the Accent very
right and exactly.
 Of whom doe you learn?
 Of a French man that is
newly come over, one of
Blois.
 'Tis true, the purest french
is spoken there, not onlyin respect of the
Pronunciation, but of the
phrase also.
 All the world confesse as 
much.
 Your language is very 
hard.
 I would speak as well as
you.
 Lady, but that I fear I
should take you off
from your more serious
imployment, I would
return your visite.
 Sir, when you please.
 How doth he teach you?
 What method doth he 
use?
 He teacheth me in a
discoursive way.
 If I were in, I
would learn by
keepingcompany at
Meetings.
 I knew a Countesse atthat spoke the
language so well, that
they admired her at 
Court.
 I have the honour to be
known to her.Is it not the Lady &c?
 She speaks all sorts of 
languages.
 She hath gotten her self a 
great name.
 She hath learnt a long
time.
 How long have you been 
in?
 Three years.
 You speak good English 
then.
 I protest to you, Lady, I
cannot beat it into my
head.
 Who is the best Master of 
the Languages in this 
City?
 Every man commends his 
own.
 Doe you play upon the
Lute?
 No Sir, I play upon the 
Virginals.
 Doe you learn to dance
too?
 I have learnt, but I shall
learn no more now.
 Lady, let me beg the
favour to hear you read
two or three words.Sir, I pronounce very ill.
 That's no matter, do me
this favour.
 Sir, I am ashamed.
 I beseech you deny me not
this favour.
 Your command shall serve
me for an excuse.
 You read it exactly well.
 I cannot flatter my self 
with any such vain
thought; I wish I could
do so.
 Really, Lady, you have
the true pronunciation 
of.
 Are you able to write a 
Letter in? 
 Yes, poorly.
 You are very much 
improved.
 What Author doe you
read?
 I read,, and.
 Those are good books.
 Have you never read the
Works of?
 No Sir.
 I desire you to read them,
they are excellent good.Have you readand?
 Yes, a great while ago.
 That's a good Book, where
the phrase is well
observed.
 Hath hee that teacheth
you the right phrase?
 The English are very 
curious.
 Yes Sir.
 At what hour comes he to
you?
 Hee never failes of his
time.
 Do you understand a 
Historie well?
 Yes Sir.
 Can you tell a story well?
 Doe you understand all
that you read?
 I doe understand a great
part.
 Doe you understand the 
sense well?
 Very well, Sir.
 Every body speaks French
at your house.
 Yes Sir, my Father hath
been in, and.
 What do you think of ourCountry, Sir?
 It is the pleasantest
Country in.
 I confess the civill
government is better observed
here then in. 
 You have many handsome 
women here.
 So have you in.
 The English herein excell
all other Nations.
 Sir, they are very much
obliged to you.
 If you should say so much
of any French women,
they would be hardly
of your opinion.
 I have told them as much
to their faces a hundred
times.
 Where is your lodging?
 Neare Covent-garden.
 There is the best company
in all.
 In what street.
 InStreet.
 I know it very well.
 I have learnt very much in
this little time that I
have enjoyed your
good company.You speak better then I.
 Sir, now you are too open.
 I know very well that you
do but jear me.
 I should be very sorry to
do so, I assure you.
 Are you married?
 Yes Lady.
 Is your Wife in Town?
 She is in the Country.
 Sir, as soon as she returns,
I shal tender my service 
to her.
 Lady, shee shall prevent
you.
 Shee will know her duty.
 Sir, I am bound to you for
this your conversing 
with me.
 God b' w' Lady, I am very
much your servant.
 Sir, I am your servant. Oh Sir, what news?
 I know none, Lady.
 I was yesterday abroad in
some company.
 Where, Lady?
 At a friends of mine,
where I met with a 
French Gentleman.
 Had you any discourse 
with him?
 Wee discoursed together
in French two hours at
the least.
 Is he a man of quality?
 I believe he is a 
Gentleman.
 He is a man of very good
behaviour, & discourses
well.Is he well clad?
 Exceeding well.
 Does he like your
pronunciation?
 Yes Sir, but I believe it was
but by way of
Complement.
 I can assure you, your
pronunciation is admirable.
 What did you discourse 
of?
 The French Tongue.
 Did you understand him
well?
 As well as if he had spoke 
English.
 Is he an affable man?
 Very affable.
 Where lives he?
 By Covent Garden.
 Is it not Mr. &c.
 Yes, Sir.
 I have the honour to be
acquainted with him.
 He is a gallant man, an
honourable person.
 When you see him,
present my service to him.
 What do you heare out of?
 The letters are not come
yet.The Post is not come yet.
 He is expected to night.
 Have you brought mee
that you wot of?
 Hee talkt to me ofand, is that a 
good Book?
 A very good Book.
 He advised mee to buy the 
works of.
 Lady, they are extreamly
good.
 I hope I shall be able to
speak French in time.
 As well as any French 
woman.
 Pray Sir, correct me where
I speak amiss.
 Do I read it well?
 Very well.
 You encourage me.
 I was discouraged
yesterday.
 Have you any store of 
Schollers?
 Yes, very many.
 What doe they give you a 
moneth?
 No less then you do.
 Do they give as much as I
do?
 Yes Lady?
 Pray Sir, take a seat.I desire you to buy me the
Works of Monsr., and I wil pay you
what money you lay
out.
 I shall Lady.
 When will you come
again?
 To morrow, at my usuall
houre.
 I pray you fail not.
 I shall long till I see you.
 Lady, I have obeyed your
commands; see here's
that you appointed me
to buy for you.
 I give you a thousand 
thanks.
 What did it cost you?
 Sir, I shall give you your 
money.
 Have not you seene that
honest Gentleman since?
 No, I have not been abroad
since.
 I met him this morning.
 Hee much extolls your 
worth.He sayes you speak 
admirable well.
 He saies your 
pronunciation is exact.
 He speaks as he thinks, in
saying this.
 I am much beholding to 
him.
 I will go on Sunday to the 
French Church.
 You shall do well.
 I must begin to studie.
 Do you go still to the 
Lady, &c?
 Yes, Lady.
 No question shee learnes
better then I.
 You both learn very well.
 This Gentleman hath
raised a very great
opinion in mee of a certaine
Countess that lives at.
 I have had the honour to
teach her.
 Doth she speak so well?
 She speaks as well as any
Lady in the Court.
 You make me wonder 
very much.
 Is it possible that anEnglish VVoman should 
speak so well?
 Why not?
 You pronounce more
exactly then your English
men do.
 Were I in, I should
have some hopes of
learning; but here I see
no probability of it.
 You may learn as wel here
if you be taught by an
able Master. Lady, your servant.
 Lady, I am yours.
 Excuse my boldnesse, that
I take the liberty to
speakto you.
 Where there is no fault, 
there needs no excuse.
 I have been told, that you
speak extreamly well.
 I have heard the same of 
you.
 For my part, I am so
conscious of my own 
insufficiency, that I cannot
believe any such thing.
 Who told you this?I was yesterday in some
company where I heard
it.
 Those Gentlemen, or
those Ladies should
have spared my
ignorance.
 But they say you have
very great command of
the French tongue.
 As the French say,.
 By what I find, you speak
much better then I do.
 I protest to you, I have
the same opinion of
you.
 Do you believe that
Monsieur &c. speaks well?
 He's no Master of the
Language, but he makes
a good shift.
 Hath he the right
pronunciation?
 No, he hath onely what
he hath learnt of
himself.
 It is good to practise
somtimes, for fear of
forgetting.
 I do not fear that at all.
 What's your Master'sname that teaches you?
 His name is Monsieur &c.
 Is he a diligent man? does
he never fail of his
time?
 He never fails me.
 He's a man of good
repute.
 He is an able man.
 He understands his
businesse very well.
 What Gentleman is that
you were yesterday in
company with?
 A kinsman of mine.
 He's in very good esteem.
 He's a man of very good
account.
 What is he that made
your coat for you?
 'Twas a French man.
 It is very fashionable.
 I hear, you speak Italian
too.
 Who told you so?
 Monsieur &c.
 He's a notable jearer.
 When do you go into the
Country?
 Perhaps within these 
fifteen dayes.He takes upon him much
or, he's a great
pretender.
 How do you passe away 
your time?
 How do you imploy your
self?
 What d'yee doe all day
long?
 How do you spend your 
time?
 Madam, I study the French
tongue.
 After dinner I goe abroad
into Company.
 What company doe you 
keep?
 Such and such Ladyes.
 I have the honour to be 
known to them.
 They are very accomplisht
Ladies, the eldest of
them playes excellently
well on the Lute, sings
rarely, and dances
extreamly well.
 Are you acquainted with 
any Dance-masters?
 I know two, that goe far
beyond all the rest.
 Are they not such ones?Yes Lady, They are very
Active men.
 Where got they that
perfection?
 At Paris, where theylearnt
of the best Master
there.
 They dance a Saraband 
well.
 They have very good
footing.
 Doe you learne of one of
them?
 Yes, Lady.
 Do you know ere a good
Musick Master?
 Yes Lady, I know one that
is one of the best in
England.
 Have you heard him sing?
 Have you seen him dance?
 Does he not sing well?
 Does he not dance well?
 He's a rare man.
 Do you know a good and
excellent Writer?
 I know a yong man ofnamed Monsr., 
who excelleth in hisArt.
 Youare every day in 
company.
 You love to keep company.
 Truly, Lady, you speak
better then I.
 Away with this
dissembling, I know the
contrary.
 Doth such a Gentleman 
speak well?
 He speaks well enough for
the time he hath learnt.
 He hath learnt a great
while.
 He hath not the right
pronunciation.
 Lady, d'yee stay any time
here?
 Some two yeers.
 I shall be very glad to
enjoy your society some
times.
 Madam, I think my self
much honoured by this
enjoying your good 
company.
 We will practise to speak
French together.
 I shall make bold to wait 
upon you.Madam, I am very much
obliged to you for your
civilities.
 Madam, God b'w'yee, I
shall make bold to wait 
upon you again once
within these two dayes.
 Madam, I shall come and
wait upon you.
 Doe not put your self to
that trouble. Sir, you are very
welcome home.
 Lady, I come to tender my
service to you.
 Sir, I am extreamly joyful
to see you returned.
 I have a great while 
desired to have this
honour.
 How long is't since you
landed?
 Lady, you are the first I
have spoken withall.
 Sir, you oblige me
infinitely.
 I find you much 
changed.You look like a 
Frenchman.
 Your friends will be very 
glad to see you.
 I make no question, Sir,
but you speak French
as well as a naturall
French man.
 I, Lady! excuse me.
 I believe you speak better
then I.
 Better then you! how is
that possible?
 Why not?
 You have conversed 
altogether with the French.
 There is great advantage 
gotten by conversing 
wholly with them.
 I can assure you I kept
company alwayes with
the English.
 Sir, if I may have the
liberty to measure your
proficiency by the
opinion I have of it, you
speak very well.
 I have gotten neither the
true pronunciation, nor
the phrase.
 Where was your longest
abode?At, upon the river.
 Doe they speak good
French there?
 The best in all France.
 Those ofpronounce
well naturally.
 You went abroad there
into company, did you
not?
 Not at all.
 What doe you think of
France?
 It is a gallant Country,
pleasant, and fruitfull.
 Doe you goe into the
Country, or no?
 I shall stay there some
time.
 I am very glad of it; I
hope at least to enjoy
your company
sometimes.
 Is there any service you
will please to command
me?
 I desire you would be
pleased to take a short
Commons with me.
 Have you not left a Mistris
behind you in?You are pleasant, Lady.
 No truly, Sir, they so
much cry up the
Beauties of, that I
believe you must needs
have gotten some
Mistresse there.
 Are all things very deare 
there?
 Extream dear.
 Did you receive any of my
letters there?
 I never had that honour. 
 And yet I wrote to you
ten times.
 VVhence doe you now
come?
 I come from Dover.
 How many miles is it from
hence to Dover?
 Do you findbigger
then?
 I cannot judg of that.is very great.is more populous.
 What wine wil you please 
to drink?
 You have forgotten the
tast of Beer quite by this
time.
 What did you drinke in?I drank wine and water.
 They say that Maids atdrink no wine at
all.
 It is true.
 How long were you in?
 A yeare.
 Pray Sir, take a seat.
 Lady, you overcome me
with your Civilities.
 Have you heard any news
since you came out of?
 None at all.
 What do they say of the 
Princes?
 Is the Peace concluded?
 Have you seen the
Articles?
 Did you learn any musick
there?
 Do me the favour to let
mee heare you sing a
French Air.
 I have got a cold, I cannot 
sing.
 Doe you play upon the
Lute?
 I beseech you excuse me, Iam the veriest bungler
in the world.
 Pray Sir, do me the favour
to let mee see you to
morrow.
 We'l go see some friends.
 I am at your command,
Lady.
 Sir, you'l excuse this your
bad entertainment.
 Sir, I have made you lose
your dinner.
 Sir, your very humble
servant.
 How long were you at
Sea?
 The troubles are very
great in.
 None of your Letters came
to my hands.
 Did you like to be inbetter then 
here?
 I like every place wel.
 I tie my self to no
particular place.
 Doe you and such a 
Gentleman meet together
sometime?
 Very seldome.
 Your friends will wonder
to see you.They do not expect mee so
soon.
 When do you return out
of the Countrey?
 Some six weeks hence.
 Where's your lodging?
 At the Temple.
 Is such a Gentleman come
back with you?
 I left him at Roan.
 Will you be pleased to
wash?
 Shall I help you with some
of this?
 You are grown.
 To all our friends.
 Shall I make bold to enjoy
this my good fortune?
 I pray do.
 Do you go so far?
 Have you any businesse?
 I would not hinder you
from yourbusiness.
 Sir, I am very well satisfied
concerning your
improvement. Sir, I understand you
have a purpose of
going over into.
 Yes Sir, in the Spring, if it
please God.
 Sir, I should be very glad
to beare you company.
 Sir, I should be extreame
glad to enjoy that
happiness.
 Doe you understand the
Language?
 Sir, I learnt a little while,
but I do not at all
understand it.
 You understand enough
to express your mind.
 Sir, I can ask for bread and
wine.You are resolved to goe
then.
 Yes Sir, if no cross accident
hinder my design.
 Is your Father in the
Countrey?
 No Sir, he's here in Town.
 I would gladly have the
honour to waite upon
him.
 Do you know him, Sir?
 Sir, I have been
acquainted with him a long
while.
 Sir, he'l be very glad to see
you.
 Sir, I cannot do it now, but
I shall some other time.
 Which way shall we go?
 We must go from hence
to, and so to:
 Or else wee may goe by.
 Have you your Letters of
Exchange?
 Yes Sir, and Letters of
Credence too.
 What's your Merchants
name?Monsieur,.
 He is the best in the whole
City.
 He is the richest in.
 He is a very honest man.
 I pray Sir, do so much as
speak to him for me.
 Who is that, Sir?
 A French-man.
 Of what Profession is he?
 He is a Master of the
Languages.
 Does he understand Greek
and Latine?
 Yes, hee is a very good
Scholler.
 Is it requisite that he be a
good Scholler that
teaches the French tongue?
 He cannot possibly do it
otherwise.
 Hee must be able to
discourse well too.
 What do you give your
Master a moneth?
 Forty shillings.
 How many times a weeke
does he come?
 Hee comes three times a 
week.
 How does he teach you?He teaches me to read the 
language, to tell a
story in French, and to
pronounce it right.
 Doth he pronounce it wel 
himselfe?
 Hee's a naturall French
man.
 That's no necessary
reason; for all that are
French men, doe not
therefore speak well.
 Have you ever learnt, Sir?
 Never, Sir.
 Whence came you
yesterday?
 I came from such a 
Gentlemans house.
 Is he in Town?
 Yes, Sir.
 I was told he was sick.
 He's somewhat mended.
 Hee thought hee should
have died.
 He's a gallant man.
 Hee's a man of good 
repute.
 A stout man, and very
noble, politick, judicious,
honourable, active, of 
good account.But his Brother is an
impudent, giddy-headed,
simple, empty fellow.
 Is he maried?
 Yes Sir, he hath Wife and
Children.
 Hath hee been married 
long?
 Not above two years.
 Has he married a young
woman?
 No, he married an old 
woman.
 Did you never heare him
speak of me?
 Yes, many times.
 What said he of me?
 Nothing but good.
 We were at odds a little
once he and I.
 Are you friends now?
 Yes Sir, a great while since.
 We have met together.
 We are very great friends.
 I will speak to him of you.
 As you please.
 Have you been yet where
you said you would go?
 Not yet.
 How do you like him that
was with you yesterday?There is something in him
that I do not like.
 He is one that brags much.
 He has a good opinion of
himselfe.
 He thinks himself alwayes
the best in the 
company.
 He is a very vaine fellow.
 He's a great Pretender.
 He's a proud fellow.
 He's a debosht companion.
 He's a very Booby.
 He's a very Loggerhead.
 He's an Asse, a Dunce.
 He's a broken fellow.
 He is a miserable, undone
man.
 He is a beggerly fellow.
 But his Brother is a very
ingenuous man.
 Have you lately seene
Madame?
 I was at her Lodging
yesterday; Oh, she sings
rarely! she plaies upon
the Theorbo, the
Virginalls, the Harp, and the
Guitarre excellently
well.
 Is there no way to heare
her?Sir, if you please to goe
along with mee, we will
beg that favour of her.
 Where lives she?
 She lies in Covent-garden.
 Is she handsome?
 She is very handsome.
 She is a young
Gentlewoman of a very good
judgment, very discreet,
very vertuous, wel bred,
and of very civill
carriage.
 How old is she?
 Shee cannot be above 
sixteen years old.
 They say she speaks
Italian, and Latine too.
 I pray let's go see her.
 With all my heart.
 Will not she take it ill that
we come there?
 No, no, Sir.
 I will bring you
acquainted with her. 
 You will infinitely oblige
me. 
 Here's a friend of mine, 
Lady, to whom I have
much commended your
worth.Sir, you oblige mee too
much.
 Madam, I beseech you let
mee hear you sing one
song.
 I cannot sing.
 I beseech you Lady, deny
us not this favour.
 I vow to you, shee does
rarely well.
 Whom did you learn of?
 Of Mr..
 He is the ablest of his time.
 You sing extreamly well.
 Madam, I thanke you for
this favour a thousand
times.
 I beseech you touch your 
Lute a little.
 VVhere have you your
strings?
 I buy them here in Town.
 Lady, I shall proclaime
your praises where ere I
goe.
 Come, Sir, shall we goe?
 VVith all my heart.Sir, if you please to give
me leave, I should speak 
a word with that man
there.
 I beseech you stay a little
while.
 I will not tarry at all.
 Sir, have I not been
troublesome to you?
 What are you looking at?
 Those pictures there.
 Let's take a Coach to goe
home in.
 We shall be able to goe on
foot well enough.
 Oh Sir, is it not a very
handsome Lady? does
she not dance well?
 I protest to you, I admire
her.
 She's very handsom, she's a
very compleat Gentlew.
 Hath she ere a servant?
 Yes, so they say.
 She'sa very charming beauty.
 Did not I tell you right?
 Shee is the glory of her
time.
 I must tel you besides, that
she is as rich too.Whence come you, 
Gentlemen?
 Sir, we have been hearing
a rare voyce.
 I perceive, Gentlem. you
are in hast.
 Not at all, Sir.
 Are you for our company?
 I am for any thing.
 Let's go drinke a glasse of 
wine.
 D'yee know where's any
good?
 Here, hard by, let us goe
thither.
 Lead us in Sir, 'tis yours.
 Prithee honest friend,
draw us a pint of the
best Claret thy Master
has in his Cellar.
 Pray Gentlemen, walke up
into this Room.
 This wine is naught,
prithee give us better.
 Sir, the Wine is good, I
drew it my self.
 To your best thoughts, 
Sir.
 Wee are resolved for, Sir.
 When, Sir?
 The next Spring.
 You shall do very well.
 God b' w'yee Sir. Sir, have you any 
new-fashion stuffes?
 Doe you lack any
burraquan?
 Have you any Holland
chamlet?
 Have you anyserge?
 Have you any Spanish
cloath?
 Have you any English
Cloath?
 Have you any Drap de?
 Have you any Drap de?
 Have you any Tammy?
 Have you any Romane
Serge?
 Have you any course
serge?
 Have you any Buckram?
 What is't an Ell?
 What is't a yard?It is the best in.
 Have you any Holland?
 Have you any Lace?
 Have you any Flanders
Lace?
 Have you any stiffening?
 Have you any Canvas?
 Have you any
VVhalebone?
 Have you any Castors?
 Have you any Bevers?
 Shew me some.
 Have you any silks?
 Have you any Buttons?
 Have you any Ribbon?
 Get me some fashionable
Buttons.
 What's the price of that?
 I will give you ten sous for
it.
 Have you any Scarlet?
 Have you any Velvet?
 Have you any Droguet?
 How much will you please
to have?
 Have you enough?
 Will you have any more?
 It is the best in.
 What did your Boots cost 
you?They cost me so much.
 What's the price of this
paire of shooes?
 A crown.
 Will you take fifty sous?
 I'le give no more.
 Shall I have them?
 I cannot take it, Sir. I Pray' Father give mee
your blessing.
 Daughter, you are
welcome home.
 How does your Mistress?
 She is very well, Sir.
 Have you not forgot your
English quite?
 No, Sir.
 I suppose you speak French
excellently well by this
time?
 I understand it better then
I can speak it.
 Which of you two is the
best Proficient?
 My sister, sir.
 I don't believe that.Render me some of that
Book there into French.
 What's that in French?
 Do you understand that
sentence?
 Yes, Sir.
 You have made good
proficiency.
 I find you have very well
improved your self.
 You have profited very
well.
 Were you the lowest in
the School?
 No Sir, I was the highest.
 Hath the Gentlewoman
had any care of you?
 Shee had a speciall care of 
me.
 She's a gallant woman.
 Does there any good
company use to visit her?
 Yes, every day.
 Can you tune the Lute 
well?
 Play me an Almaine.
 VVhere did you buy your
strings?
 At.
 Did you receive any 
letters from me?
 There came none of them 
to my hands.You did not answer them.
 Excuse me, Sir.
 I received none.
 Have you learnt any
Needlework there?
 Your Lute is out of tune?
 To morrow we'l go visite
the Countess of.
 Shee'l be extream glad to
see you.
 But you daughter, have
you nothing to say?
 I expect your commands.
 What have you learnt?
 Come nearer to me.
 Dance me a Corant.
 Is this the?
 I find your Sister much
more forward then you.
 You have lost your time.
 You have mispent your 
time.
 You shall go thither again
no more.
 How did you spend your
time?
 In reading, writing,
singing, dancing, speaking
French and Italian,.You have scarce learnt any
thing at all.
 I am much vext at you.
 Your sister is farre beyond
you.
 Your Cousin has learnt
not above two moneths
and yet she speaks 
better then you.
 I have done my endeavor.
 I can doe no more then I 
have done.
 It's no fault of mine.
 I have a very bad memory.
 I hope Sir, you'l pardon
me.
 I shall endeavourto
satisfie your expectation in 
other things.
 Were you atwhen
that was done?
 Yes, I was.
 Is there any room in your
School?
 Yes.
 Speak French with your 
sister.
 I command you to talke 
French with her every
day.
 Father, will it please you
to hear me read?With all my heart, but
dip in your Booke, and
read.
 Turne mee that into
English.
 I do not understand it.
 I understand it very well.
 I doe not well conceive
what the sense of it is.
 I pray you help me.
 Your pronounciation is
good enough.
 You have spent your time
very well.
 Do all the Gentlewomen
of your Schoole speake
well?
 They speake excellently 
well. Madam, I hope you'll
excuse my boldness.
I was born to be a trouble
to you.
 I thank you a thousand 
times.
 You visit the poor.
 I wonder I could never see
you.
 I thought I had lost you.
 Madam, I confesse I ought
to have discharged my
selfe of my Obligations
to you, all other
businesse set aside.
 I know your goodnesse to
be such, that you could
not forget me.
 Where have you been all 
this while?
 I have not beene out of.I thought you had been in 
the Country.
 No, I was never out of
Town.
 Does not M=ris=.and
you meet sometimes.
 No, I have forsaken her
company, she's a very
ill-tongu'd, proud,
prating Gossip.
 I am of your humour, I
cannot away with such
kinde of people.
 You two were very great
once.
 I did not know her so well
then.
 They say she's a 
Gentlewoman of very good
discourse.
 Yes, at first, but afterwards
you'l quickly finde how
weak she is.
 They say, she's to be
married.
 'Tis quite broke off, ther's
no more talk of it now.
 What Portion hath she?
 Two thousand pounds.
 What's that? she lives
very high.
 She is very fantasticall.They say, she sings rarely.
 Excuse me, she has a very
harsh voice.
 Shee passes for the best
singer in.
 Yes, when ther's none but
she.
 Did you ever heare her
sing?
 A hundred times, her voice 
is gone.
 Who taught her?
 Mr..
 He is a good Teacher.
 He hath made many good
Schollers.
 Hee hath a good way of
teaching.
 I know a Gentlewoman,
that is a Scholler of his,
that sings very well.
 There are many better
Teachers then he.
 He is not the Phoenix.
 He hath a kinde of
roughnesse in his voice.
 For my part I know not,
I have heard all about
the Towne, but in my
judgment he is the best.
 He's much bound to you.
 That does not follow.He may be a good 
Musician, and yet have some
bad Schollers.
 All people are not alike
capable.
 Shee talks too much.
 Ther's no end of her talk.
 People laugh at her.
 Shee pretendes to know
much, but understands 
nothing.
 She's much given to
contradiction, you cannot
speak a word, but she'll
presently take you up.
 She's very gallant.
 She goes like any
Countesse.
 The Countesse of,is
not so richly clad.
 She pretends to be a great
Polititian.
 Shee understands nothing
at all.
 She has studied
Romances, more then Politicks.
 She is not very handsome.
 She paints horribly.
 Shee mindes nothing else
but tricking up her selfe.
 She goes like a Queen.She thinks no body
worthy to wipe her shooes.
 She is something low.
 I have heard so.
 She is much courted.
 She is a Gentlewoman of
quality, 'tis only her
ambition undoes her.
 They say M=r=.is a 
Suitor to her.
 So I heare too, but I
beleive he's too wise to
looke after such a 
talking Gossip.
 I have heard she dances as
well as any Master.
 She dances but ordinarily.
 Her dancing is not so
excellent.
 They say, she has a good
wit.
 'Tis true, but she knowes
not how to use it.
 Shee is wholy given to
vanities.
 She often visits my Cosen.
 They are never asunder.
 There is a great league
betwixt them.They have but one heart.
 Hath she not a Sister?
 Yes, & one that is a 
thousand times handsomer,
and wiser then she.
 Do they agree well?
 No, the Elder is jealous of
her Sister.
 Vertue always meets with
those that envy it.
 Is her Sister a finer
Gentlewoman then she?
 Ther's no compare betwixt 
them.
 Ther's as much difference
betwixt them, as betwixt
day and night.
 Where is her Brother?
 They have sent him into.
 How long since?
 A good while ago.
 What newes d'yee heare?
 They say all things are in
a combustion.
 Have you it from any
good hand?
 Yes.
 Thats ill newes.
 Do you take that man to
be a Politician?He's as politick as a childe
of two yeares old.
 He's a very simple fellow.
 Is he alwaies at the french
Court?
 He will never quit that.
 He's a man of a bad life.
 He is highly promoted.
 Hee is very happy for a
time.
 If it will but hold.
 Bad men have but a time.
 GOD sometimes suffers
wicked men to prosper
for a time.
 I beleive that man has
intelligence from all parts
of the World.
 He holds correspondence
with the States of,.is quite undone.
 It is great pity.
 I would not be there now
for any thing.
 They say, thatis a
very exorbitant place.
 They say, 'tis very ill
governed.
 God be thanked, our
governement iseasie 
enough.Whither went you t'other 
day in a Coach?
 I went into theCountry,
to see M=rs=..
 She's a gallant 
Gentlewoman.
 She's the most accomplisht
Gentlewoman in.
 Shee's not very well in
health.
 Shee's something out of
temper.
 She's a gallant Lasse, and a 
very merry Soule.
 Is not M=r=.a Servant
of hers.
 She's no match for him.
 He's too debosht.
 She will not heare of him.
 She has variety of servants.
 Does hee visit her
sometimes?
 Very seldome.
 She gives him but cold
entertainment.
 M=r=,hath a minde to
her.
 I beleive he'll be the man.
 Does his Father like well
of it?
 He mightily likes the 
businesse.What saies her other 
Servant?
 I can't tell.
 I should be sorry shee
should doe otherwise 
then well.
 Shee's a good
Gentlewoman.
 What think you of giving
her a visit?
 If you please, to morrow.
 Is her Brother a gallant
man?
 A very honest man, a good
Souldier, and well
beloved.
 I am very glad to heare it
 I pray Sir, when you next 
see him, present my
service to him.
 Madam, I shall not faile to 
do it.
 Madam, do I not hinder
you from your
occasions?
 Madam, I should willingly
leave all businesse to
injoy your company.
 I beseech you tell me what
time I may finde you at
home.
 I am alwaies within after 
dinner.I seldome go forth.
 I beseech you speak not a
word of what has past
betwixt us concerning
M=rs=..
 I shal not say any thing of
it.
 I pray do not.
 I shall take my leave of
you.
 I pray' Madam, stay a
little longer.
 Are you so much in hast?
 No, but it is late.
 I am expected at home.
 Do they know where you
are?
 You may send your man
home, to tell them you
are here.
 That's not the thing, 
Madam; I must go my self.
 God b'w'yee Madame, I
am your most humble
Servant. , suffer no
body to come to me.
 Say, I am not well.
 Say, I am gone forth.
 If my sister chance to come,
bring her up.
 Come comb my head.
 Come put on my French 
Dressing.
 Is this the mode of?
 Make cleane my Gown.
 Make cleane my Chamber, 
and sprinckle some
water about, for feare of
spoyling the hangings.
 Call the Cookehither.
 There he is, Madam.
 Bid him dresse the veale,and mutton for Dinner.
 Get me some water.
 Don't stay at all.
 Make me a fire in my 
chamber.
 Cut me a little peice of 
Bread.
 Wash my Crevet.
 Make clean my shooes.
 Sow me that.
 Have you done it?
 Fasten me that.
 Has any body askt for me?
 Yes Madam.
 Doe you know who they 
are.
 Bid them get ready dinner.
 Bid 'em get the coach ready.
 Where's my Husband?
 Is he gone forth? is he come 
in again?
 You must rise betimes to
morrow morning.
 Goe to M=rs=.and
present my service & thanks
to her.
 Have you been there?
 Yes Madam,
 Curle my haire,
 Where's my apron?
 Fetch me my cloathes
 Come dresse me.
 Tell me when I do not
pronounce well.Come hither to me.
 Teach mee how to reade
French.
 Spell me that word.
 What's the meaning of
that word?
 Do you understand that 
Word?
 Never speak English to 
me.
 Wee'll speak French
altogether. Sir, are not you a French
man?
 Did I never see you at?
 Yes Sir, and I remember I
have seene you there
too.
 Doe you speake our
language?
 I cannot speak a word of
it.
 Why do you not learn?
 I am too dull.
 I have the worst memory 
in the world.
 What businesse brought 
you to Town?
 I have some business here.
 Can I doe you any service
here?
 Sir, I am bound to you for
your favour.I have some business to do
for some friends of
mine.
 All's quiet now in your
Countrey.
 Not yet, Sir.
 The interests of the
Princes undoes us.
 You have too many 
Princes in.
 Oh Sir, you are used to
these things in.
 There's no help for it.
 I shall scarcely come there.
 Are you come hither upon
any design of
Merchandise?
 No Sir, I have had some ill 
fortune.
 What ill fortune?
 Sir, I shall take some other
time to inform you.
 Sir, if you think I can doe
you any service, pray
make use of me.
 Sir, you oblige mee very
much.
 Are the Parisians alwayes
given to mutiny?
 Yes Sir.
 The poore suffer much by
it.Where's your lodging Sir?
 Just over against such a
place.
 I shall make bold to visite
you.
 You shall be very
welcome.
 How do you call that in
English?
 It is called.
 Pray Sir, tell me one thing.
 May a man pass safely by
Sea?
 No, it is very dangerous
going.
 You are in danger of
being utterly lost.
 Those ofseize upon
all.
 Is Mr.at Court still?
 He will never leave it.
 Did you know atsuch a Gentleman? 
 I knew him very well.
 How go things with him?
 He has got the better in
his suite.
 He's grown rich.
 Is not ours as good a
countrey as yours?
 It is a finer Countrey.But we have no wine.
 You have it for your
money.
 Money does all.
 Have you been in
Holland?
 Yes Sir, but I finde this
Country to be another
manner of thing.
 The Country is good.
 Are you married, Sir?
 No Sir, I was, but my wife
is dead.
 How long since?
 Three moneths since.
 You mourn for her then?
 You are in the right.
 This life is but transitory.
 We must all dye.
 Have you any children
living, Sir?
 No Sir.
 We heare very bad newes
from.
 They say the Princes are
joyned against the K.
 The most setled
Monarchies have need now to
look to themselves.
 Do you make any sudden
return?Not suddenly, I shall see a
little further.
 I had a good opinion of
the man you wot of.
 I never thought otherwise
of him, then what is
now come to passe.
 'Tis a sad accident.
 Sir, he alwayes lived too
high.
 He was too high.
 His ambition has undone 
him.
 Wild company has ruined
him.
 He did nothing but drink.
 He has a very ill name.
 I leave him to his deserts.
 God b'w'yee Sir, if I can
serve you any way, I
shall be very ready.
 Sir, you oblige mee very
much.
 I am your humble servant. Your very humble
Servant S=r=. I did not 
think to have met you so
happily.
 S=r=, you have met with one
that desires nothing more
then to do your service.
 S=r=. shall we go to the place
you wot of?
 With all my heart, if you
have no other businesse.
 Shal wetake a Coach, or
shal we go by water?
 Let us go rather by water.
 That is a very pleasant
prospect.
 Yes Sir.
 In what time shall wee
come thither?
 We shall be there
presently.Sir, Is it true what is
reported abroad?
 I have heard as much.
 What is the newes Sir?
 They tell very strange 
newes.
 There are so many lies
abroad;
 I give no Credit at all to
any of these foolish stories.
 I laugh at these fopperies.
 There's nothing of truth
at all in this story.
 All people beleive it.
 Whether are you going 
this morning?
 I am going to take order
about a businesse.
 Have you had satisfaction
of Mr.?
 When shall we have a
meeting?
 When you please.
 Where's your Lodging?
 I have left my Lodging: 
I do not lye now where I 
did formerly.
 Mrpresents his service
to you.
 I am his servant.
 Pray present my service to
him. 
 I shall Sir, shall we go to
visit him?What's the difference
betwixt Mr.and you?
 He's one that I do not
desire to heare spoken of.
 Have you not been
acquainted with him a
long time?
 Tis true, I have; but I have
found some basenesse in
him.
 You must forget all.
 I'le make peace betwixt
you.
 I'le make you friends.
 Hath such a one paid
you?
 Is he a rich man?
 What estate hath hee?
 Give me a little water.
 I shall give you
satisfaction.
 Have you forgot that?
 That Lady is ilfavouredly
drest.
 This is a handsome
Gentleman.
 That Lady discourses very
well.
 That is an ill-natured
woman.
 I would willingly be
assuredof that.Follow me.
 Whether you please.
 Is not that the 
Gentleman?
 I shall be with you in a
moment.
 Do that for my sake.
 Present him my excuses.
 Chide him for it.
 VVhither run you?
 I have bought me a Hat.
 Go and fetch me some.
 Is this your daughter?
 VVhat do you there?
 Come to me.
 Do you speak to me?
 Lady salute your sister.
 How long doe you stay
here?
 Have you seen the Newes
Book?
 Did you see it before?
 I shall wait upon you.
 I am wholly at your
disposing.
 Sir, there is this honest
man.
 I shall do as you please.Embrace each other.
 Live hereafter like two
Brothers.
 Shake hands with him.
 Shall we go, Gentlemen?
 Let us go back by water.
 Let us go by land.
 Sir, when shall I have the
honour to see you
again?
 Sir, as soon as you please.
 God b' w'yee Sir.
 I thank you for your good 
company.
 I beseech you present my
respects to your Lady.
 I am much beholding to
you.
 Make me a little room.
 You have too much room.
 Let me go by.
 Cut me some of that.
 Bring me in the fruit.
 Stay a little while longer.
 I am come to take my leave
of you.
 Do not ask me so high a
rate for that.
 Let me know your lowest
price. Pray Madam let us
alwaies speak French
together.
 Alas I can't, I must learne 
then.
 Our Master will be here
presently.
 I am perfect in my Lesson.
 I can't say a word of mine.
 I finde my selfe not very
well to day.
 Let us walke forth a
little.
 Lend me your Inckhorne.
 Mend my hand-kerchiefe
a little.
 Where is my Booke? I
think I have lost it.
 I cannot yet understand 
French.I must quite give it over.
 I'le tell my M=rs=. what you
say.
 You are alwaies speaking
English.
 You are alwaies vexing 
me.
 You do nothing but
quarrell.
 We loose our time.
 I was more forward a
month agoe then I am
now.
 Will you go abroad after
dinner.
 M=r=.will send his coach
for us.
 Let's rise.
 Let's dresse our selves.
 Let's make hast.
 Let's go to dinner, to our
Books.
 Do you understand that
word?
 Is that your Brother?
 Wil you please to go along
with me?
 Let's go together.
 Let us go home againe.
 You have said enough.
 It is no matter.
 I hate that woman
extreamly.I like that man very well.
 You are to blame to talke 
of me.<|endoftext|>Well met, what is the best newes that the Country doth afford at this time?
Alas sir! I wonder you should so earnestly enquire newes of mee, that live in the Countrey, whenas we receive all our newes from you. I confesse, you did prevent mee, therefore I pray, what is the best newes in the City?
Alas! the ambiguous rotation of the World is very mutable, nothing is constant, nothing durable, but all things doe praecipitate themselves most strangly in a mutuall levitie.
This newes is hard indeed: for I did expect better, in regard that I have a Son, truely a pritty Scholler (as his Master tells me) and of a hopefull expectation, whose preferment I intend to raise (God willing) Therefore I beseech you (if you can) instruct me, what way I may settle him in.
What can he understand the Latine tongue, or how farre hath he proceeded therein?
Truely sir he is past his, & histoo I'le assure you; yea, & he can reade any Chapter in the Bible very punctifully, and withall he hath read toe Master Practise on the Piety, and many other Godly bookes I thanke God for it, who hath endewed him with so much grace: Therefore because he is come to some knowledge now, I would willingly bring him up to some Scholler-ship: what think you Sir, if I should send him to the Vniversity?
Sir I commend your sedulity herein: but I have often heard, and withall I know by experience, that the Vniversity is much polluted, and contaminated with Popish superstitions, which if your sonne should be seduced into, perhaps it will cause both his utter ruine, and your perpetuall sorrow.
Is it possible that the Vniversity should be corrupt? Tis no marvell then that the whole kingdome is misled, since the very fountaines themselves are poluted.
I Exhort you as a friend; and hope you will not contemne my friendly admonition.
But my Son may avoid their crafty allurements, and if he then uncessantly follow his studdy, he may one day prove a Minister of Gods word.
Pish, a minister of Gods word quother? Now a dayes every man will become a Minister: therefore it will be but vanity for you to send your sonne thither to attaine to the Sacerdotiall function.
But dare every man presume so farre without learning?
That is the chiefe cause thereof: for learning is abused, contemned, derided, neglected, despised: theywill have noe praying, nor preaching, unlesse it be performed by instinct and inspiration, as the spirit mooves them. And if a man heapes up knowledge, and Scholler-ship by indefatigable studdy, he is thought to have fild his mind only with more advantage to doe wickednesse.
Oh lamentable!
Yea you may see Coblers and Tinkers rising from the very Dunghill, beating the Pulpits as conformably, as if they were the Kinges professors of Divinity, scattering their new doctrine and discipline in the Church, and are accounted great divines too of the vulgar. Here you shall see one making himselfe a Prophet preaching in a Tub as confidently, as if he were Doctor in Divinity. There you shall see another thumping forth his new doctrine in a Barne among his conniticles (I should have said) conventicles, as if he were Master of Artes. In the meane while revolve all, and you shall finde Scholler-ship most shamefully despised.
But if he diligently continue in his studdy, God knowes but that he may one day become a Bishop.
How? a Bishop? alas! I feare there will be no more of that dignity: for the generall assent and consent too of the Commons will admit of no Bishops: and they must all very shortly resigne their Titles, which shall be abrogated. Your sonne shall never be Arch-Bishop I'le warrant you: and if you intend to make a Divine of him, he must have a great care least the Arch-Bishop doe not cut of his eares. But I will free you from that feare, for I tell once againe that there will be no more Bishops: Yet if it seemes more just, and secure, that the holy Church should admit a degree of lesse, and greater, they will have no Bishops, but onely Lay-Elders: to the election of which dignity, they judge andsuppose none more fit, and none more prepared for the performance of every thing, belonging to Gods word, then those venerable, and reverend Fathers Master, and, men (although but of a meane Scholler-ship) yet most wonderfully inspired. Therefore I think it it meere vanity for you, to bring your sonne up to be a Scholler.
Alas! then what shall I doe? unlesse I should put him to the Innes a Court.
Soe you'l make a youngof him, and then he'l run away.
But I intend to make him a.
Alas the Starre-Chamber, and High-Commission Court is downe long agone: and he must be as busie as a, or else he will loose preferment. For Lawyers are not respected, neither are they accounted Honest, because they sell their lines dearer thenPhysicks, which I confesse is deare enough, yet nothing comparable to the price of their lines, which gape wider then an Oyster-wifes mouths, and straddle wider then a French-man's legs. Fie, fie! Lawyers are accounted Knaves over all the Country.
Tis strange! For I'm sure they have more Angels come hourely to them in Terme time, then all the Puritans in the Towne.
But here lyes the difference: Their Angels doe weare crosses: and because the Puritans will admit of no crosse, therefore they hate the Lawyers the more, because they are so ready to receive them.
And there is none of their whole Tribe, that will deny such crosses, I'le warrant you.
But Lawyers are so little regarded now adayes, that I feare before they can procure other men's Suites at Law, they'le want Suites to their owne Backs.
But perhaps he may come to the honour of a Iudge one day.
I hope you doe not desire to have your Sonne hang'd. That's a dangerous title I'le assure you: Did you not heare that most of the Iudges are to be judged under other Iudges, yea and they'le hardly escape hanging too, unlesse they give ample satisfaction to the Parliament: for they are acknowledged to be the Originall of all our greivances. Therefore if you be wise desist from that opinion.
Alas! What education shall I then impose upon my Son? Since all these grounds of hope hath deceived me. What thinke you Sir, if I traine him up to be a Souldier?
He must sweare lustily then: and bragge of many things with ostentation, although he can performe nothing. But stay! Now I thinke on it: Perhaps he may be suspected to be some Trooper, (for they say the Countrey is very full of them) then apprehended and so incontinently committed onely upon suspicion.
You say true indeed Sir: Therefore I know not what course to take with him. I intreat you Sir, to lend me your advice.
If the Lad be so hopefull, as you declare him to be: I care not greatly if I take him under my Tuition, and if you please to condescend thereunto, he shall be my Apprentice, and I'le assure you for your sake he shall be both kindly kept, and religiously instructed.
I humbly thank you for your love, wherefore I acknowledge my selfe much ingaged to you: But I pray what trade are you off Sir?
I am a Vintner by my Trade.
I am very glade to heare of that: and if my Sonne be wise enough, but to take fourty Shilling aTunne, he may prove an Alderman too. Well Sir, I am much obleiged unto you, for your love unto him, and I will bring him unto you, and if you like his morality and ingenuity, I will willingly send him unto you.
He shall be most lovingly respected.
Thankes Noble Sir; In the meane while farewell.<|endoftext|>How is it with you Brother? Mee thinks you look something dull and melancholike, and yet you nor I have any cause to bee discouraged especially at this time of the year.
Why so, deare Cozen? No mans state is certaine, I am full of fears, doubts, and jealousies, lest some honest hearted and well affected to the good of this Common-wealth, and for the generall good of the Belly, Cold, and Backtold generation of poore Tradesmen, with their Wives, Children, and Servants, from whom (as you know a little better then I) we Spunges doe sucke no small gaines; I tell you I doubt some honest Commissioners will bee appointed suddenly to be Examiners and Overseers of our actions, and then, you know what followes, I know your Cause and mine will bee bad enough, and too bad for us to uphold.
Tush, what's that the matter? doest thou not know the old Proverb?: cannot we joyne and make a purse? and you know, silver bags will worke, especially with good store of Wine, and a rich Feast; and for the cry of the poore I esteem it no more then a flea-biting, andhowling of a few poore Curres at the Moone: let the poore coole their heels, wee have swarmes of them in our Parish, and I am glad of it, for they support mee, and are my best Merchants, especially in frost and snow, and Saturdayes at night, or if it be on the Lords day i'th morning, at these times I can put off any that's black as a coale, though it be a stone, and at any rates, because of the season; and poore fooles they take mee to be a very charitable minded man: and besides all this, against a good time, or in the hardest weather, I send out to the Churchwardens and Overseers of the poore but one halfe chaldron of Coales to bee distributed to poore Families, though they have the consciences to give but halfe, and keep the other to themselves; ah Brother! 'tis so, yet all the poore are still'd, and pray to God for me, as a wonderfull charitable minded man, when as I tell you, I did it out of pollicy, and not charity, and to get more custome for my coales.
I commend your pollicie, I see that good wits jumpe together; it's my method too I promise you, better to part with the draffe then to lose all; only I differ from your practice in this, that you send halfe a chaldron to the Officers, but I send to the poore themselves to fetch them, whereby I view all my Customers, and have their manifold prayers, yet God knowes I laugh at their simplicity; for this is but a bait to lure them to fetch all the yeare after at my own Yard, where I quickly get in & recover my coales that I gave them, with advantage; but especially by three infallible polliticke tricks,small measure, high prices, and base coales.
Very well, and what cause have you or I tobe melancholike? come, I have a cup of rich Aligant to revive our spirits, will ye walke? I have inhansed the price of my coales this last weeke from thirty shillings the chaldron (which was too much) to thirty eight shillings, so that I can afford you a mornings draught, the poore shall pay for it.
How do you bring this about? for I have had but a dead weeke this last weeke; ah! this fine warme weather is as bad for our Trade, as 'tis for the Hay-mongers, who expected seven or eight pound the load, and by reason of this Summer-like Winter are forced to sell it in Smithfield for fifty five shillingsLoad.
Pish, pish, I see you are not so expert in your Trade as you ought; Ile never want pollitick tricks to vend my Coales at what rates I please: but principally I use these four or five devices, though they are all false, yet I finde they are all gainfull, and taking.
What may they be? let me know, for if they bee beneficiall to you, they cannot bee amisse for me; for I am as eager to lay lime-twigs to catch poore mens purses as you can be.
Why first I vent it out by Carmen, and poor folks, that indeed there was a fleet come of 65. or 70. Saile, almost as far as, but there rose a violent storme, so that most of the fleet was shipwrackt, and the rest rendred unserviceable to put to Sea till next Easter at least: at the report of this, O how the poore shrug in their shoulders, and pawn their pewter dishes and brasse, and any goods to the Brokers, to get some Coales in at any rate? But if this works not so effectually as I thought, yet it seldome failes; however, I causeit to be noysed and rumored about, that in regard our fleet is now come into Harbours, those insolent Dutch Pickeroons with some men of War, lie upon or neere, and the North coasts, that a Collier cannot stir out, and this affrights the meaner sort of people, that they cry out, Alas! would these wars were once done with the Hollander, else wee poore must starve: and is not this a cunning sleight? yet if this fails, I have a third Engine, and that is a sure one, for I seeme to be pensive, and complaine to the poor themselves, as they come to my Warehouse for Coals, how that indeed there was a great fleet comming in, but putting in to, all the Colliers were pressed for the States Service to be Seamen, so that the Navy cannot come up; and then I doe adde, Seamen must bee had, and we want Seamen, and wee lost abundance of Saylers in the last great fight, and Seamens service is hard now, and many doe shunne it, and the pay is but small, and the Navy must speedily put to Sea, and that the Hollander is maine strong already, and the Danes are joyned with him, so that to all likelihood, there's no hopes of Coales, and then I sigh and say it is pittifull for the poore, but however I am almost undone by this means, for most of my stock (as I pretend) lies in the safety of that fleet of Colliers; upon this false story commonly told, I laugh inwardly how it works upon poore necessitous people to buy up coales so eagerly, that they are ready to fight, who shall be served first.
Oh admirable, and politickly done!
And yet to heighten my price I adde, good people, you see my store, when these are gone, I know not how to procure more, (though he hath three or fourgreat Cellars full against harder weather come, and and higher rates, and then I complaine of the multitude of Ale-Brewers, and Beere-Brewers, and Diars, and Cookes, and Smiths, and Founders, and Glassehouses; and pretend that these and many others doe in the time of yeare buy up all, or at least so many as will serve for three years following; and this they conclude to be true indeed, and this whets them on to furnish themselves, though at any price; and then I vend my worst Coals, or mingle them with a few good ones: Nay, rather then faile, Ile bid them come downe to your Coale-Yards, for I know well enough you and we are so wise as not to shew all to publick; Oh! this point of reservation is as advantagious to our purses, as it hath been to the Popish Jesuites, a little quantity, sayes the poore, is better then never a whit; when as we laugh at them when they are gone, and say to our selves,.
Oh rare policy! surely thou hast mightily incouraged mee to keep up my mystery; for these are sure Holders, and will lick in moneys from all sorts of people.
Moreover, I tell you Brother, a man must live by his wits; men of my profession never make scruple of Conscience for what we doe: I adde moreover to the former inventions, that there is a great decay of Woods, many being of late grubb'd and stubb'd up, and that Heaths and Commons in many places of England, where poore people had wont to gather Fearn, and Heath, and Gosse, and Furse, are now cleansed and turned into Corne land, so that the poore must burn Coales or sterve; besides the Hospitals, andAlmshouses, Prisons, and sundry Courts of Guards of Souldiers must all have Coales, and what hope is there that they should not be at high prices? what doe you think of all these practises?
All extraordinary, and neat, and sure stratagems to get wealth and to grow fat and suddenly rich.
These are my Pullies and Engines to inhance or to keep up Coales at a high rate: I would hear now what devices you use to squeeze your Customers.
Why I would not have you thinke that we doe not only equalize, but rather exceed these stratagems; you know first our Customers are not of the beggerly rabble of poore Silk-weavers, Button-makers, Taylors, Rag-men, Bonelace-makers, Tobaccopipe-makers, Wash-women, scolding Oyster-wives, who seldome goe above halfe a bushel at a time, and that but against some good time too, but we deal with Brewers, and Diers, and Merchants, and rich Citizens, some of whom fetches in forty, fifty, or a hundred Chaldron at a time, some twenty, some five; none comes into our Purlews at lesse then one or two Chaldron, besides Billets and Chamber-faggots for their Wives lying in; neither do our Customers desire forbearance of pay, for they come with money in hand; we do not use Chaulk nor Counting-books, down pay, ready receit, and present Cash are our Customers Arguments: we deale not with Fowls that want feathers; it's good fishing at a comming Tyde: now because you have discovered to me your proceedings, you shall judge if we be not your Masters at this Game, both for gaines and knavery: as first, we all know that Noble men and the Gentry, and Brewers will desire to be first served; now we complot,when as in Summer time their Stewards, or Cash-keepers come to enquire how coales are likely to be? and whether there be any lately come in; when they come to our Yards, we wil not seem to be within at first comming, but either our Wives or Yard-men shall salute them with a kinde of heavy countenance, and after the how doe yee? and I am glad to see you, and I hope my good Lord, &c. is well, with other sleight dissembling Complements are over, the Steward presently begins presently to aske what wee desire to heare, how goe Coales? what rates do they beare? and the like; our Wives have the Art pritty well, for wee teach them, though wee need not to dissemble to give a sigh, and say, indeed Sir I am sorry to tell you, wee are very loath to sell any as yet, for our stores are almost spent, and the Warres continue, and there were some fifty sayle of Colliers ready to goe out, but there is an Order from the State to stop them, and the Colliers are put into Friggots as fast and as soon as they come aboard, so that our first returne is lost, which was alwayes the best, and when the Seas will be cleared we know not; with many such affrighting speeches, to the amazement of the Steward, who wee know will furnish himselfe, at what rates soever, and so begins to plead; well, my Lord hath had his Coales a long time heere, and they were alwayes good, and I do not intend to change this place, and go to another: I must therefore have you promise mee faithfully to let mee have this next weeke thirty or forty chaldron, we will not stand for price, and my Lord will not stand to the hazard of Winter, and then provide: no, no, and therefore if you please to remember me to your Husband, and make me a promise,I will give you a paire of Gloves, and your Husband a pottle of Wine and a Neats Tongue, at our meeting: Truly, replies the Wife, Sir, heere hath been my Lord such a ones Steward, and such and such a Brewer, and I heard them talke of a hundred, or two hundred chaldron a piece, and whether my Husband hath promis'd them or not I know not, but if he hath, I doubt our store will not hold out to supply all; but I'le do what I can with my Husband to furnish my good Lord: Well spoke, replies the Steward, and to remember mee the sooner, I do intreat you to let me pay five pounds now, for I brought it for the same purpose; and I shall informe my Lord of your great respect to him and care for him: thus our Wives feeling the pulses beat high and throughly seemingly sayes, Sir, if you please to leave so much moneyes I shall shew it my Husband, and it may prevaile with him to remember you the sooner. Thus it is with our customers, and is this not pretty dissembling sport, for I have the money and presently I imploy it, and deferr the coales under some pretence or other at least three or foure months? as thus we live in hopes that the fleet will be speedily in the Thames, and then he shall be sure to have good ones; let him resolve upon it, let him trust me to provide for him: and so he rests satisfied, and glad that he is sure to have them; though in that space I have the use of his money, and buy the Coales for halfe those rates I had of him: how like you this Ginn?
Truly Brother I perceive you have cunning tricks to fetch in great Fish into your Nets, and you want not Art to spread them; but where you catch one we have a hundred come to us.
Pish man, if that Art should faile, we use another; for you must know we deale with a Fleet of Colliers as Hunters do with their Hounds, do not let all run out at once at the Game, but now some, and then some; so we, though the Fleet be an hundred saile, yet we meet them at, or before they come so farr, and suffer not above twenty to thirty to appeare at a time, and then give out the rest are suspected to be lost, or taken, and so perswade men to take these while they may, and not to trust upon uncertainties of more comming in, and the like; nay, we tell the Masters that our Yards are full at, that money is dead, now they must deliver and sell forthwith, or else their charges will quickly eat out their gaines, and so we get coals at our owne prices, and sell them as we list; besides this, we buy after ship-measure, but sell after our own, and wee have Carmen, whose Sackes (if the Magistrates would looke after them) are some of them halfe a foot too short, and almost as much too narrow, and this fills our pockets all the yeare long; and they use to keepe their Sacks always wet, that they may shrink the more: I tell thee plainly, that by this onely trick we have gotten twenty bushels of coales cleare to our selves out of three chaldron; and is not this a thriving Trade?
I assure you Brother, you speak to the purpose, yet being we are by our selves, and as I hope none hears us, I will scarce yeeld to you in this Craft; for I seriously protest unto you, that my Measures; eyther halfe or whole peck or bushell are scanty enough; for I thrive chiefly by false weights and false measures, and quick return, quick returne you know, makes a heavy purse; and I hope it will not be alwayes fayre, calme,weather;and, and the rest of the stargazers, who for my beleefe can stare no further into a Star than into a Milstone, yet all of them tell us of snow and frost and slabby cold weather, which however the weather proves, yet these buzzes and Prognostications have gained credit amongst many, both men and women, and so bring in our Customers the faster, which wee make pay for their simple credulity; and for my part, I could finde in my heart to spare halfe a chaldron of Coales to bee distributed amongst the star-gazing fraternity, to warm their Noses at their Criticall Conventions, and to uphold their Predictions, and to procure them to write commonly of a cold, snowy, and a very hard Winter season to come; you cannot imagine how people doe confide in these Astrologers conceptions; what think you Brother?
Truly I know you to bee good furtherers of our gaines, and it is my intent to make use of their sayings, but I intend not to bestow any thing upon the Blades, for they doe not really intend or ayme at our good, nor ever had us in their Calender amongst their friends, but write, as we use to say, at hap-hazard; neither doe they care whether we thrive or not: but to disclose some deeper craft in our dealing yet, I tell thee, Brother, wee know that wee are hated and cursed of every man, but then we Foxes fare best; wee have an intention to keep up such a thriving Monopoly amongst our selves, that except the wisedome and Justice of a Parliament, or a Councell of State interpose and hinder us by stinting our number, or setting a Rate upon the price, or limiting how much each of us shall lay out, or by taking the Coale-pits into the Stateshands, and so manage them out and in with able Convoyers; some of which I greatly feare: for I confess the profits of the Pits belongs rather to the State than to us, which if they doe, farewell the fairest flower in my Garden: I tell you Brother, there is such a generall exclamation of people of all sorts against us, and of late there hath been a suit at Law and odious Petitions exhibited against our dealings, and not without just cause, I confesse, that I doubt our best dayes are past, if we can goe clear off with what wee have gotten already; but however I am as busie yet, as a hungry Ferret in a rich Cony borough; for as I heare there are now some 40. or 50. saile of Colliers come into the Poole, and the poor people have great hopes to see Coales fall in their prices, and that they shall be for them, when as, alasse, poore silly fools, our Agents at Newcastle have bought them for us; if the poor will have them, they are sure to have them at what rates wee please, and out of our yeards: for they were all bought by us before they departed from Newcastle; for if we be not disturbed, this Winter will be my best harvest, and the work weather brings our greatest incomes; what think you Brother, of this our policy?
I commend your wisedome for preventing others, and I am beholden to you for suffering mee to put in a share; I promise you I have my halfe pecks, pecks, halfe bushels and bushels, fitted for my owne purpose; and I keep two nimble Lads my Apprentices, that are excellent for not overfilling them; I warrant you the poor get no heapd up, or overfild, or pressed down measure at my shop; I say plainly to you, thatby one helpe or other, I get halfe in halfe out of pooresneaking impotent people; and if my Coals fayl, I have all other things which I know the poorest people must have; but whatsoever they buy of me, they may resolve that they must pay double, as two pence for a peny faggot, and so for a pound of cheese or butter, and for bread I am in league with a Baker, that notwithstanding the present cheapness of Corne, and the Lord Mayors Orders, knows how to puffe up a loafe that should bee but for one peny to two pence, that of two pence to a groat, and the same order I hold in all my other commodities, and yet my shop is so filled with goorepeople, that never were Wasps more busie about a honey pot in a Summers day, then they are at my Shop and Cellar on Saturday nights and frosty mornings.
Did you thinke I had but one string to my bow? you know how I ingrosse Wood of all sorts, as well as Coales; I have Billets but soundly nicked and marked, Ile warrant you where I had them with three notches, I adde three more; and stack wood, and faggots, and sprey; I deale in hard coale, and charcoale, in small coale, and what not for gains? if one mill will not grind, another shall.
Well, well, our case is good enough yet, and
for my part I fear nothing; for the coldest weather,
rough Seas, the Hollander out, and our Navy at home,
and none inform the Magistrate of our actions, are all
pleasing and comfortable to us: and I tell you Brother,
this present season makes the poore to shrinke, the rich
to provide: I had these three last mornings a hundred
poore people flocking to get coales, all fearing lest they
will rise, which I promise they shall, if my cunning and
policy faile me not.<|endoftext|>How now, how goes the world with you? me-thinkes you are growne very wist of late, thy cheekes looke as thin as a Shrove-tuesday pan-cake; surely thou hast oft the priviledge of the Ale-tap, or will motherat the bunch of Grapes score no longer? Tell me the cause of thy dejected countenance.
A pox on you, if it had not beene for you I might have beene now merry and frolicke, with my pipe and my pot; but now alas the case is altered: the Fidlers go a begging.
Sirrah, doe not you lay the cause of your downfull upon me, for if it had not beene for your tearing throat, my basket with papers would have filld mypurse with crownes; whereas now I could scarce get money enough to buy shooes to trot from the Exchange to Westminster, and from Westminster to the Old Bayly, from the Old Bayly to Pauls Church-yard, and from thence to Westminster againe: it is well known to the whole world, that what we got wee tooke paines for, like true Adamites we got our living by the sweat of our browes.
You were true Adamites indeed; for some of you had scarce cloathes enow to cover your nakednesse; it was better sport than to see a Beare-bayting, to heare a male and female Mercury scolding together. I oncegoing in Smithfield, one calld rogue, the other whore; one comming by wisht the Divell to take them both: the woman with her tippet standing up, her tongue being almost weary with Billingsgate worke, going out of doores, chanced to slip, and in stead of a womans smock, shewed a mans shirt on her backe. And this is the gentility of your worshipfull, both male and female: and then to make up the matter, you solely endeavored to pull down the admirable Corporation, or rather Bacchanalian Society of most reverend wandring Stationers.
You may well call your selves wandring Stationers, for there was scarce one of you that could say, at such a house I will lodge to night: one of you came out of a hedge, another out of New-gate, a third out of the New-prison, and the fourth not beeing above a moneth out of Bedlam, roundly, profoundly, and soundly cries out with a voyce made of cannon proofe,; these are the most admirable proprieties which belong to your most admired Corporation.
, cease thy rayling,look wherecomes, the Regent Master of all Ballad-singers, he who thinkes his Muse came from, when as it is well knowne the first originall of it was taken out of a Tan-pit, I say, let this worthy Patron of Strangullion Poetry moderate the cause, betwixt us two, for why, we are both at variance.
What is the matter most worthy Gentlemen? me thinkes yee should rather deplore one anothers late misfortunes, than to deride at each others misery, I privately heard all your discourse, which will be a laughter to the whole world. You Mastercall MasterKnave, and Mastercalls you Knave, and as for my part, I thinke yee are both Knaves, for why, neither of yee both deal honestly, I will shew you a reason for it, as for you Mercuries, instead of binding of Bibles you have chang'd your Trades to binde one another to that you never had, your good behaviours I mean, moreover there are amongst you double dealers, for why? you have been meer Male and Female, one upon another. now for you Gentlemen Hawkers, or rather wandering Book-sellers, whose mouthes are like open sepulchres, for why? they are alwayes gaping, as for your hands, they are open also to take money, when yee can get it, yee are beholding to traiters, for had they not been bad, you had never took so much good money.But who was the better for it? not your selves I am sure: for why, you have spent it all at the Ale-house; and now, be it spoken to each one of your comforts, the next time you cry books about London, your reward shall be the whipping post; for why, there must be nothing sold without License.
Master Poet, your tongue runnes before your wit, you tell us of our faults, but never looke upon your own. I saw the other day a Poet in print, shiting out of the Divels breech: you are very religious men, rather than you will lose halfe a crowne, you will write against your owne Fathers. You will make mens wills before they be sicke, and hang them before they are in prison, and cut off heads before you know why or wherefore. You have an indifferent strong Corporation: 23 of you sufficient writers, besides. This alteration notwithstanding hath made all your breeches make buttons: two or three of you if they had not trusted unto their legges, it is ten to one if they had not taken acquaintance with the Gate-house, and then have lent the Pillory an eare or two. I thinke Master Poet I am even with you.
Sawcy, the arrantest knave of forty, if it had not been for us Poets, your wives petticoats had not been so laced, nor you blacke cloaked: wee shall have you shortly cry a poxe on the Printer, and then go hang your selves, and save yonga labour. There is a zealous Brother neere Warwicke lane, will helpe you to make up the number finely.
Master Poet, let me desire you to cease, I have heard you thus long with patience, let us all three beefriends, and be brothers in adversity I am the oldest Hawker amongst two hundred threescore and seventeen honest men and true, come, how say you, are we friends?
Well spoken, I were not worthy the name of a Poet if I would not condescend to be friends, so the band of amity were made in an Ale-house or a Taverne.
Have you any money Poet?
Money? I wonder when you ever see Poets have money two dayes together, I sold a copy last night, and have spent the money, and now have another copy to sell, but a pox on't, nobody will buy it because it is not licenceable, come, I know thou hast money.
By this light not I.
Nor you?
Why I? I was drunke last night, and never a new booke being out to day, I am quite broke.
Why then here be three broken gentlemen of us.
Thy fall O Poet, makes poormad.
Thy fall O Poet, makessad.
If Mercuries be mad, and Hawkers sad,
I'me sure no reason I have to be glad.
Farewell kinde Brothers, 'tis a cursed fate,
One hour should make five so unfortunate,
Poet, Book-seller, Mercury, Hawker,
And Printer, which but lately was a talker,
How much he got, but fortune late hath frown'd,
All five are falne, all five do kisse the ground.<|endoftext|>Wee are utterly undone, this Parliament hath not only rendred us contemptible to the world, but hath deprived us of our practice: the Kings Advocate hath not got a fee for anbusinesse this halfe yeere: my selfe have drawne no Articles against one that repeated Sermons with his family this twelve-moneth: my Lord of, might have spared the making of a table of fees, hee needed not to have turn'd out the Register for extortion, unlesse the issue had bin better.
'Tis true M., but we doe not suffer an Eclipse in the high Commission onely, but in all other Courts.that on a Court day us'd to be fuller then at a Sermon on a Sunday, and the Audience Court in, where a man could not heare with his owne eares: the Prerogative, Consistory, and Arch-Deacons, with the Deane and Chapters Courts, that were wont to be crowded like money into anUsurers bag, are very quiet and peaceable now; we cannot talke false Latine now, but it will bee understood, wee cannot get ten pounds in part for the probate of a wil, as corpulent M Copper-nose our Brother, the English Proctor could, we cannot putname to Articles, for incontinency, with the privity of the Judge, as heretofore we could, and then compound for the penance our selves, as we have done with the Judge before for his sentence.
No more can we send our Messengers into the Countrey, that pry into peoples actions there, as Aldermanspirits would into a But of unlicensed wine. You know when many Articles were drawne in the name of, against any that we knew was rich, upon no ground at all, but hope that he would refuse to take his oath, either to accuse or forsweare himselfe, if he did refuse, then we would be paid our fees; M. Advocate for perusing and subscribing the Articles, a Peece, thats two fees, when it was all but one labour, my selfe for drawing 'm, running up and downe, sending my man, and twenty pains more, that Heaven knowes I never tooke, my fees treble, and the Office would be carefull enough for their fees, for expedition for extraordinary attenda~ce, bonds and twenty things more, they would not want much of twenty times their fees, and then hee remaining obstinate, my Lords Grace would deale with him as he did with others, into prison with him, no redemption. O money causes were pure good ones; a parson would spend more money, by delay, then the benefice is worth. We could not endure Alimonie, many of them were.
A pox upon 'em, I had rather the Judge wold have given sentence against my Clyent then bestowed aon me, I am sure the creature if he follow'd not his own busines better then I, he would have a cold bargaine of it, for my part I fitted him, but sometimes he would present aor the like to my man, and if he lookt after it so, if not, I got very well by a wench that has beene undone in a darke entry. Sirwould commit her penance into ten pounds, towards the repaire of, and then we would share it. A shop doore could not be open on a holy-day, but the next Sunday the Church was saluted with a, and if he did not appeare, whether he heard of it or no,. Let him appeare when he would, he must tender downe his contumacie fees, or he remaines and is accounted, and when he is restor'd, he must pay the Officers fees, faith such businesses were pretty toyes.
And I have gain'd well by a poore will, when the estate has not amounted to above fortie pounds, I would perswade the executor for confirmation to prove it, but first it must be proved in, and by that time some twenty markes or such a sum would redound to me out o'the forty, I ne're car'd much for an Administration.
But I did, for I would get more by it, the Inventary (which my man should ingrose, as if one word were affraid of another) the account & the, and the gratuity, (which I never fayld of) then you could by an Ordinary will. All,,,, were as fearefull of me, as of aConstable or, many a time have I stept in with 'em for my fees, and have had all content possible. I should have thought it an ill day i'the vocation if I had not got a peece.
Oh brother you would not beleeve how I delighted in a Commission, which I would goe into th' Country withall, and expedite, and if they would not give me ten pounds for it, (which if a Country Proctor had done, he would not have required above a peece) I would not make many delayes for the matter, but have got it taxt by any Surrogate (whom I could perswade) to twelve or foureteene pounds, a motion flies downe and an excommunication after it, and so I liv'd in as much state as, or'e your Country, Commissions would afford good profit.
Faith brother, and I have cheated many of my brethren inth' Country, who used to send me up businesses ready roasted, I would pretend caveats were entred, and detaine the businesse in my hands a weeke longer then the time, and then make them pay me as fully for them, as if my man had ingrost them himselfe.
O but I was as good at an appeale as could be, for when the cause was ready for sentence, if I thought the adverse party would not appeale, if sentence went against him, I would perswade the Judge to give sentence against my Client, and then I would be sure to appeale, and when I had appealed, my Bill would exceed a Taylors; there would be, andtwenty things more that were never done. A notable merry fellow had a poore cause appealed thrice: and then the adverse party got a Commission of review my Client, stillhaving sentence, which when he told, how his enemy had appealed so often, and was yet gone further: sayes he, I have a Proctor that will follow to th'Divell, (if I whip him with a silver Lash. And on my conscience I should have lookt as scurvily upon a poore Client as a Beggar does upon a Beadle, or a whipping post, for Gods sake brother how long is it since these blessings faild?
Faith ever since the Parliament begun, or rather before. At the visitation at SaintChurch, when Doctorwas hunted dry foot into the water, where had he not dived, the Spanels, would have tore him in peeces, they catcht hold of his legs and made them swell extreamely, ever since that time we have bin held in most speciall contempt; your whores that would have hang'd themselves before to please us, now call us civill villaines, our Law, the bawdy Courts, and they that have preserv'd our Bills, now show them us, and expect restoration, nay thefails us now. That is, to bring a boy with fifty or three-score pounds, or within a yeer or two turne him away, but keepe his monie; this is a blacke tune for us: ten groats give in a licence now makes me as jocound as a gratuity of ten pound would before. Can not you devise what course is to be taken?
Now,could draw a prohibition,leave my Sheepskin-hood, and convert it into a
Buckram bag, aAtturney lives a Kings life now,
however I am (if the oathshot out of our new
Canons does not strik us quite dead) get acquaintance with
parish Clearks, & keep a horse that can smel out a
testament, if my brother Coppernose would die once,would be made free of the Girdlers, and beg the
probation of Citizens and Aldermens wils:
if all faile me,flye after Doctorinto, and than 
wee'l eate Capons and
revive our living.<|endoftext|>My old friendhow goe all things at your Office, what is it full Terme with the brave Sparkes of your Court?
Truly Sir I am sore afraid the Terme is at his full hight, J beleeve J have layd all the Records in their severall places, and placed them in due order to little purpose.
Why I pray thee tell what is the matter, J hope the Parliament doth not meddle with so great a Court as your high Court of.
For my part I know not what the Parliament either doth or intendeth to doe, but this I am sure of, all my Masters that had vsed to sell some of their papers so deare as they doe at the Lottery, walke from one end of the Office to the other sighing, and pitifully complaine and say their time of Angell-gathering, they are sore afraid, is at an end.
Is it possible any thing can discourage the sparks of your Office had they bin corrupt, as I beleeve it is unpossible?
No truly, I thinke they were never corrupt; for they were honest men enough in all Conscience to be Lawyers.
Why are not Lawyers so honest as other men? Doe you know any thing to the contrary?
No Sir, I dare not say to the contrary; for I have all my livelyhood from amongst all these large Bundels of law, which I have here placed in their order, and cleansed them from the Cobwebs, wherewith they were plentifully hung.
They are very large indeed, they cost something in writing.
J believe you, for they have bin coppied, ingrossed, written, rescribed, prescribed, and transcribed forty times over.
But what did theuse to pay for so many times writing?
Yes that they did, and in ready money too, the sparkes of our Court would not be procrastinated, prorogued, or demurred.
But J hope their Rates were conscionable: were they not?
Yes! they did pay but xij.d. a sheete for the Coppy.
That was somthing deare, but how did they write them?
Very conscionably, some 15 lines in a sheet, with some 4 or 5 words in a line, which stradled so wide as an ordinary.
In my opinion xij.d. a sheet was somthing deare.
Alas! that was not all, they must pay to theGent. in the Cut-finger'd Gloves for the expedition and for the writing, besides the xij.d. a sheet for the Coppy.
Thou now tells me of a thing more then ever J heard of; is it possible, a thing may bee copyed and ingrossed, and not written, that the Cliant must pay xij.d. a sheet for the coppy, besides money for writing, and expedition? Surely both the Masters & the clarks of your Offices, have brave times of it.
Yes, they had brave times of it, but now (if we may credit their owne report) these dayes are done, and they must suffer now for all their exactions, and extortions, for the squeesing and screwing their Cliants.
How J pray did they squeese their Cliants?
Why it had bin almost so good for a man to have bin two Termes in the high Commission (which is now in faire possibility to be purged from it's exactions, by those sure Curers thethen one Terme in the.
That is unpossible sure.
Oh these Gent. have had brave times of it; for had a cliant come some 50. or 60. miles for a, they would have made him to have attended at least 3. dayes, when they could have dispatched it in halfe an houre, andin the mackereld tailed Gowne, would have made him to have paid 5 s. for his extraordinary care and labour, though it belonged to his Office to take forth the writ, and besides hee should have paid at least xij.d. more then his due for the Fee of the Writ.
This was intollerable exaction, but I pray thee proceed.
Had a good Fellow but killed a Coney within halfe a mile of a Gent. Parke,hee thatsowes the seed of dissention for our Court (though the Gent. that ownedthe Parke never knew of it) would straight have him up, and would draw a Bill in Parliament the compasse of a mourning Cloke, wherein he would set forth, that contrary to the peace of our Soveraigne Lord the King, the people being unlawfully armed with Guns, Swords, Bowes and Arrowes, and furnished with Dogs, nets, and other Engins, there hunted, killed, and destroyed all his deare and game of Conies, with more superfluous words then are contained in a, & the poore ignorant Clyant being fetched up, and seeing all these strange matters laid to his charge; would with all his heart give halfe he was worth to be rid of this unjust businesse; and then must be forced to compound withand these other spungy Gent. who would looke so contemptibly upon the poore fellow, as a Brasen faced Jaylor will upon a Malefactor.
But what in case the poore fellow had not ready mony, would they not give him some time to furnish himselfe?
No, they had no more conscience nor beleefe then the compounded fat bawd in the middle of; For had he not ready mony they would rap out twenty Basiliske oathes, and cry.
But J pray thee to what use was the money taken, and how was it imployed?
To build neither, nor, neither the King, Common-wealth, nor party wronged was the better for it; it was for the onely benefit of our large conscienced Clarkes.
I pray thee proceed?
Had a poore Clyant that was to put in hisanswer to one of these or such like unconscionable matters, or to appeare upon some occasion in the Court, but neglected halfe an houre more then the time limited: the two Clarkes would have agreed together to informe the Court of the Contempt, and straight have him censured; which with their subtile devises for Fees and such like would have beene twice the value of the offence, and the poore Clyant should surely pay every farthing, or else lye in prison, and out of hand too a writ then would be sued forth for the levying of that in halfe an houre which is something under three dayes.
But I pray thee explaine who were these two Clarkes.
Why the one was to be for the plaintiffe, and the other for the Defendant.
Js it possible the two adverse Clarkes should agree to cosen the poore Clyant? then J perceive it is full time these things should be looked unto.
It is true as I tell you, for though they would in the presence of the ignorant Clyants raile at one another, and accuse one another, of undue proceeding, yet at night at a Taverne or else-where in some private place they would divide the spoyle & laugh at the silly ignorance of the poore Clyant; they have a thousand of these wayes: I have known them make the Clyant pay for expedition in the middle of a long vacation when they have had nothing at all to doe, yet many times made the defendant to put in his answer and take a Coppy of the Bill when the plaintife hath signified he is satisfied, and that they are agreed?
Surely then the Clarkes of your Offices are very rich.
Yes truly some of them are; but there is othersome who have laid out more money then was their owne for the purchasing of places in our Offices.
And how doe they take it?
Faith for them who lived long in our Office
as Ministers preach conscience to their under clarks,
and say they must write more close with their words,
whereas before they could never write wide enough,
and the rest that have laid out more then their owne
whole estates upon their Office, hang downe their
dejected heads, all say they are utterly broke, and
know not what course to take,: yet J hope
my generous Masters will let mee have this benefit
for all my good service to make my best profit of
all these large Roles of parchment, which I will sell
toat the signe of the 24. 
halfe-penny loaves in, who will sell
them by retaile to furnish all the large measuring
Taylors in Towne; for they are fit for nothing else,
and I hope this will be sufficient to maintaine mee in
an honest way. And so farewell allExaction.<|endoftext|>Whether in such hast Mr.; you looke as if you did not know me.
I doe indeed Sir, yet I am perswaded I have seene you; and now I thinke ont, 'twas at the Sessions house.
Right Sir, my name is; I enditedfor receiving of Inmates:
I perfectly remember you good; how go'strading with you now, I am afraid wee shall have a dead time on't, you have little to doe I thinke; whencomes Pattents grow out of date.
You are in the right sir, and which is worse, the City had rather goe wetshod then have them brought vp againe
Say you so, troth I cannot much blame them, for to say truth, you have not made them serviceable for the Common wealth, you have onely a respect to your private gaine Master Pattent, you got sweetly for the time they lasted.
By your favour Master, now you talke of deceit in Trading, I must tell you your owne too: did you never vent Calves Leather for Neate, and oftentimes for Spanish to some ignorant Customers: nay now you tell me of vnserviceable ware, how many of the Kings Subjects have you put in the stockes without authority not vagrants and Beggars, but Gentlemen, Marchants, Citizens, with their wives and aughters.
I vnderstand your wit: you meane that I have made their shooes too little for them.
Yes sir,
They had better be in the Shoomakers stacks, then be so gauled by Pattents as they have beene.
I doe not thinke but you have dranke yourMornings draught in Wormewood Beere Mr..
Why?
You fall so bitter vpon me:
I shall be bitterer ere we part Master Pattent.
Doe thy worst Shoomaker.
No no no, not the worst neither: The best I have to tell you will make you madd enough, doe you remember when you were Constable Master, when you tooke me in your watch on Crispine and Crispianus Night, and carried me to the Counter.
Ha ha ha, yes I doe, I doe.
Doe you laugh at it.
Yes faith, I remember you went beyond your Last then.
I remember thou wer't the troublesom'st tyrannicall Constable that ever knock'd down iniquity with a painted staffe: Thou would'st have a finger in every mans businesse, thy very name was hatefull, if they did but heare ofthey were danted, thou hast had a pernicious wit, or else thou could'st never overcome Scriveners and Brokers, they have curst thee sufficiently, the low Country Butter-boxes wished tennehundred thousand tunne of Devill take thee, because they were forced to waight for Butter till you brought the transporters to composition: And what had your Loggerhead to doe with Mr.the; thou wilt vndertake to teach people to dye well, and thy selfe could'st never live well.
Very good.
Not very bad sir, 'tis you I am talking off, doe you heare, theMarchantvowes a revenge vpon thee, and I much feare he will take thy life: for he sayes he will send his two Faetors,andto stifle thee.
The devill he will, they are from him already man he hath put them to boord in blind Ale-houses.
No matter, ther's more wayes to kill a Dog then hanging of him.
A Dogge you Dunstable.
Yes you paper Kite, and now I talke of hanging, there could not be so much as the hangmans office to sell but Tyburne, and the rest of his kindred must allow you a pention for it.
So, so, so, can Saintand his bones protect you to talke thus liberally Shoomaker.
Oh yes, yes, yes, thou giv'st me authority, I know I may talke freely by patent my friend:
It was Master.
I that was when you traded in sheepskins and Lambskins oh thou wer't a precious Woolfe in Lambskinne.
You will answer all this, will you not.
No, I scorne it, I beleeve I have spoke more then thou canst answer.
But heark ye goodman Shoomaker.
Goodman Shoomaker, I deny and defie the title. I am a Gentleman, my gentility is of Antiquity, thou art an Upstart; Shooes were made when thy villanous Pattents were not thought on.
Well I may chance shortly brew a little Wormewood for you.
Brew say you, you have brewed for vs already I thanke you, all the Gentlemen Cordwayners in St. Martins doe wish but to have the drowning of thee for abusing the Brewers: which hath made them abuse vs and send vs inchanted small Beere in stead of strong, before you had a hand in the Brewhouse we could have oldbeere would makes all madde before Munday noone, now tis so small we can scarceget drunke byNight, a whole tunne of our beere will scarce for a; this you have done good Master Pattent.
Shall I be blam'd for this, I thinke I did the Common wealth a great deale of good to keepe it sober.
I thou art a necessary member for in keeping of them from being drunke, thou mak'st them mad, as I am a Shoomaker and free of the Cordwainers, every prentize I had came home sober lastnight: It was not so I am sure when I was a Lad:
Hay, hay?
Yes and straw to, you put me well in mind on't, the horses that had been well bred and pamper'd in the Country, and had their allowance of hay freely, and lay at racke and manger, eat what they would; now they are stinted: how many pound of hay is there in a Load Mr. Pattent.
I cannot tell?
Wee must buy hay for our horses as we buy figs by the pound, doe you beleeve when you waighed Hay that Iustice held the Scales.
I see you will have License?
Not from you Iack straw, vnlesse you were in office againe?
Iacke straw?
I prethee answer me to one question andbe just with me to a strawes breadth?
Declare your wit?
How many ounces of straw goes to the littering of a Mad man a yeare in.
'Tis a madde question?
I that's true, I know who I speake to.
Why doe you count me for a Mad man.
No for a wise man: and a man that hath had experience ith mistery, this is no question for a Mad man to answer:
It seemes your conversation is altogether with wise acres: was it not you that asked the silly question once; whether Red-herrings came out of the red Sea or no.
No but it was you that made men pay as deare for them, as if they came from thence, I wonder you had nothing to doe with dainty blote herring, blote, blote, or dryed Sprats; I beleeve you had something to doe with Gudgeons, though thy selfe art as miserable now as poorewas, is it not you that one Lent endited a poore man of Felony for frying of Bacon.
Of Fellony?
Yes of Fellony, and you would needs justifie it with an Act of Parliament, which when one looked on it which had better eyes, it was not frying of Bacon, but fiering a Beacon.
Ha ha ha.
Doest thou laugh at thy owne ignorance, doe you heare, did I never know you a Dunghill Raker.
I a Dunghill raker, ye Pantoffle.
I cry you mercy Sir, you did onely rake them that raked Dunghills, looke too't, for there is an army comming against thee, whose weapons are strong yron hookes; the Captaine of them is: those that be vnder his command I shall nominate to thee.And a great many more out of my memory at this time that have made vp a ragged Regiment and vow no more to be obedient to thy authority Moreover the Hop-Marchants have an intentionto marry all the female Bonelace makers, and get Children to fortifie themselves against theethey say if thou dost but come amongst their hops againe, they will scarce leave thee a leg to hop away vpon, and the Bonelace-makers have taken such spirit against thee, that in stead of Bone-Lace thou shalt returne with laced bones, and take my word, thou hadst better be in the middle ofpikes, then amongst theirneedles.
Doe you hold any confedrase with this lawlesse faction Mr.that you can so well tell the manner of the revenges they will execute vpon me.
I promise thee I doe not thinke but they will burne thee when all comes to all, and ther'san end of.
It must be some of your female Bonelacemakers then, I care not a button for the rest of the Rebellions.
Don't you care a button? Masterinwill make you care a button, why thou Iack in a boxe, could'st not thou be content to gaine Authority amongst the Buttonmakers of, where the sisterhood might have payed thee tribute; besides Buttons for thy breeches.
Yes when their breeches make buttons, have I lived after that rate to goe secured among Precisions you vagrants.
Among Precisians you puppie, what need you confine your selfe to one Sect when there is so much division amongst them.
That's all one, they hold the greatest sway who care no more for knocking a mans braines out in zeale, or for the good of the common cause: then I for philiping a flie to death, I would not be within y=e= jurisdiction of newfor a million.
Nay I thinke thou hadst better be in the greatCountrie:
Or have been Page to Sir, I should hope to returne with more security.
Well, but now we have been in,, and; let vs returne to oldagaine, where there is many honest men will welcome you home, one Mr..
Oh, the Hatband maker.
Then theres another one Mr.
A fiddlestring maker?
Master:
A Tobackopipe maker?
Master Glasse.
A Spectacle maker?
Master:
A Combmaker?
Doe you heare Pattent cannot you vance all trades, how many Halls have you been free of:
Whats that to thee?
That is a question all men aske when they are ashamed to give an answer.
Ashamed?
Did I say thou wert ashamed:
'Twas your pleasure?
Give me thy hand I am sorry for it, I cry thee mercy I tooke my markes amisse: Ile give thee thy due for that efaith I thinke thou wert ever shamelesse, have I hit the Naile on the head now Smith, are you pleased:
You have spoken all?
Not all, but I am drawing to an end?
Would thou hadst spoke thy last once?
I shall vexe thy soule first Sirrah, vnlesse thou canst come off with good Language, thou wilt suffer many Deaths in one, the Hatband maker will choake thee or strangle thee with, the Gutstring maker will make strings of thy Guts which will cozen the Fidlers most abhominably, for they will never stand in Tune, the Tobackopipe makers, Spectacle makers, and Combe makers, will compound with the Dicemakers for thy bones to make falce Dice with, and that's a way to make thee as mischievous in thy Death as thou wer't in thy lifetime, and if thy Bones prove so deceitfull, we may very well turne the tother end of an old Proverb, what was bred in thy flesh will never out of thy bones.
I have heard you, and doubt not the worst their mallice aymes to inflict vpon me, I have ere this my tragedy be brought to passe, contriv'd a meanes to worke revenge on them.
Declare, I shall be glad to heare it, I always had an itching desire to mischiefe as well as thou:
Thus then, I will bring up a fashion amongst some of our temporising gallants to forsake the wearing of hatbonds, we will have all our fiddle strings fromand, and as I am a Smith, I have a conceit to make yron tobacko pipes and steele Combes, and our old men when they once grow dimme sighted, shall have their writings read to them.
I this is prety well, but not in your power to perfect, this is a harder project vpon them, then the first you had, it will be a hard matter to draw the humours of the whole Kingdome to these fashions: besides your yron worke will doe no good, for we have many phantastike Company keepers that onely take Tobacko to breake the pipes, and shall we be beholding to other Nations for fiddle strings or combe our heads with Horse Combes. Besides ther's a strange conceit indeed that all old men should have their writings read to them, 'tis enough to vndoe halfe the old men in the Kingdome, their Mistresses shall not send to them letters of commendation, or places of newmeeting, but they must be enforc'd to have their wives to read them, and what inconveniency that would bring, doe but judge: No no, this will not doe Mr., I am a little in hast, I thinke it be dinner time, I will onely give you one item more and then I'le leave you to your owne direction, were you never acquainted with one Mr..
Yes, yes, a Horner.
Ware horns, take heed of him are you mari'd.
What of that?
Take heed of him, that is all; I speake as a Friend.
Friendly councell.
It is so, then doe not you know Mr. Kill Cow.
Yes the Butcher.
The very same, he hath a great many friends abroad, so hathhis Dog, be sure you goe not through field lane, Newgate market, Butcher row, St.shambles, East Cheape, or, there is wait laid for thee in all these places, and if they meet thee thou wilt be stucke fuller of Skuers then a Surloyne of roast beefe atis stucke with Rosemary: And by all meanes come not neare the Beare garden for beares and Dogs are friends and all agree, on thee to act a bloody Tragedy.
Well sirrah, you are a railing fellow, I'le talke no more to you?
One cold word more good Master.
But sirrah why doth these things trouble you so much?
I tell thee my name ismy nature is like vnto my name, and I defie such juggling in a Common-wealth, it makes my honest countrymen beg in a land of plentie; I have somthing to say to you (now I consideris so neare) concerning Cards. What new game have you set a foot, that the knave of Dyamonds doth cozen the king of Hearts and all his Subjects to the very Ace, y'are a sure Card sirrah, whendeales, all the rest doe but hold Cards.
Why not, why I tell thee I will cozen my Father at Cards.
Prethee doe not sweare I'le beleeve thee, the Father quoth he, I the Father of thy Country -- you are going now, you doe not love to heare of your faults, I have onely one thing more to say to thee, & then fire or y=e= Iakes consume thee.
I thanke you sir, spit out your spleene, what is your next venome?
No venome vpon my credit, now I have laid open thy soule inside, I will give thee a purge that is with Soape:
With Soape?
With Sope, I with Sope, that was a purge deere enough as you order'd it, all the goodHuswives in, and those that take a pride in cleane linnen, have an intention to wash thee cleere from all thy former villanies; but I am afraid they will doe no good vpon thee, they will be enforced at last to hang thee vp for the signe of y=e= Labour in vaine, which is the end I bequeath thee too, and though I am no Barbar good Mr., I must leave you ith suds at this time, for I have talk'd my selfe weary, my shop Iournimen and prentises expect me, if you have any thing to say to me, you know St., I will not change my house now the world is in hope of reformation. So good even sweet Master.
Farewell sir?
And though these things I can no longer 
thrive by,
Hang him that wants, who hath all Trades
to live by.<|endoftext|>Well met, well met Master, you are such an eager man; Do you remember, Sir, the conference we had, when we last encountred, almost in this very place? Doe you still pursue your errours with that wilfull heat?
Out of my sight, thou Idolater; prophanesse hangs in a mist about thee, that thou maist commit thy deeds of darknesse with the Whore of Babilon with more securenesse.
Not so hasty Master, a good cause should be disputed with good words, and confirmed with reasons, not with passions.
Down, down, I hate thee;I hate thee and thy late disputed doctrine of the reall presence in the Sacrament, worse than the lawne sleeves of the Prelates, which are but meer rags of, and fit onely for tinder for the Tinder-box of; but goe to Master, because society is the injunction of nature, and good discourse (they say) doth make a horse that trots seeme to amble, proceed in your last argument, and I promise you both silence and attention.
If you will be patient I will. The doctrine then of the reall presence in the Eucharist.
The Eucharist! I can forbeare the argument no longer; there is no such word to be read in all the Scripture.
Very frequently, Sir, in the Greek originall.
Talk not to me of Greek, I will beleeve no Greek, it is a language that shall carry no authority with me; I hope to see Greek and Latine too, ere it be long, in lesse reputation than they are.
I doe not like this fury, E'en God be with you, and grant your zeale more knowledge, and your knowledge more humility.
Nay but hark you Master, hark you one word, - look you here, - Master: - Come as wisht for.
How have you done this long time? How doe you Master? Sir, I heartily salute you.
I returne your salutation with the like testimony of good will, and true affection: you intervene an happy Vmpire, we two were e'en a falling out, and a falling off too.
Verily, Master, the words of truth being not in his lips, I was about to separate, and to leave him to the fogs of his superstitious ignorance,I must beseech you, having so happily met with your better company, that we may abandon him.
Why so Sir, Although I am a Professour of true and Orthodox Religion, I am not of the separation; I would be neither a, not; it fares with Religion as with Vertue, she must preserve her selfe entire betwixt two extreames; and the safest way to truth, is the middle way; I would be neither learnedly superstitious, nor obstinately ignorant; but to the point which you were so hot in disputation of.
Sir, when last Masterand I encountred, we held a controversie concerning the reall presence in the Sacrament, which Masterbeleeveth to be truly corporall, and in adoration bowes unto it.
Sir, I beleeve the Sacrament to be a greater mystery then peradventure you conceive it, and not a meere Love-feast, as idly enough you are pleased to fancy it; I dare affirme, that the great worke of mans Redemption is no where more perfectly to be discovered,.
Sir, you are in your Latine, I will have Latine againe to answer you; I assure you I take it to be a Commemoration, onely in remembrance of our Saviours sufferings, on whom we feed with the eye of faith.
That cannot be Master, the words are positive and punctuall,, and will admit of no other interpretation.
The words that follow that text doe as plainly and punctually interpret the words precedent,, which implies a direct absence of the party; for what needs a remembrance, when the person is present? and in this I referre my selfe to Master. You affirmed besides at our last meeting, that you didfeed in the Sacrament, upon the very body of Christ indeed.
I feed in the Sacrament on the very Body and Bloud of Christ, the elements of Bread and Wine, being transubstantiated into his Body.
This is most horrible impiety. How is this transubstantiation? when is it begun? when is it finished? answer me to that, Master.
Immediately after the words of the consecration.
That cannot be, for the Metaphysicks (as I have heard Schollers say) will not allow that the substance should be altered, and the accidents remaine, that the Bread and Wine should be converted into the very Body and Bloud of Christ; yet the colour and taste of the Bread and Wine, which are their accidents, should still continue; neither will Divinity ever agree, that the Bread, which after consecration, you say, is turned into the Body of Christ, should suffer afterwards corruption, and moulder away, as we see it doth.
We feed, I say, in the Sacrament on the very Body of Christ; but how? not as we feed on butchers meat bought in the shambles; but it being received with all reverence, and prepared humility after a divine and spirituall manner; and whatsoever you are pleased to say to to the contrary of us, beleeve me, there is no Catholick but is of the same opinion with me.
That you doe to avoid some dangerous absurdities which would consequently arise, should you affirme, that in a fleshly manner you eat in the Sacrament, the very flesh of our Saviour; for then by the same argument should the blessed Virgin, the mother of our Saviour, feed in the Sacrament, on the flesh of her owne son; and then again, as often as in the time of Lent you receive theCommunion, you should as often offend against the order of the Church, which doth command, that there should in Lent no meat be eaten. Besides, I understand how crosse it is to reason and Philosophy, that one Body should at one and the same time move in severall places.
Wonders are no wonders in wonderfull subjects; I beleeve as the Church beleeveth, which doth informe me, that the Body of our Saviour is assisted alwayes with the Divinity of our Saviour, and in this (as Masterdid before) I referre my selfe to you Master.
With all my heart, and if we shall continue in our journey and travell one way together; as in this, so in all controverted points betwixt us, I shall referre my selfe to your advice, Master.
I have not the desire, nor yet the ability to goe thorow with so great a taske; but since it is the inclination of truth to communicate herselfe, and through all my life I have made it my labour to enquire her out: I will, as neare as I can, first state the question aright, and then determine it. I beleeve we ought not to make our approaches to the blessed Sacrament, with that overweening familiarity, as the sawcy Brownists; nor yet with such a devout superstition as the abused Papists. That the Bread and wine in the Sacrament should be transubstantiated into the Body of Christ, cannot be admitted into the faith of any sober man, without admitting with it many grosse and grievous errours; for besides that, it is but a meere invention of latter times, it is diametrically opposite to reason and nature; and God himselfe, who oftentimes doth work above nature, doth never work against it. The elevation of the Host by the Papists savours of rank idolatry; and the unmannerly sitting of the Brownists at the Communion, of irreverence. A decent and humbleposture is most requisite, especially where God is pleased to communicate himselfe to be really, and more peculiarly present. It is no lukewarmenesse, no neutrality to keepe safe between both your errours, but a grounded knowledge and uprightnesse: And I assure my selfe, if you would well weigh, with how much safety between both rockes the Truth doth passe by unship-wrackt, how secure and cleare shee is discovered, you would then make hast to disembogue, and make up unto her, who indeed is the Center of all sublunary happinesse, where alone we may finde peace with confidence. Errours in the Church result out of too unruly an heat, or too thick and too grave a Superstition; either while we violently are lead by our own ungoverned humours, or while blinded with pompe, or with the shadowes of Antiquitie with a willing reverence wee are drawne unto Idolatry. Too much Ceremony and an affected pompe hath begot much Superstition in the Sacrament amongst the Papists. Too carelesse a presumption hath begot much irreverence in the Sacrament amongst the Anabaptists. The mean betwixt both is the safe and happy way attended with a persevering care, not to decline, either to the one, or to the other, either to the right hand, or to the left.
I thanke you for your good counsels, and shall endeavour to embrace them.
And I shall acknowledge my selfe to be much improved by you which doth embolden me to propound one question more, and that is concerning the Originall, and the Institution of Bishops.
I should with much content lend eare to your 
Conference, but see the Towne is neare, and within the
full view of our eye; we will therefore for this day repose
our minds as well as bodyes; and refer the discourse untill
the Morning.<|endoftext|>A Young Lawyer come amongst us! perhaps you may learn something; I have been telling these young Gentlemen you see with me by what means I could make this Kingdom the most Flourishing Kingdom in the whole World.
I am sorryI am come to late to hear how so good an Effect might be so easily wrought.
Nay Sir, you are not come too late, for I can (without any weariness) sit here to tell it all day long, I so greatly desire the Publick Good. In short Sir, what I have been saying is this; I can plainly demonstrate how we may beat thewithout fighting, pay Debts without Money, make all the Streets inNavigable Rivers, harbour all the King's Great Ships upon the top of an Hill, where they shall be secured from Wind and Weather, and from an hundred other Accidents they are else obnoxious to. All or most of this you may see printed in a Book of mine, which I know you Lawyers are against, because it likewise maintains a Register, which spoils your Trade; but to be Friends with you, though I have undone you in the First Part, I have a Second Part waiting at the Press, that will maintain you all sumptuously, if there were ten times as many more as there are; what say you to all this young Lawyer, Ha?
I say you have out stripp'd all the Poets that ever wrote and that 'tis pity the King and Council should have no more regard to your Person and Discourses, than wise man have for.
Sir the Reason's plain why they mind the Improvement of the Nation no more; heark you, the Great ones have another sort of Game to play; -- no more of that -- you understand me.
Not I, I profess; I cannot be reconcil'd to half a Sentence join'd with a little push, a wink, a nod, a smile, or a Finger held up to the Nose; I have hated those sort of tricks, ever since I've read my Lord, where, under the Title of seeming wise (he saith) such persons help themselves with Countenance and Gesture, and are wise by signs, and when they know within themselves, they speak of that they do not well know, would nevertheless seem to others to know of that which they may not well speak. Therefore Sir, if you would do any good upon me, you must speak, and not leave me to conjecture what you can say.
Psha! I see you do not know the World: pray read this Paper.
A Club to consist of threescore Lords and Gentlemen., They shall be calledEngland., They shall meet twice in the week.. They shall have provided for them a pennyworth of Cheese, Bread, Beer and Mustard. A brave Treat for LordsI confess! I'le read no more, unless you tell me how this Paper is pertinent to our former Discourse.
This is to satisfie you, that I am not only one that seem wise; for I was Chair-man of the Club, and I tell you, there were some there under my Instructions, would have baffled all the Coife; therefore whate're you may think on me, you see some Ingenious Gentlemen have thought me fit to be their Instructor.
That any Ingenious man desired you to be Chair-man, is more than I know, or ever heard on before; But pray Sir no more of that! Tell me what you mean by saying.
You will understand it too soon, I am sure I foresaw what's now coming upon us, before you was born. -- We are a lost People -- a lost People! An undone Nation, An undone Nation!
Still more Riddles! Good Captain what's the matter? What's the City on Fire at one end, and are they cutting Throats at the other?
You may sport at these things, you are but a young man, and cannot see so far as I do: that Priest yonder, can tell you, 'twill not be long before you must burn, unless you are resolved (as he is) to turn.
Do you know that Gentleman?
No, I never saw the man before.
How can you pretend to be acquainted with his Resolves?
What do you talk of pretend? pray who does not know that all the Clergy of the Church of(as you phrase it) are a Pack of -- I know what?
What do you mean by? for my part I am very well satisfied, if you did know what they were, you would speak of them with as much Reverence, as you do Detraction.
Psha! I tell you they are all a parcel of Self-interested Fellows, and Papists in their Hearts.
I perceive you are such an Enemy to Prerogative, that you'l encroach even upon the Almighty's, and not suffer him to monopolize the knowledge of Hearts; but how ignorant, as well as impious this Affirmation is, will appear: for how can they be self-interested, and for Popery? for if that comes in, there will a great many come to share with them in their Spiritual Livings.
You are a young man, and run too fast; for any one knows, if Popery gets once the upper hand, all the Lands taken from the Church in8. time will be restored again; though some therefore doe come to share with them, yet their Advantages will be much greater.
You may as well say every private mans Estate will be taken from him, and given to the Church; for no man holds any Estate by a stronger Title, than the Purchasers of Church-lands hold those Lands: for first they were sold by Act of Parliament, and in QueenDays instead of abrogating that Act, it was corroborated by another, to which the consent of his Holiness was given; and if this be not Security strong enough, I'le be content (though I confess 'twill be a great punishment) to write in Vindication of a Register. But Sir, to let this Slip of yours pass, pray instruct me for what reason our worthy Divines stand condemn'd in your Judgment, for Papists?
For what Reasons? Why, don't all the World know they are against Bringing in the Bill,and that they openly pray for the Duke?
Is this all?
All! Ay and enough too.
I am sorry to see you thus hurried on by a blind Zeal; for why should they not pray for his Highness? Let him be good or bad, their Prayers are necessary; if good, that he may be so preserved, if bad, that he may be reclaim'd and converted.
I shall not so much insist upon this; but as to the other Points, I mean the Bill: I have a Paper in my Pocket will confound all your Divines, and all your Lawyers put together; here, do but read, and you'l be convinced.
What, it's Intituled?
The same.
I have read him already; but for my part, I neither approve of the Man, nor his Reasons.
Not the Man! Why you don't know who 'tis.
But I know he fails in his Morals, by injuriously calumniating both His Majesty, and all the Worthy Clergy of our Church: forhe tells you, 'tis the constant Practice of Church-men to debauch young Gentlemen with ill Principles: and, the Episcopal Sees, Deanries,were the certain and constant Rewards of such Services: such Superlative Impudence ought to be quell'd, not with a Pen, but with the Magistrates Sword. However, this is to besaid in alleviation of his Fault, what he has spoke, is so grosly false, that no one (in their Wits) will believe him.
Pray let this alone, come to his Reasons; methinks you do not care to meddle with them.
I will shew you, there is not one thing, in the whole Pamphlet, worthy the name of a Reason; For as to the first and last position, which he so much endeavours to refute (and God knows does it boldly enough) there is no need of them to maintain this Cause, so that the four first Pages and the four last, (which the Gentleman is pleased to give us) contains only a parcel of insignificant Stuff. As for his Instance of, that God said This thing was of Him, what then? Therefore he approved of the Action of the Rebels. This looks like the Logick of one that rails at the University., saith the Lord;he approves of the afflicting Instruments. He hardnedHeart, that he might not let the Children ofgo;he was pleased withfor keeping them. A brave Divine! Indeed the Church ofmen and he do differ in Opinion.
Well, but he hath other Instances.
I tell you Sir, they are all impertinent; for he hath neither proved his Cases to be parallel to ours, nor that the Actors did what they did justly; the question between us, is not only what hath, and what may be done; but what hath justly, and may justly be done; for unless he will argue, Every thing that hath been done, hath been justly done (which is like his Logick) he hath said nothing to the purpose. When he can prove thatanddid justly excludewho was their right and true King, he will speak to the Point: But pray observe his Reason whywas put by; becausewas not an honest man, not becausewas dishonest. What think you, is not this a brave Fellow to be in Print? I so much insist Sir, upon this Term; because the Supreme Authority may chance to do something unjust: (else instead of Destroying, he'l Make Popes) for they may do something against the Divine Law. But to be short, what think you ofCase? I hope we all know that Act of Parliament was sufficiently repented of, because 'twas unjust. Let us see then how it suits with our Case;received a more severe punishment by that Act, than the Laws of the Realm had provided for such Offences; this was all, and here lay the injustice of the Act. If this Bill had pass'd, thehad receiv'd more severe Punishment for his Faults, than the Laws of the Realm have provided in such Cases; either therefore, that Act was just, or this Bill unjust.of the Queen it is with good reason provided, if any made open Submission and Declaration of his or their Conformity, that then they shall be discharged, of and from all and every the Penalties and Punishments inflicted. Now suppose the D. should conform: if this Bill had pass'd, it had nothing availed him; and though the meanest Subject in the Kingdom might have taken Advantage by his Conformity, yet the D. could not; a most unreasonable thing. Now upon the whole matter I appeal to any impartial man, whether this Argument will not hold: All Subjects ought in reason and justice to bear equal Punishments for equal Faults. But if the Bill had pass'd, the D. had had a more severe Punishment than any other Subject for the same Fault; Therefore,We have hitherto taken it for granted the D. is a Papist, but now let us see whether the Parliament could justly (when the Bill was brought) take notice of him as such; I demand therefore, Had he been legally convicted of Popery?
I cannot say that.
Why then, every man is supposed innocent, till he be Tryed, and proved Guilty; and I believe all people will agree to this Argument, That 'tis highly unjust to Condemn any man unheard; but if this Bill had passed, the D. had been condemned unheard; therefore he had been unjustly Condemned. 'Tis certain by the same Reason and Justice, they may make a Law to Condemn one man unheard, they may make a Law to Condemn all men unheard; and how would you like such a Law?
I perceive you conclude the Duke to be guilty of no other Fault but Popery; but alas! we all know there are a great many other Offences laid to his Charge, and things of a high Nature too -- but no more of that.
Now are we to believe you have a thundering Reserve, when in truth you do not know so much as you have spoke. Suppose him Sir, to be Actor of the most and greatest Crimes that ever mortal man was; let him (without Favour) be charged with them all; but let him be summon'd to make his Defence, and then from what Imputation he cannot clear himself, let him suffer for it according to the Laws in such Cases: But that there should be new Laws made to punish His particular Person only, or that he should be condemn'dunheard, are things I will maintain (against you and all the Fanatick Crew) to be Dissentaneous both to right Reason and Justice.
Talk what you will, I cannot believe but that the Parliament may lay the next Heir aside: for what if he should be a Fool, or a Mad-man; must we be govern'd by him?
I begin now to be weary with your Impertinence. Pray, who does not know 'tis every man's Fate (according to Law and Reason) that is an Ideot, or Mad-man to lose the Government of his Inheritance, and this rather fortifies than exonerates whathave said: That Justice must be alike to all Subjects. Thereforehopehave fully evinc'd, that though the Divines are against the Bill, (which is more than either you orknow) they are not for that blame-worthy.
Nay, talk as long as you will, I shall still be of the same mind.
Well, I see you are an obstinate, prejudic'd Man, 
thereforetake my Leave.<|endoftext|>How now, whatandmust I goe make to day? I led you a brave dance yesterday, how wee traversed the City as so many boote-halers to get in prizes! never did a Dunkirk Frigat watch a Newcastle Collier, nor a jealous wife a wanton husband, nor yet a Cat a poore Mouse, as we looked after desperate debtors.
FaithI tell thee thou art one that standest in no need of perspective glasses, for thy eyes are as piercing as a Hawkes, and as dangerous as a Basiliskes, thou puttest a prodigall spend-thrift toas many turnings as a Woodcock hath windings, and thou hast one quality more; thou art no kinne to the Snaile, nor yet to the Dormouse; a flie-boat or a Turkish galley is not quicker at Sea than thy indefatigable legs be on land, sure thou wearest some Goose-grasse in thy shooes, for Physitians say that Herbe will keep those that weare it from weariness.
Poxe of your jesting for me, I am sure your hands would doe little without my eyes, never did a poore Mill-horse tyre himselfe out of his skin, and labour out his owne eyes for others profit, more than I doe for yours, and to speak truth, as the poore Mill-horse is at last devoured by my Lord Maiors Hounds; so are such as we are by his Serjeants: what, will you give us any thing this morning? for I protest I am Crop-sick of yesterdaies Physick, I gave my selfe a vomit, but without the direction of any Quack-salver, and now a Modicum this morning would be a generall restorative to my watry stomack.
Well, let us goe see our Grand-Seignior Master, for he made a private composition last night betwixt two wilde mad-brain fellowes, that will maintaine him and us too this fortnight; if he had not clapt in just as he did, I had ended the businesse, and pocketted the Cash up my selfe, but come, we will to him, and never did a Bartholmew-faire beggar more earnestly set upon a Gentleman passenger for an almes, than we will invade him for a good bit this morning, to satisfie our hungry mawes.
With all my heart, and I know hee will bid me welcome, for I can tell him of two nests ofgreat wilde-fowle which are yet very fat, I know their haunts, I spyed out their taking wing to flie abroad, I followed, and saw them housed, and like an olde setting dog, I traced them back againe to their sleeping holes, doe you think that this newes will not bee welcome to M? I faith I think you and he could as ill subsist without me, as a new upset Apothecary could without the custome of some well practised Physitian. Ile assure you, if the officers of the Counter had any charity in them, they would alwaies remember such as I am for their speciall Benefactors, and upholders; I have sent them in five or sixe couple of rich feathered fowles in a weeke, which they have pulled bare, and devoured in a week after; no Poulterer can sooner unplume a Partridge than those Coysterels can a prodigall youngster in the poultry; yonder is the man we looked for, he is stirring betimes, I beleeve he is going about some Ambuscado, come, we will up to him: how doe you Master?
What my two Harpies? well met, you could not have come in a fitter time, I have imployment for you both presently, come, there is Cash for you both aforehand, and we will be joviall, doe we but intercept this Canary bird; he lies in Lime-streete, and we will lay strong lime-twigs for him;, I hope your fingers are not soaped, and, your eyes are cleered this morning, are they not? If we surround him, never was a narrow piece of Kersies stretched more upo~ the Tenters, then he shall be by our Tallons, you must be sure to watch narrowly, he is an easie Gul without a sword, or stout company, he goes in Plush, and Ile warrant youwe will make him blush, there be three passages to secure,, walke you by such an Alley, and there stand as if you were making water, but have an eye to such a doore, if any such rich Capparizon'd younker fallies out, presently withdraw you to us to such a Taverne, we will about him like so many Wolves, and feast our selves upon his Cash, or his Carcase.
What say youto this, is not this brave hunting, this is better than beating of Hares, or threshing, and hedging in the Countrey for two pence a day and porridge, what though we be cursed? yet you know the Foxe then fares best; Is not thisa brave trade? Those who are called spirits, that catch men for new plantations, are meere butter-flies to us; if once we utter but our terrible Apologie,, into what a shaking fit puts it men into, our pressing men into the Counter, is more dreadfull than a Constables is into the Kings service.
Tush, now I am feed with good silver, I am ready for any villany, I would not spare to betray my owne father: what though we be counted Varlets? it is nothing, I would venture upon the stoutestman with as good a stomach, as a hungry dog would upon a creeping pudding. Ile deale plainly sirrah with thee, we in our offices must be like theeves upon the high-way side, have no respect of persons, command all to stand, all is fish that comes to the net with us, rich, or poore.
Doe but observe what a confession the young gallant will make when he is taken, oh how I rejoyce to heare him, he does it in hope to finde mercy at our hands, alas, it is much like that whichThieves make at the place of execution, without any pitty or hope of pardon; A man may as well looke for mercy at the hands of an Argiere pirate, as at a Serjeants, for we are as cruell by land, as they are by Sea, they passe them away to the Gallies, and we to the Gallowes. When we cope such a Sparke at any time, the first place of debating the matter, is, if hee be well lined with monies, the next Taverne, but if he be a bird but of an ordinary flight, then the next rotten, olde, darke Alehouse, our intent is there to gorge our selves upon him, as so many Carrion Crowes, and to fish out of him whether he be in further danger or not, and sometimes it is to send in the interim to the Creditor, to give him intelligence that, and to bid to haste to the Counter, and enter the action against him, for that is an usuall trade with us, first to arrest a man, and then enter the action a little antidated, that our knavery may be concealed.
Tush, that is as usuall as it is for young wenches, first to adventure a great belly, and when they are sped, then to procure a Licence, but how we squeeze him in the interim, he might have sitten as easily bare buttockt upon thornes all the while, as to have stayed there amongst us, if we give him liberty to send Letters to any of his friends,, or he that we send, knowes how to protract time, or goe about other businesse, or to say they were not at home, or else he would goe againe anon to their houses, and all this the poore gull takes for great curtesies from us, when it is nothing lesse, for we doe it either to have the longer time to feast our selves in, or else to gaine monies of him for keeping him as we say for going tothe Counter, or to put him into the greater feares, while we sit and laugh at him.
This is all as true as Gospel, but my nimble villaines, there is more you know in it than all this; you know a priviledge that I have beyond all this, for if I smell that he is well lined with gold, no Chymist hath more dexterity to extract sophisticate gold from other Minerals, than I have to scrue mettall out of his feathered pockets, I have a tricke under the vizzard of extraordinary curtesie and favour to drill this Bussard home to my rooste, where I finde lodging at ten shillings a night, and dyet with a shoulder of Mutton, and a Capon, at thirty shillings with the sauce; Vintners reckonings are often paid with brawling and quarrelling, but I have all paid me with hearty thankes, and a prayer to boote, to be good unto him, if in case I see he will be fetched off, I am sure one or two daies to keep out of sight of purpose, that his friends may spend the freer, and his score run the higher; besides when I do come in, I make as though I was sorry for the Gentlemans trouble, when as it is a thousand to one, but I have been entring some other new action against him, or else informed some of his other Creditors to doe it while he is in Limbo, and then he and his friends will pay any thing to quit him of my house, when alas poore bird, I have agreed with another of my brethren to take him in againe as soone as I am discharged, beside all this I have a devise to goe to his Creditors, to desire them not to be seen in the businesse as yet, telling them also, that if they keep off, and not cloze too soon with him, they may have their full debt and charges, when as all this while I doeworke only to spin out my prisoner to the highest straine, as Nuns doe fine Lawne, so that you Varlets ye see, how I like a cruel devill torment this poore soule: Is not this a brave trade my nimble dexterous slaves? & how often have I at the upshot got good fees for you also?
And doe you think great Commander, that all comes into your purse? No Ile warrant you, for if once I have found out but a debtors lodging, he shall not want for visits, for once or twice a weeke I come and salute him, where I am sure to be well fee'd with an Angell at least for concealment of him from your clutches; besides good Sack and Clarret, and oftentimes good victuals too, for most men love liberty, and they will try all conclusions before that of a Gaole, when once they are there, they give themselves lost men, and are as sure bound, as Gally-slaves bee to their Oares.
I protest I hold the City like a racket Court, and debtors to be like Balls,throwes them into our hands, and we bandy them from one hazzard to the other, most commonly under line, so that all that come in, are either tost and lost, or else broken and spoiled with our violent usage, we are like the gamesters, make sport at their misery, there are as few debtors come sound off from our hands, as there doe sound wenches from old bawdy-houses, or good horses from an old horse-coursers stable, or full dishes of meat from a dinner amongst old Soldiers in a beleaguerd towne. A Mildew rots not more sheep, then wee consume mens estates, what Caterpillars are to fruit, that are we to prodigals.
We may (I hope) speak merrily amongst our selves (old Rogues) I hold the City like a Wilderness, and we be the beasts of prey, if Usurers be Tigers, and Attornies be Leopards, Clarkes and Sollicitors be Foxes and Badgers, your Informers and Promoters Whelps and Beagles, your Justices Clarkes as Cats, and if Brokers beeWolves and Beares, yet it is the strong number of Serjeants, Yeomen, and Setters that be the Lions and Mastives, if it were not for us, you should see Guildhall as empty of complainers, as Westminster Hall is in a long Vacation, or a dangerous pest-time, we finde all those work, therefore all the rest are in fee with us; what quick returne have we foure dayes in a weeke at Guild-hall; and it would seeme strange if we should not be well fed, as long as the Sheriffes keepe open house; I tell you Magpies cannot feed better in a full Cherry Garden, then we doe there.
There's no feare of our thriving as long as men can borrow money, and forfeit their day of payment; I have, a list of mad shavers that will fall into your hands ere long, but all the mischiefe is, they live in fortified places, such as are Milford-lane, Ramme-Alley, Chancery-lane, Grayes-Inne-lane, Charter-house, Great Saint Bartholomewes, the little Minories, Saint Catherines Liberty, and the Tower freedome, if you dare make your approaches upon these Bulwarkes, and enter a strong battery, you may be sure of prizes enough.
Poxe take you, doe you jeere us? the name of those Garrisons how it startles me, I once had an enterprize upon one of those forts, and though the enemy had no intelligence a long time, nay I had possession of my Captive, but suddenly the alarme was taken, or all the women were as ready as they be in the Iles ofand, or in the Ile of, upon the discovery of a French or Spanish Navie, and fought most desperately, so that I was forc'd to foregoe my purchase, and glad I came off with life, you shall assoone perswade a theefe to goe up Holborne Hill, and hang himselfe at Tyburne, as to get mee against any of those Citadels againe.
Let me have one passage with you amongst the rest, I had a large fee once given me, when I was Yeoman to Serjeant; to adventure upon that narrow Sconcecalled. We had our prize that we went for, but before we could get off, we were invironed by the enemies forces that lay in Ambuscado, but we were so imprison'd, so sentenc'd, so shav'd, so trimm'd, so annointed, so washed, so slashed, and gashed, that had we not stuncke so miserably, I look't for no other preferment then to have beene slic'd out for steakes for a breakefast; but at last it was generally resolved on, that seeing we were such stinking Carrion, wee were fitter for Fishes or Duckes than for men, and so in a desperate manner, we were flung over the Castle walls into the water, either to swimme or drowne, I never was in such hot service before, and will never adventure it the second time; see the markes they gave me on my face, head, hands, limbes, and buttockes. Ile rather turne futurer to my Lord Majors kennell of hounds, and be bound all my life to carry guts to the Beares for a penny a day, then ever bee pressed upon that thanklesse service againe.
Come, come, there's no gaines without paines, sometimes we are hard put to it, but however we get something by th'hand, we have as many cheating trickes as a dancing Beare, though some escape, yet 'tis not one of an 100. Well, lets heare some newes, what is there any stirring?
There was a rumor the other day, but I hope 'tis but a report, that our Deanes should be searched, and our Officers examined, about unjust fees, and unlawfull imprisonment, 'twas said too that the Serjeants should be reduc'd to their pied-party-coloured-coats, and to answer to all such prisoners as should make just complaints against them, and to give satisfaction to the parties wronged, 'twas reported likewise that prisoners should pay but two pence a night for their lodging, and not above four pence a meale, and that Serjeants should not arrest on the Lords day, and such as would not weare such coats, should be put out of office, and many such hard Impositions.
S'foot, if this be true, Ile goe sell my place forthwith, for if all these Injunctions be laid upon us, I shal nere keep them, and therefore it's best to get something for it in time; some locusts cannot live in Israel, nor such Caterpillers be suffered in a reformed Kingdome, wee know what hazzards we have runne, and if we should be called to an account for them, we had better flee away then stay; as great as our selves have done so: besides, there be such store of Protections out, that we know not how to seize upon a man for feare of lost labour. I met with two such this last weeke; well lets make hay while the Sun shines, I am afraid of the worst, if such a Leather-fac'd fellow, as I or thou art, should but be brought into question, our very downe-looks would halfe hang us, a bleare-ey'd man had as good gaze upon so many shining Suns at once in their full lustre, as you or I view that great Parliament at midday: well, I am for the countrey, Ile buy a little Farme and live thereon, and repent me for all my former iniquities, farewell.
Will he so soon cashiere himselfe? sure he has heard of some ill to that company of Varlets, but sirrah, what shall you and I doe? thou mayest have as good an head to advise well as thou hast eyes to spie well.
Well, if you will be ruled by me, goe you to, and see that in case you come into his hands as you are doubtfull you shall, that he should quickly turne you from earth to your great Patron in hell, for that will be your habitation, you that put so many into dens, 'tis fit that you should live in one your selfe.
And what will you doe you mad slave?
Who, I'le warrant you I am not to seeke, I'le
post into Italy and catch frogs, and present them to the
Duke of, for Netherlandish Ducks, let me alone.
Well for this time,.<|endoftext|>Stay? Whither away so speedily? What you goe, as if you meant to leape over the Moon now? What's the matter?
The matter is plain enough: You incuse me of my nimble feet; but I thinke your tongue runnes a little faster, and you contend as much to out-strip facetiousin your tongue, as lamein my feete.
Me thinks you're very eloquent: Prithee tell me, Don't, and the Jove-begotten-brainelodge in your facundious tongue: You have without doubt some great cause of alacrity, that you produce such eloquent speeches now. Prithee what is't?
How? Cause of alacrity? S'foot I had never more cause of sorrow in my life: And dost thou tell me of that? Fie, fie!
Prithee why? I did but conjecture out of your sweet words.
Well! I see you'le never be hanged for a Conjurer. Is this a world to be merry in? Is this an age to rejoyce in? Where one may as soone find honesty in a Lawyers house, as the least cause of mirth in the world. Nea you know this well enough, but onely you love to be inquisitive, and to search the Nature of men.
You say true indeed: J cann't deny but that the world doe swell with griefe-bedaubing cares. For illustrate the whole Universe, frompurple doores, to the Occidentall West, and you shall finde all things drowned in the floods of sorrow. And no marvaile too: For here Gods heavy hand doth punish, there man's oppression doe raigne: And what greater affiction can be expected, then that both of God and Man.
'Tis true: And now a dayes 'tis very difficult to live without one of them.
Revolve all humane nature: Here you may see a man puff't up with the winde of popular applause, climing to the top of Honour, but being once touch't with the breath of Iustice, oh in what a moment doth he tumble downe. There you may see one oppressed with the tyranny of disgrace, and groaning vnder the burden of calamity, but being smil'd upon by Justice, oh how suddainly is he mounted up with the wings of Fame. There you may perceive women lamenting the deaths of their poore Husbands; here one deploring the Churches Anarchie: there one grieving at Fortunes malignity: so that in the whole world such diverse streames of sorrow doe flow every where: that if they should meet: they would easily make up an Ocean.
You speake of the Epidemicall cause, that produceth universall griefe, but you shall not need, for we our selves have cause enough to mourne for our owne mis-fortune, and not to participate with the griefe of the whole world.
Well! wee must submit our selves to Gods all-disposing providence, who in his owne time will give a period to our irregular teares. But our cause of sorrow, is the cause of the whole world: For i'me perswaded that there's never ain all the City, but is sensible of our calamity too, although we seeme to them to beare the greatest burthen thereof,
I beleeve thee: therefore I thinke, they may well commisserate our cause with their own, and not account us so ridiculous to the vulgar spectacle of the world. For when we rejoyce, they doe all rejoyce with us; but when wee lament, they have all cause to lament too: wherefore let not that thing trouble you so much.
Ay, come, let us omit this patheticall passion, and thinke on the brave times which wee have had heretofore: Oh, the times, when wee have vapoured in the streets like Courtiers.
A pritty comparison! like Courtiers indeed; for I thinke our pockets were as empty as the proudest of them.
Oh the times, when my tongue have ranne as fast upon the Scaeane, as apen over the Ocean.
Oh the times, when my heeles have capoured over the Stage as light as aFeather.
But (alas) we must looke for no more of these times I feare.
Why so? Dost thou thinke because a cloud sometimes may cover and obnubilate the Sun, that it will therefore shine no more? Yes I'le warrant you, and that more bright too: so never feare Boy, but we shall get the day agen for all this.
But i'le assure you 'tis to be feared: For Monopolers are downe, Projectors are downe, the High Commission Court is downe, the Starre-chamber is down, & (some think) Bishops will downe: and why should we then that are farre inferior to any of those not justly feare least we should be downe too?
Pish, I can show thee many infallible reasons to the contrary: we are very necessary and commodious to all people: First for strangers, who can desire no better recreation, then to come and see a Play: then, for Citizens, to feast their wits: then for Gallants, who otherwise perhaps would spend their money in drunkennesse, and lasciviousnesse doe find a great delight and delectation to see a Play: then for the learned, it does increase and adde wit, constructively to wit: then, for Gentlewomen, it teacheth them how to deceive idlenesse: then for the ignorant, it doe's augment their knowledge, Pish, a thousand more Arguments I could adde, but that I should weary your patience too much: Well! in a word we are so needfull for the Common good, that in some respect it were almost a sinne to put us downe: therefore let not these frivolous things perplex your vexatious thoughts.
But it makes me feare i'le assure you in these times: And I thinke it would be a very good plot to borrow good store of money and then runne away: what thinke you of it?
A good plot, quother? So you may come to lie in a worser plot for it all the dayes of your life. S'foot runne away too? So you may be taken for a young, and then followed presently with a hundred Horse. Fie, fie, remit these fopperies, you little thinke of the last Comedy you acted now.
The last Comedy quother? I act Tragedies every day, but I cannot remember since I acted a Comedy, 'tis so long agoe.
But Prithee how comes it to passe that you act Tragedies every day.
How? J'le tell thee: my purse each day perisheth most Tragaedically: and now J may be taken for a Scholler, since J've no money, but because I cannot speake true Latine, I'me afraid, I shall be taken for a Lawyer.
What do's Lawyers then speake false Latin?
As if you know not that! Why? True Latine is as much out of fashion at, as good cloathes at.
Come, come remit your jests, and thinke on our present estates now: and you know the Sicknesse is dangerous, and increaseth weekly; therefore I think we must be content in the meane while to live likein his Tub.
Well! the best remedy that J can imagine for our present Calamitie, is to downe on our knees humbly, and pray God to abate the Sicknesse, and let each true hearted Subject conjoyne with us in our supplication.
This motion pleaseth mee exceedingly, come let us goe to some other friends, and unitely joyne in our Prayers.
A match, come let us performe it with
expedition: and in the meane while let us conclude
with part of our Letany.Good Lord deliver us.<|endoftext|>, not a word amonst us three confederates, but what's, it is not fit to letgo off thus for 135 pounds; wee'l make him marry thee, or make thee aall thy life time: Hee'lthat we say, whilst we agree in one and the same Tale, he won't be long absent from us, therefore lets beandagainst his coming.
The project will hit doubtless, we have such a grand earnest of his folly before-hand, 'tis but making him believe shee'l turn and be honest ever after, which if it were not so, you know, for my part, I wish I were the:is not overworn, therefore not past turning, and a goodleft to look in still.
Ay, and a goodtoo thou mayst lay, but 'tis customary here to receive mony with wives, (who like light gold will not pass without allowance,) but give mony for wenches, and that hee'l do I warrant yee, wee'l make thee afor others to imitate and follow: what mustbe made aofwhere there's a? I'le make him believe she hath as many suitors as there are days in the year, to make him more zealous ofhisshould such an Amazonian beauty, accomplisht with such transcendant endowments both of body and mind, proportion'd with such equal parts, enrich'd with Silver and Golden habiliments, be parted with at an easy rate, so, as to make a slave her master, or a servant her Commander.
My very teeth water at the Contrivance, if it falls right, expect I will reward you both out of his estate, 'tis but his believing that I will be honest after all myand, and that's all one to a fool; for, I shall not be the firstthat has turn'd honest, in the flower of her age, 'tis but your getting another to supply the place during my absence, for common Jades (such as, and,) are numerous enough, and will sit with their leggs spread over the sides of a chair with their petticoates and smocks in their mouths, whilst theirrun a tilt at theirin that posture, paying twelve pence a time for holing; and for his part and mine we have taken a sure course to try each others abilities before-hand; we shall not fear commencing offor want of, or for being, yet Ile have him sign and seal these followingfor anof his future,, That Ido freely, and willingly settle 300 l. per annum upon, for and during her life time., That I will allow her aand four, withanswerable., That I wont be jealous of any man's coming, or visiting her, of what Quality, Rank or Condition whatsoever., That I will allow her a, to hold up her train whilst she walks from room to room., That she shall have free liberty to make choise of her own, and others belonging to the family, and chuse a-new every month, if they do not keep close their chaps, what ever they do with their legs.
They are singular ways to providefor his, but I would not wish you to stand upon such, if he will but marry thee, for if he should deny to let thee have thy will and pleasure afterwards, 'tis but taking a touch or two with a, (who frequently takes histhat way, if hisbe handsom,) and hee'l sue him for, and make him maintain thee out of his Estate in spite of his teeth, and then play theunder his nose as many brave lasses have done before thee, and he shall not help himself, whereof we have a thousandof women running from their husbands, and chusing otherfor their, as appears by a late Treatise entituled the, written byin the case of, &c.
Thou hast done well to satisfy me so cleerly, Ile follow the example of yongthewife, who receiving some seeming abuses from her husband, (when the major part of her Portion grew due) ran away from him, carrying all his, &c. suing him for maintenance, as he found by woful experience, and the leaving off of his trade, under the pretence of his having the.
I shall tell thee of another way besides that, ifthou hast a mind to make him run mad; take a handsomthy, and please thy, into the house, love and lie with him and hate thy husband, lie naked in the bed rather then have thy smock sow'd to his shirt, when thou wouldst under pretence of rising to piss, or going to a close stool, go to bed with thy, and if he be angry, call him, and; and if that faylshis head with a, orhiswith a, and it will cool his courage quickly.
Thou'rt a primeindeed, if thou hadst but ato match thee, for to read a Lecture in a, thou hast evermore had a natural propensity to, as to, and knowst how to ride post to the; for I dare swear there's scarse a rule in all, but thou hast it, readier then thy; for thy zeal, (likewith the,with theof, andwhen thecudgel'd the 5 pounds out of his Carkass for lying too neer his Brindle) is lockt up in amore then honesty, yet I like thy.
, as thesaid to the, be sure I have not my namefor nothing: I have told,, and you are not to seek in that point, Im'e sure on't.
Thou say'st very true,, as thou didst with my Cousin, but methinks we are grown huge modest in our debates bewixt each other, but I wondertarries all thiswhile, I wish we had some pleasant tale, told to drive away the tedious night.
Rather then want, I would invent a, but this I shall tell you stands upon record, is very true, and was try'd atof a, who was courted by a neighbor whom she did not fancy: this yongout of spight, reports she had noand scarce a pissing place; a second suitor engages her affections, but upon noise of the rumor relinquishes her; a(as most of that function are) tells her he would sue thisin her behalf, and demand nothing till, to which she assented, the party being arrested the suit was shortly brought to tryal, where a Jury of women were summoned (not men) to search her, who upon demand from the, what they had to say in the business, one of the eldest Matrons answer'd that she had a good thing (meaning the maid, not her self,) the Judge told her that was not enough to satisfy the Jury, she must speak broader and plainer? Why, then (quoth she) she hath a very: I tell thee again woman thou must speak plain; why, then if I must I will, and will swear it again and again, before yourand the, she hath alarge enough for the beggest mansin the Parish, at which they all laughed, and the Jury (for that she was a handsom wench) fined her adversary threescore pounds damage which was accordingly paid the.
That was honestly done of them, and is neer a kin to a passage I have heard of a fellow who helping a Gentlewoman on Horse-back, slipp't his hand under her belly and tore a tufft of hair off herCommodity, waring it in a Bravadoin his hat; which her husband hearing of, su'd him for it, and it cost him forty pounds for his frolick.
Well I am bound to tell a Tale or let a fart, therefore give ear to this following, concerning a Gentleman who had continu'd with a great deal of eagerness a suitor to a Gentlewoman, whose incivilties could not retract him, nor perswasions withdraw him, at length when nothing would serve his turn, she uncover'd her breast naked, ranckled, rotted and corrupted, which he espying took leave of her, and never set eye on her after.
I believe neither of you two would have uncover'd your infirmities, in such a Case, but for my part I conceive it lawful for men and women, to, and were it customary as in, your, andwould be less in request, both with your selves and oother's, and fewertoand, which is seldom occasion'd by a brown skin, a crook'd back or legs, or poor habit, but often byand, with other, which cover yourand: I have known many women, taken out of (their better part) theirwould have been a loathing to themselves and others, who otherwise were doted upon in their.
Should you men, see all ouractions in a true, (and not a counterfeit) glass, we should be the mostin the world, but we can order you in that point, as most of yourdo their, who if they won't let them havetheirandto boot, 'tis but dissembling aor, a, or some other distemper, and theirshall cost them more mony in, (who now and then cornute them into the bargain),, and, then if they had granted their desires at first.
I am no stranger to those tricks, for if I were, I should have a better opinion of your sex, then they have deserved (the number of wicked women, being numberless) amongst which number are, who broke her husbands head with a, and had like to have kill'd him with it,, who us'd to comb her husbands head with a, into which hiswas struck as if he had been in the, or got aabout his neck,at the further end of, who is never quiet but whenthein, is at work in her, and, who notwithstanding her husbands lawful and due correction, will tempt,thein, to make her husband a: well if you think to haveI hear, and see coming, you must behave your self with more discretion, as a, said her husband did her.
Prithee, but stick close to us in our;, truly devoted of your servants salutes you, and rejoyces at your appearance, why so long absent from her so deerly loves you, why at such a distance from her whose life and fortunes lie andtruckle at your foot-stood, whose presence is my life and absence death.
Thy company's no less to me my, my, and my, of whom I'le say:deerrosy lippscomplete partssweet joyessweet armeskind bosomLoversLadies.
That you have gain'dis no news, I would advise you Sir to marry her, you may meet with a, and that's worse then a, but she hath vow'dfor the future.
I can assure that to be true, that she's resolved to turn if you'l marry her.
I thought I had remov'd all scruples in that point, is the motion of your mentioning?
Truly sir, I am very weary of this life, and would gladly turn, would you let me be devoted wholly to your service.
'Tis no sleight Question to answer, much more to execute, so that you must pardon me in that Point.
Why then you must allow her a yeerly revenue to maintain her for your self, and keep her in herand.
There's all the reason in the world for't,what would not some men give for ain a corner, the.
Well what's your demands, what will maintain her from theof, come speak out or letdo't for you, but marry I may not.
a year is as little as can be to maintain herand.
Well, provided she layes no claims to marriage with me, I'le settle 50 Pounds.
Come she shall do't, Ile be her, fill us some wine to seal the bargain.
Content till our next days meeting.<|endoftext|>Care I for thy worldly trash? not a rush: tell not mee of thy millions, thousands, and hundreds: I prayse my (bountifull) starres I have an inbred treasury, not valuable in respect of that which thou countest good.
I, I, talk on, talk on; it seemes thou art neither acquainted with wealth, nor (what thou brag'st of most) wit; for thou art quite beside thy Arethmatick, putting the cart before the horse: millions first, and hundreds last: a preposterous Argument, suitable to thy disposition.
Why? I tell thee (foole) I am soe weaned from the very conception of any thoughtconcerning Riches, that tis noe wonder, if all words spoken by mee on that hatefull subject prove to be abortive.
How doest thou live then, I prithee?
By my wit, I tell thee, and hold it a farre richer Patrimony then all thy gold can make thee soe much as capable of.
Marry I tell thee in my conceit thou'st but a very bad trade on't now. What canst thou expect to get by thy wit, in an age which regards neither wit, honesty, conscience, humanity, Noble-Ancestrey, nor indeed (to bee briefe) any thing; but what I am Master of, (and by which I can accomplish whatsoever my thoughts would acquire) and that is money, the darling of the time, the conquerour of Conquerers, the Coyner of Honesty, and the Muzzell of Eloquence?
O brave, why now I perceive the case is much altered since I saw thee last, I doe not think but thou haste bought (and read), or (rather); why thy phrase and manners is quite changed from what was wont to bee, or I now expected, I do not think but thou art become one of the wits of the times, all thy usuall Dialect was&, orbut now let me see what is't the Darling of the Time, Conquerour of Conquerers, Muzzle of Eloquence; O rare stile! but tell me, is all this Rhethorick proper to Pelf?
This quotha? why I'd have thee to know, that these golden phrases, and thousands more daily in use are the very children of drosse (as thou callest it) Subjects of silver, Servants and slaves of gold: why man didst never heare talke of golden Boyes, Girles worth gold, and penny white, brown bread Lasses? I'm sure thou hast.
I marry have I, what then? are all these Epethits equivalent with an admirable wit, a quaint conceit, a curious delivery, an exquisite device, an elaborate stile, and a gallant humour?
Tush, what of all this? why, I say againe and againe, and as many times againe as thou wilt, that all this, and as much as thou canst sum up between Shrove-tide and Easter, are but Lent by the benevolence of industrious gold and silver, does not money buy Learning? and (I prethee) does not learning make Divines, Lawyers, Phisitians, Phylosophers, Poets, and what not?, no mony no Master, no Master noScholler; for it is an old Proverb,; thereforeleave off thy bragging of wit, least thou prove thy self a fool, in preferring it before wealth, which is (as it were) a creator of Wit.
I protest, though indeed I never held thee to bee very wise, yet I tell thee, I never expected such a vacuity of discretion, as now thou hast bewrayed in thy last discourse, out upon thee, hold thy tongue for shame, till thou learn how to use it better: I vow I'me asham'd of thee.
Why Sirrah? tell me patiently, I beleeve in truth this is but a flourish of wit, a meere whimsie to daunt me, and make mee leave off, but in faith thou art a younger brother in that, all thy witty flashes cannot beat me off from my ground, I say still, that wealth is to be preferred before wit, as being (in a manner) the very nurse and foster father of it, all these thy bravadoes shall never beat me off, while I can speak my minde to maintain it.
I marry, thou hast spun a fine thred indeed, thy argument is even as strong as a Spiders web, which thou shalt see me presently blow away, and dissolve with a blast from my mouth; thou hast spoken like a meere Dody-pole as thouart, in seeking to prove that Wealth buyes Learning, and Learning creates wit, when it is apparently seen to the contrary; onely this I confesse that Literature is a most necessary handmaid to the Muses, without which (indeed) they cannot be well dressed, but, a Poet is so born, not so made, for unlesse a man have an inbred and naturall proclivity, what boots all his Learning? nay rather, doth it not render him more odious to his auditors, who expecting the Nut of Learning, finde nothing but the shell of guilded ignorance, like a Jay deck'd in Peacocks feathers, a Sow with a gold ring in her snout, and a Millers Asse, garnished with the rich saddle and trappings of, doth not the experience of all ages ratifie this? speak man.
Thou wouldst inforce me to beleeve so, but I neither can nor will, without particulars to confirm thy words more then a generall saying that it is so, therefore I absolutely deny the Argument to be good unlesse thou canst instance some pregnant proofe to justifie thy assertion.
That I can very readily doe, not needing to trouble thee with precedent men & times, but even turning to those now living in thispresent age, and of them one most eminent may serve to dignifie a multitude of others more obscure: what thinkest thou of that notable (only) English Poet, how many sublime and (truely) witty Poems hath hee published in Print? raising a Pyramides to his never dying memory, of an ingenuous fertile braine without any addition of learning worth mention: but what his own industrious (and inbred) capacity hath possest him of; what curry-combs hath hee taken out of the Iron-mongers own shop to dresse the (ill-conditioned) Iade withall? how artificially hath he rosted and broyled him upon his own spits, and grid-irons, how hath hee fry'd and toss'd him in his own frying-pan, basted him with his own ladle, and boyl'd him like a Calves-head and Bacon in his own pottage-pot? Now I prethee judge impartially of this; the one vaunts much of great learning (which thou sayest is bought with money) the other professeth himself to be guilty of very little (if any) and yet how different their writings are, having (with all possible acerbity prest the Presse against each other, the world hath censured already, and so doe thou now.
Why, is not the Iron-monger counted for a pregnant witty fellow? I think he is,he hath published (and doth weekly) a number of Pamphlets, which some like exceeding well.
Why, I tell thee hee hath no wit, but a kinde of railing invention; was ever any age guilty of producing such a firebrand of mischiefe? what pestiferous incentives hath hee writen and published, to stir up sedition betwixt the King and his people, while it is to be feared hee is really true to neither.
Well then, leaving this discourse, let us proceed to something (in my conceit) more pertinent to our purpose, which shall bee this: whether Wit or Wealth (as I touched in the beginning) will best feed and cloath a man? answer me to that briefly and plainly; here's the case, thou hast Wit enough, and I have Wealth enough; now which of them affords the best maintenance, there lies the state of the question, I hold my principle still, Wealth is to be preferred before Wit?
And I will confidently defend the precedency of Wit before Wealth, as being a divine and supernaturall gift, which mony can never purchase.
That's confest but neverthelesse thou canst not deny but Wealth is a Divine gift, as well as Wit, is it not? doth not holy writmention many godly men, very rich?
I pretheelet holy Writ alone in our quarrell, for I love not to mix holy and prophane matters together, but if thou shouldest hedge in them to make thy fence the stronger, the examples are so few, in comparison of others, that have abandoned riches to imbrace contemplation in poverty; that the difference would easily appeare; to what end thinkest thou did my Couzenthat witty Phylosopher, throw all his wealth (which was abundance) into the Sea; was it not because it was an impediment to his study, and our Poets in imitation of him, if they be possest with any worldly trash (as loathing to keep it) doe they not drown it in Sack, as he drowned his in the Sea? what should he doe with wealth, who hates it in comparison of his study? the Muses children ne're turn Usurers, nor care they for coyn, but for necessity, all besides is superfluous.
This is all true (I confesse) but tell me one thing, how if thou should'st come to be sick, lame, cast in prison, or feel any such kind of affliction, can thy wit ease or release thee, will the Phisitians, or Gaolers, take learned Epistles, or witty Poems, in lieu of their fees, canst thou in rime shew them a reason why they shoulddeliver thee without money? nay, Ile goe a nearer and easier way with thee, canst thou by such meanes procure any palliation or mitigation to (or of) thy misery, will they be mollified with Madrigalls, softned with Sonets, entreated with Epigrams overcome with Odes? tell mee seriously,, what think'st thou? whether will Wit or Wealth (in such sad exigents) stand thee in the most stead?
This touches home I protest, thou never graveld'st me till now, yet Ile beare up still; and suppose that reliefe may be gain'd by Art; for ifhad power with his dulced harmony to convert salvage beasts from their naturall (and customary) truculency, can it be imagined that men (such as are Phisitians or Gaolers) should be more barbarous then bruit beasts, more salvage then Satyres, more cruel then Caniballs, and more inhumane then Incubuses, have I clench'd the nayle, what sayest thou?
Very sleightly,, nay, now I perceive thou beginnest to yeeld, I have beat thee out of thy play; run thee off o'thy legges, put thee besides thy Text, turn'd thee out of tune, and whipt thee to confession of thy folly, yeeld up thefor in truth thou art utterlyfoyl'd in thy argument, art thou not?
Ne're the sooner for a hasty word,, I confesse that I doubt some of this is too true, but howsoever,, let mee have tryall by thy own Law, thou didst put me to particular proofes in a generall plain case, the like I claime of thee.
Very willingly,, but let one include many as thou servedst mee (about) there is an honest man, a very good friend of mine, and one whom thou knowest very well (but he shall now goe namelesse) he is (by many) accounted to have an indifferent portion of wit, but in this sad predicament being a close prisoner in, belonging to) he is altogether destitute of mony, and consequently of friends; all shunning him (as a man utterly forlorn and forsaken;) nay, which is most (and worst) of all: Some to whom the key of his wit (when he was at liberty) did, in a manner, open the doore to their earthly happinesse (I think they expect no heavenly) now in his distressed captivity, doe utterly abandon his sight not vouchsafing to visit him with money due to him, nor giving him former imployment, what sayest thou to this,, wilt thou yet grant me the Victory?
Truely I am heartily sorry, that thou givest mee such (a failing) occasion; especially considering that he is an intimate acquaintance of mine (as thou sayest he is) tush, I am not absolutely induced to beleeve it; yet indeed this present age hath gotten the start of all precedent times for ingratitude, hypocrisie, hardnesse of heart, neglect of lawdable Arts (and Customes,) and indeed want of common honesty; but let mee see, I was about to ask thee how the Gaolers use him (for that was our argument before) but 'tis needlesse discourse for if his professed and obliged friends, are so ingratefully cruell, a man may almost conclude it as an Article that his wit or honesty will but little prevaile with the Keepers without that which makes the Mare to goe.
Why so I said before, and yetin troth,, I must needs (in his case) vary something from my first principle: for his particular hee hath found unexpected favour from his Keepers (whether wone by his wit, honesty, or both, I question not) for were not their hearts softned in consideration of his condition which is without paralell) he had been cast into the common Gaole before this time, there to have perished without any remedy.
Well,, me thinks yet I smell the victory as hot in my nostrils as a Beare does honey in a marrow-bone: hast not thou confest it thy self? dost not thou (with pitying his case, withall) conclude that his wit and honesty procure him favour without money? what can be more cleare? a ha? have I taken you tardy ath' last? come yeild, yeild.
Well: I perceive that if I give thee an Inch thou'lt take an Ell: but I prithee don't vaunt before the victory: suppose I have granted that the Keepers are kind to him beyond customary use? wilt thou therefore runne away with the argument, as though the poore man might not be better us'd for money, if he had it? away with thee, thou a, thou a, (as thou call'st me) thou hast absolutely brought thy self into a Meander of folly; from which all thy pretended Wit cannot deliver thee.
O brave, I protest I think the rich fool will carry't when all is done.
Rich fool quotha, marry,, as the world goes now adaies, he's most wise (or wity, or what thou wilt call it) that can keep a penny for a rainy day (as the Proverb sayes) come, come, have thou wit to save thy money when thou hast it, thou'lt brook thy name the betterby't, doe not stand upon a vain opinion of living by thy wit, I tell thee thou mayest as well turn Chamelion and live by the aire, consider with thy self, the condition of people though they speak faire in prosperity, while the golden sun or the silver Moon of thy fortunes, reflect upon them, what will they doe, or what will they say when those refulgent Luminaries are set or eclipsed, Faith if thou wantst either meat, drink, or apparell, so thou mayst, till new Lights be recovered, if thou owe money, wit will not pay it, thats certaine.
Then,, it seems all these reasons don't move thee to retract thy sayings.
Well, thou hast got two strings to thy bow, what thou canst not get with reason thou'lt have in rime, well, Ile yeeld on one condition.
What's that, a request that is reasonable, or rimeable, speak?
Both, I desire a Song before we part, that shall end our controversie.
Wilt thou not be angry? may I sing what comes at my tongues end.
I, I, what comes next let's have it, I prethee honest.
Then have at it, 't shall bee extempore,
a tryall of Wit.<|endoftext|>How doe you good Mistris? I made bold to give you a visit, to see how you doe.
M. New-come, pray draw neare and sit downe; come, you are heartily, heartily welcome.
I shall be a trouble to you, I see you are busie.
No, no, not so busie, but I can spare so much time as to discourse with you a while; how doth your husband doe? what, is he at home? or where is his Rendezvouz?
I thank you Mistris; he is not at home, nor is his Rendezvouz farre from home; but what, have you a Feast here suddenly, that you are so Decking, Adorning, & Trimming up your house with this fine Rosemary and Bayes? I beleeve there is some such doings, is there not?
No truely, here is no Feasting, but what doth fall out according to the Time.
Time; pray now what Time?
Why,, woman; have you forgot it? Indeed these Wars and Jars would almost make one forget their Christen name, if they were not often called on, to put one in remembrance.
Indeedcan hardly be beaten out of many folks heads, which is a very strange thing.
Not so strange as true, woman; I should rather, and sooner forget my mother that bare me, and the paps that gave me suck, then forget this merry Time; nay, if thou hadst ever seen the Mirth and Jolitie that we have had at those Times when I was young, thou wouldst blesse thy selfe to see it.
Nay, undoubtedly I might very well beleeve you without swearing; for surely, there was then excessive Sports, Pastimes, & Revels, that it would make a bodies haire stand an end to heare and see it.
Didst thou never heare of my Grand-father? why, he was second cousin to the Earle of, Cup-bearer to, Knight of the Vapour, and Esquire of the Pipe; he was a great Polititian, Monopolist, and Project-monger; 'tis very strange you never heard of him.
I have heard of the like, if not the same; but what of him?
What of him; nay, nothing of him, but I say my Grand-father was his second cousin.
Well, and what of that?
What of that? Nay, by the masse, I forgot where I was; this 'tis to have such a scurvy head-piece, by Lady I know not what I was going to say.
It was about your Grand-father at.
O me, O me, 'tis true, 'tis true; I see you keep your brains warmer then I doe, which makes you so ripe-witted: but for feare I should forget againe, Ile tell thee; my Grand-father kept a brave house at, (it makes ones teeth dance in ones head like Virginal-Jacks with the very conceit on't) for according to his owne Verses:)This I say, the very conceit of this is enough to make one chew the Cud; for my part, it makes me methinks look two yeares younger then I did before, every time I think on't; indeed they were brave Times, pray God send us such again, and we shall once more have a merry world.
This was in the times of old, when men wore trunck-Hose.
Nay, by Lady (God forgive me for swearing) it is not so long since; for my father kept a brave house to at that Time, though he pinched for it all the yeare after; he had all the Varieties as the earth could afford, for Boyled, Baked, and Roasted.
I have seen but a little of this Sport, yet of that little I have seen too much; for it would make the stander by ashamed to see what the feeder devoures, and what gods they make of their bellies, that one would think that people did take in twelve moneths Provision into their panches, or that they did ballast their bellies for a voyage to, or to the.
Indeed all this as you speake is true; for I think verily, if it were not for Dancing, Frisking, Playing, Toying, Christmas-Gamboles, and such kind of jogging Exercises to shake it down, it were impossible they should devoure so much as they do. Then to see Cook hot and Cook cold, Cook young and Cook old, Scullion & Scullions mate, all in a sweat, like so many Monarchs of the Marrow-bones,Marquesses of the Mutton, Princes of the Pyes and Pasties, Lords, High-Regents of the Spits and Kittles, Barons of the Griddiron, and so be Commanders of the Frying-pannes during this Festivall. I say, to see them Act their Tragi-comicall Feasts, would make a man orwomans stomacke elevate its selfe into another temper.
And all this hurly-burly is for no other purpose but to stop the greedy mouth of this, or Land-whale,.
Well, 'tis true; but now forsoothmust be cryed downe,must be cryed up; if they were weighed in a ballance, then I knowwould goe downe without crying: but there are some now adayes, a Crew of Tatter-demallians, amongst which the best could scarce ever attain to a Calves-skin-Sute, or a piece of Neck-Beefe and Carrets to dinner on a Sunday, or scarcely ever mounted (before these times) to any Office above the degree of Scavenger or Tything-man at the farthest; and now forsooth these Reformado's, upon pretence of Reformation, shall destroy and overthrow the most Famous and Commendable Customes of this Land; especially for the observing and keeping of this Great Day: what, are we forsooth wiser then our fathers, that brought us up, and educated us in this Wisedom? 'Tis a strange thing to me; it can't be beaten into my braines, that this can be just and honest.
, you were best to discourse with some of these which thinke it not fitting to keep that Time in such a Revelling way, perhaps and no doubt but they will give you reasons against it; & I partly know you to be a rationall woman, and that you will permit reason to bear the sway.
Reason, reason; as if any man could shew a reason for not keeping of, you spake as bad as blasphemie:, that hath been a Custome ever since the world began, should now with a puffe of reason, through the Ramshorne of selfe-conceit, with the walls of, be layd flat to the ground.
Nay,, although it is a Custome very Ancient, yet it is not so old as the world; there you are somewhat mistaken.
As for the world, I doe not know its age; but for, I am sure it was kept in my Grand-fathers great Grand-fathers time, in my Grand-fathers time, & in my fathers time, & none of these did ever think it Superstition or Idolatry; and for my part, I will keep it as long as I am able, let all the powers on earth stand to oppose it.
Then you are resolved.
I am for that matter, come what will come; ah now (methinkes) my braines are whet upon the conceit on't; I could wish now at this Time, that the Valiantest Champion of all theRound-headed Disputants, to encounter with me in this Argument: I tell thee, If I had the tongue of, who (as my Husband saith) was Prolocutor to the gods; or if I had as many fingers as, who was feigned to have an hundred hands. If surging, was converted into Inke, or the rugged-ragged-face of our antient mother, were Paper, yet could not the verball, volubilitie, or elocution of my voyce, nor the agilitie, dexteritie, or facultie of my hands, nor the spacious, unmesurable number-lesse, white innocent Paper; no, none of all these could either speak, write, or by any other meanes declare the aboundance of Arguments, comprehended within the notion of my braine for this unlimited Subject.
For my part, your Eloquence is too harsh for me.
Oh, I have it by heart; I have heard my Husband, when Gentlemen have been drinking here at my house, rabble out aboundance of this Fustian-stuffe, which gives them a great deale of content, especially when they have almost seen the Devill in a Prize Jerkin, and every thing look withfaces.
Then I perceive by you that you cannot possibly be wrought on to leave this Old Ceremony, your mind is so unchangeable.
Unchangeable, can the Black-moore change his skin, or the Sunne alter his continued course? Yet sooner can these things be done thenmy mind changed, for to keep oldonce again.
It is an old saying, and true, That which is bred in the bone, will seldome or never out of the flesh.
Thou sayest true; My great Grand-father, my Grand-father, my father, and now my selfe, these nine and fortie yeares have kept this Festivall Time, and this yeare above all the rest ought to be kept, for it is the yeare of, as the Bishop ofsaid, when he preached before the King; and I for my part am fourescore and one yeares old: So that here isupon, yeare-Iubilefor my birth, and the yearfor my keeping: and therefore shall not we be merry mine owne S.a?
What, will you keepe it in spite of Authoritie?
What Authoritie? I am sure my father and mother had the greatest authoritie over me ever since I was borne, and other authoritie I knew none before I was married, & now it seems I am under a crabbed Husbands authoritie, and besides him I will be subject to none, and I am sure he is as strong foras the greatest of our Ancestours; and therefore that Authoritie will not curb me.
Then it seemes you know no other authoritie?
No by our Lady, not I: neither doe I desire to know any, for he is crabbed enough of any conscience; if I should tell you all, you would say so too: therefore the Devill take all other Authority, if it be no better then a dogged, crosse-graine Devillish Husband.
Why, then you count the Parliament no Authoritie?
I hope Gossip you are not come to pick quarrells with me in my owne house?
No truely, not I, neither would I have you to entertaine such a hard conceit; for my part I was never so well read in such Principles, nor ever took any degree at the Universitie of.
Perhaps you are of your mothers tutor-age then, for I am sure she was an Oyster-woman of that Colledge for one and twentie yeares, to my owne knowledge; and had her tongue as nimble as anMountebanck.
What my mother was, is nothing to me.
But you are a Chip of the Old Block: for what doe you mean, in telling me of the Parliament?
I meane the two Houses of Parliament which have jumped together in one Opinion, for the putting downe and destroying of thisBeast; for which, they are to be commended.
It is a strange thing; let the Devill never so cunningly hide his head, we shall know him by his Cloven foot; nor let the Asse never so craftily hide his feet, yet we may know him by his Eares: and howsoever covertly you have carried your selfe, I know you, both by head & heels: I see you are one of the New Faction, and a great Student in; but that is nothing to me: yet what do you mean by CallingaBeast? pray explain your self at large.
To leave all manner of Circumstance, which is not pertinent to our Subject in hand --
By Lady neighbour, I think you are one of these New Teachers, you handle your matter so excellent; but I trouble you, pray proceed.
The word () if learnedly weighed in it we shall find matter of dangerous Consequence: As, 1. If we consider what the word or name is,. 2. If we consider who gave him this name. 3. Where he was Christned, or had the name given him. 4. By what authoritie they gave him this name. Of which I shall proceed in order, according to my weak abilitie: And first for the word;is a word which deciphers a Scorpion, which is a venomous Beast, which carries a sting at his tayle, and so doth; for the wordis a sting in the tayle of thatBeast: Secondly, we must consider who gave him this name, & that was his God-fathers and God-mothers in Baptisme; from whense ariseth this doubtfull question? who they were, and that was Pope, Pope, and Pope; but by reason of their non-residence here in, the Bishops took that office upon them and stood as shitten Gossips: Thirdly, the place where, this is by the learned held in great Dispute, but I beleeve in his infancie he was sickly; and therefore according to the Church ofTenets he was twice Christned, that is to say, at home here inand afterwards confirmed at, the Mother Church of all such Antichristian Heresies: but I shall be over-tedious, therefore I will come to the fourth Deuision,and that is by what authoritie they doe these things: this will take up a great deale of time to open and explaine unto you, if I would doe it to purpose; therefore I will omit it, onely certifying you thus much, that there is no power under the Sun that hath any authoritie to erect or build up, neither to destroy and pull down any thing, save what is in the will of the two Houses of Parliament.
That word waked me, indeed I was almost asleep; what, you say that the Parliament hath power to pull down; I pray then what will they put up in the roome on't,Stage-Playes, Dancing upon the Ropes, &.
No, it shall be like other Times, not one day higher or lower then another; for it is not for us to stand upon Times and Seasons.
Fie upon't, fie upon't, away with't, away with't, I doe not know this Parliament, 'tis no kin to me; If this is the Authoritie you talked of, God deliver me from such Authoritie; this is worser Authoritie then my Husbands, for though my Husband beats me now and then, yet he gives my belly full, and allowes me money in my purse; which as I take it, the Parliament will not; for I remember men come for money, money, and if I aske them what it is, for they still keepe in one tune like the Cockoe, and tell me it is for the Parliament; God deliver me from those that will neither let us eate our victualls and be merry, though they don't pay for it; nor yet if they could helpe it, leave us any money in our purses.
Then you doe not regard these Powers, let them say or doe what they will.
No indeed, not; is it not fitting I should do what I will with mine own? Cannot I keep, eat good Chear, & be Merry, without I goe and get a Licence from the Parliament? Marry gap, come up here, for my part Ile be hanged by the neck first; must I be subject to them I never saw in my life? No, no, neighbour, they are mistaken in me; though they set up Scare-Crowes to scare fooles withall, they shall not fright me.
Truely neighbour, if these Powers and Authorities will not make you leave off this Superstitious and Idolatrous Feasting, some other sharper and more rigorous power must.
Must, doe you say? How now, you said you did not come to Scold, but I see you will Scold before you goe: I see now by the Masse, there is no making hony of a Dogs-turd; that which is bred in the bone will never out of the flesh; your mother I faith hath taught you your lerry, almost as perfect as she hath it her selfe: must make me?
Yes, must make you: I do not goe to eate my words; what I have spoken Ile speake againe, I have those which shall maintaine me in it, I care not who knows it, and that is the honest godly partie of the Armie, of which societie my Husband is a member; therefore take heed what you say.
What have I to doe with the Army, I have nothing to say to the Army.
But the Armie hath something to say to you then: for if no power will tame you, they can and will tame you; were you as fierce as a Lyon, they will new-mould you into better breeding, and make you leave off your Superstitious Feasting, and turne to Fasting, if you doe not mend your manners.
As for the Armie, no doubt but there may be some honest men amongst them, but allthe world knowes what thy Husband was, a poore man which ran out of his Countrey for debt, and afterwards betooke himselfe to be MasterGroome, to rub his Horses heeles in; And now such as he is, must come to tame those which are ten times better then themselves; this is a fine world indeed.
Huswife, farewell; I have with silence heard things of a dangerous Consequence against the Parliament and Armie; therefore looke to it, for you shall surely suffer for it; these things cannot be let slip without severe punishment, either with the deprivation of Life and Libertie, or at least the losse of your Goods.
Devill, doe thy worst; if they are
honest men they will not doe it: Yet all this
Chattring shall not put me off from keeping.<|endoftext|>You cannot deny the Premisses, but that you have done these things; but you deny the Conclusion that you are a Traitor.
You would make a better Secretary of State, than a Logician; for they never deny the Conclusion.
The labour lies upon their hands; the Proof belongs to them to make out these Intrigues of yours; therefore you need not have Counsel, because the Proof must be plain upon you, and then it will be in vain to deny the Conclusion.
England,.
You need not make any preparations for us in this matter, you shall have a fair, just, and legal Trial; if Condemned, it will be apparent you ought to be so; and without a fair Proof, there shall be no Condemnation. Therefore you shall find, we will not do to you, as you do to us, blow up at adventure, kill people because they are not of your perswasion; our Religion teacheth us another Doctrine, and you shall find it clearly to your advantage. We seek no mans blood, but ourown safety. But you are brought here from the necessity of things, which your selves have made; and from your own actions you shall be condemned, or acquitted.
It is all true that you say: but did you tell all that vvas true?
Mr., I'll tell you when you will be apt to gain credit in this matter: You say, that you told all things that you knew, the Truth, and the whole Truth. Can Mankind be persuaded, that you, that had this Negotiation in 74. and 75. left off just then, at that time vvhen your Letters vvere found according to their Dates? Do you believe, there vvas no Negotiation after 75. because vve have not found them? Have you spoke one vvord to that? Have you confessed, or produced those Papers and Weekly Intelligence? When you ansvver that, you may have credit; vvithout that, it is impossible: For I cannot give credit to one vvord you say, unless you give an account of the subsequent Negotiation.
Whether you had or no, you shall have the fairest Trial that can be. And we cannot blame the Gentleman, for he is more used to greater Affairs, than these Matters or Forms of Lavv. But (my Lord) I desire to go unto Evidence, and vvhen that is done, he shall be heard, as long as he pleaseth, vvithout any interruption. If he desire it, before I give my Evidence, let him have Pen, Ink, and Paper (vvith your Lordships leave) .
Help him to Pen, Ink, and Paper.
Then we desire to go on in our Evidence. We desire that Mr.may not be interrupted.
He shall not be interrupted.
The first thing we will inquire, what account he can give of the Prisoner at the Bar, whether he was any way privy to the murther of the King?
Mr., we leave it to your self to take your own way, and your own method: only this we say, here's a Gentleman stands at the Bar for his life; And on the other side, the King is concerned for His life: you are to speak the truth and the whole truth; for there is no reason in the world that you should adde any one thing that is false. I would not have a tittle added for any advantage, or consequences that may fall, when a man's bloud and life lieth at stake: Let him be condemned by truth: you have taken an Oath, and you being a Minister, know the great regard you ought to have of the sacredness of an Oath; and that to take a man's life away by a false Oath is murther, I need not teach you that. But that Mr.may be satisfied in the Trial, and all people else be satisfied, there is nothing required or expected, but downright plain truth, and without any arts either to conceal, or expatiate, to make things larger then in truth they are; he must be condemned by plain Evidence of Fact.
My Lord, Mr.in the Month oflast, did entertain in his own House, whichwas a Father Confessor to certain persons that were Converted, amongst which I was one. My Lord, I went and visited thisat Mr.House then in. Mr.inquiring ofwho I was? He said, I was one that designed to go over upon business to St.. My Lord, Mr.told me then he should trouble me with a Letter or two to St., but he told me he would leave them with onethat was Procurator for the Society of Jesuits in. I went on MondayMorning and took Coach, went to, and had his Pacquet with me, which Pacquet when I came to St.I opened. The out-side sheet of this Paper was a Letter of news which was called Mr.Letter; and at the bottome of this Letter there was this Recommendation, Pray Recommend me to my Kinsman. In this Letter of news there were expressions of the King, calling him Tyrant, and that the Marriage between the Prince ofand the Ladythe Duke ofEldest Daughter would prove the Traytour's and Tyrant's ruine.
In what language was it written?
In plain English words at length.
Directed to whom?
It was directed to the Rectour of St., to give him intelligence how affairs went in.
Did you break it open?
I was at the opening of it, and saw it and read it. There was a Letter to Father, which was superscribed by the same hand that the treasonable Letter of news was written, and the same hand that the recommendation towas written in. When this Letter was open there was a Seal fixt, a flying Seal and no mans Name to it.
What was the Contents of that Letter to?
My Lord, to give you an account of the import of this Letter, it was writ in, and in it there were thanks given to Fatherfor the Ten Thousand Pounds which was given for the propagation of the Catholick Religion, and that it should be imployed for no other intent and purpose but that for which it was sent, now that was to cut off the King of; those words were not in that Letter, butLetter, to which this was an Answer I saw and read: It was dated the Month of, and as near as I remember there was this instruction in it, That the Ten Thousand Pound should be employed for no other intent and purpose but to cut off the King of. I do not swear the words, but that'sthe sense and substance; I believe I may swear the words.
To whom was that directed?
To onethat was then Provincial of the Society in, which Mr.answered.
How came Mr.to answer it?
having run a Reed into his Finger, had wounded his Hand, and Secretarywas ill, so he got Mr.to write an Answer unto it.
Did he write it as from himself?
Yes, by order of the Provincial.
What was the substance of that Answer?
That thanks was given to him in the Name of the whole Society for the Ten Thousand Pound which was paid and received here, and that it should be employed to the intent for which it was received. It was superscribed from Mr..
Was it subscribed?
It was not subscribed; I did not see him write it, but I really believe it was by the same hand. I went and delivered this Letter.
I understood you because of the accident of his Hand he had employed Mr.to write this for him.
He did write this Letter then, the Body of the Letter was written by Mr.. I did not see him write it, but I shall give an account how I can prove he wrote it. I delivered this Letter tohis own hand. When I opened the Letter he asked me how a Gentleman (naming a French name) did doe.
When you carried this Letter, you carried it to, and delivered it to him; then he asked you of the Gentleman of the French name, whom meant he by that name?
I understood it to be Mr..
Did he know him by some French name? What said you?
I could say little to this.
Could you guess whom he meant?
He told me he was sometime Secretary to the Dutchess of, which I understood to be Mr.. I stuck at it, and when he said he was sometime Secretary to the Dutchess of, I spoke in Latine to him, and asked whether he meant Mr., and his Answer I cannot remember. He sends an Answer to this Letter. I brought it to St., and there it was inclosed in the Letter from the Society to; wherein the Society expresly told him this Letter was delivered and acknowledged. I saw the Letter at St., and the Letter was sent to him. Mr.did acknowledge the Receit of this Letter fromin the same hand with that of the News Letter, and so it was understood by all, I saw it.
How came you to see it?
I by a Patent from them was of the Consult.
You saw the Letter of the same hand which the News Letter was of with Mr.name subscribed?
The contents of the Letter did own the Letter fromwas received; this Letter was presumed to be the Hand-writing of Mr., and it was understood to be Mr.Letter.
You say the Letter was thanks for the Ten Thousand Pound; what was the other Contents?
That all endeavours should be used to cut off the Protestant Religion Root and Branch.
You say you delivered this Letter, from whom had you it?
From, it was left in his hand, and he accompanied me fromto the Coach, and gave it to me.
Did you hear him speak to Mr.to write for him?
told me he had spoke to him.
He doth suppose it was Mr.hand because it was just the same hand that the News Letter was. Are you sure the Letter was of his hand?
It was taken for his hand.
Had he such a Kinsman there?
Yes he hath confessed it.
We desire your Lordship he may give an account of the Consult here inlast, and how far Mr.was privy to the murthering of the King.
In the Month ofOld-Stile, in the Month ofNew-Stile, there was a Consult held, it was begun at the, it did not continue there. After that there they had consulted to send one Fatherto be Agent and Procurator for, they did adjourn themselves to several Clubs in Companies; some met at, and some atLodging in; some met atLodging in; and some inLodging in. They were ordered to meet by virtue of a Brief from, sent by the Father Generall of the Society: They went on to these Resolves, Thatandshould go on and continue in attempting to Assassinate the King's Person by Shooting, or other means.was to have Fifteen Hundred Pounds.being a Religious man was to have Thirty Thousand Masses, which at Twelve Pence a Mass amounted muchwhat to that money. This Resolve of the Jesuits was communicated to Mr.in my hearing at. My Lord, this was not onely so, but in several Letters he did mention it; and in one Letter (I think I was gone a few miles out of) he sent to me by a Messenger, and did desire the Duke might be trappan'd into this Plot to Murther the King.
How did he desire it?
In a Letter, that all means should be used for the drawing in the Duke. This Letter was written to one. I saw the Letter and read it.
How do you know it was his Letter?
Because of the Instructions, which I sawMr.take a Copy of and write, which was the same hand with the News Letter, and what else I have mentioned, the Subscription was,, and it was the same hand whereof I now speak.
What was the substance of the Letter?
Nothing but Complement, and Recommendation, and that all means might be used for the trappanning the Duke of(as near as I can remember that was the word.)
You did say positively that Mr.did consent and agree to what was consulted by the Jesuits, which was to kill the King, andandwere the two persons designed to do it. Did you hear him consent to it?
I heard him say at, hethought it was well contrived.
Do the Gentlemen of the Jury hear what he saith?
Gentlemen of the Jury, do you hear what he saith?
Yes.
What do you know of any Rebellion to have been raised in? and what was to be done with the Duke of?
In the Month ofthere was a Consult with the Jesuites, and with the Benedictine Monks at the. In this Month ofthere was a Letter writ from Arch-Bishop, the Titular Arch-Bishop of; wherein he gave an account of a Legate from the Pope, anBishop, (the Bishop ofI think) who asserted the Pope's Right to the Kingdom of. In this Letter (to mention in special) there were Four Jesuits had contrived to dispatch the Duke of(these were his words) To find the most expedient way for his death, andwas to be sent to do it by Poyson, if these Four good Fathers did not hit of their Design. My Lord,was present. And when the Consult was almost at a period, Mr.cameto theto the Consult, and was mighty forward to have Fathersent toto dispatch the Duke by Poyson. This Letter did specify they were there ready to rise in Rebellion against the King for the Pope.
Do you know any thing of Arms?
There were 40000 Black Bills, I am not so skilfull in Arms to know what they meant (Military Men know what they are) that were provided to be sent into; but they were ready for the use of the Catholick Party.
Who were they provided by?
I do not know.
How do you know they were provided?
That Letter doth not mention who they were provided by, but another Letter mentioned they were provided by those that were Commission Officers for the aid and help of the Pope; the Popish Commissioners they were provided by, and they had them ready in.
Who wrote this Letter?
It came from, I might forget the day of the Month because my Information is so large, but it was the former part of the Year, I think eitheror, (77) (78) lastor.
Was this Consult but inlast?
I am forced to run back from that Consult to this; Mr.was privy, and was the main Agent, and did in the Month oflast past say to, he had found a way to transmit the 200000for the carrying on of this Rebellion in.
Did you hear him say so?
I did, a Week before.
You say he was very forward to sendintoto kill the Duke of.
Yes that I say; and that he had found a way to transmit 200000to carry on the Rebellion in.
Who was by besides?
My self and no body else.
Where was it said?
InChamber in.
Do you know any thing of transmitting the money to, or perswading any to be sent thither, and the time when?
In the Month ofthere were four Ruffians procured by Dr.. These Four were not nominated in the Consult with the Benedictine Convent, but (My Lord) these four Ruffians without names were accepted of by them.
Who proposed them?
. These four Irish men were sent that night to. How they went I know not, but the next day there was a provision of 80ordered to them by the Rector of, which is a Jesuite, onein the name of the Provincial, because he acted in his name and authority, the Provincial being then beyond the Seas, visiting his Colledges in.
Did he order the 80
Mr.came to thisHouse, then lying in, andwas not within; but he was directed to come to, and athe found.
How do you know that?
He said he had been at his House, and was not within, finding him at, he asked what care was taken for those four Gentlemen that went last night to? he said there was 80ordered.
Who said so?
. And there was the Messenger that was to carry it, I think the most part of this 80was in Guineys: Mr.gave the Messenger a Guiney to be nimble, and to expedite his Journey.
How know you they were Guinies?
I saw the money upon the Table before, not in his hand.
Were the Fourmen there?
No, they were gone before I came.
Who was to carry it after them, what was his name?
I never saw him before or since; the Money was upon the Table: when Mr.came in, he gave the messenger a Guiney to expedite the business.
You say Mr.inquired what Care was taken for those Ruffians that were to Assassinate the King; pray, Mr., tell my Lord and the Jury what you can say concerning Mr.discourse with one.
In the Moneth of, one, who was sometimes Rector of St., being ill of the Gout was ordered to go to the; thisbeing in, Mr.came to attend him; thisbrought with him Treasonable Instructions in order to expedite the King by Poison, providedanddid not do the Work: Ten thousand pound should be proposed to Sirto Poison the King, in case Pistol and Stab did not take effect, and opportunity was to be taken at the Kings taking Physick. I could give other Evidence but will not, because of other things which are not fit to be known yet.
Who wrote this Letter?
It was under the hand ofthe Provincial beyond the Seas, whomleft; it was in the name of Memorials to impowerand the rest of the Consulters atto propound Ten thousand pound to Sirto take the opportunity to Poison the King. These Instructions were seen and read by Mr., by him Copied out, and transmitted to several Conspirators of the Kings death, in this Kingdom of, that were privy to this Plot.
Know you of any Commission? We have hitherto spoken altogether of the work of others; now we come to his own work a little nearer.
Who sawread these Instructions? what said he?
He said he thought it was too little, I heard him say so.
Did you see him take a Copy of these Instructions?
Yes, and he said he did believe Sirwould scarce take it, and thought it necessary the other Five thousand pound should be added to it, that they might be sure to have it done.
Where was it he said this?
It was in the Provincials Chamber, whichhad taken for his convenience at, until he went down to the, it was at, athouse.
was imployed by his Instructions to acquaint the Consult of the Jesuits, that there should be Ten thousand pound advanced, if Doctorwould Poison the King, nowcomes and acquaints him with it. Why shouldtake Copies?
Because he was to send Copies to several Conspirators in the Kingdom of.
To what purpose shouldtake a Copy of these Instructions?
The reason is plain, they were then a gathering a Contribution about the Kingdom, and these Instructions were sent that they might be incouraged, because they saw there was incouragement from beyond Seas to assist them. And another Reason was, because now they were assured by this their business would quickly be dispatched, and by this means some Thousands of pounds were gathered in the Kingdom of.
To whom wasto send them?
I know not any of the Persons, butdid say he had sent his Suffrages (which was a Canting word for Instructions) to the Principal Gentry of the Catholicks of the Kingdom of.
How know you this, thatdid take a Copy of these Instructions for that purpose as you say?
Because he said so.
Did any body ask him why he took them?
Saith, you had best make haste and Communicate these things.answered, I will make haste withmy Copies, that I may dispatch them away this night.
Was he not to be one of the Principal Secretaries of State?
In the Month oflast New Stile,the Old Stile, I think within a day after our Consult, I was atChamber, he had several Commissions, which he called Patents: among his Commissions I saw one from the General of the Society of, by vertue of a Brief from the Pope by whom he was enabled.
Did you know his hand?
I believe I have seen it Forty times, I have seen Forty things under his hand, and this agreed with them , but I never did see him write in my life, we all took it to be his hand, and we all knew the hand and Seal.
What Inscription was upon the Seal?
I. H.with a Cross, in English it had the Characters of I. H. S. This Commission toin the Month of, I saw inpresence, and at his Chamber in, where thendid acknowledge the Receipt of this Patent, opened it and said, It was a very good exchange.
What was the Commission for?
It was to be Secretary of State. I saw the Commission, and heard him own the Receipt of it.
What other Commissions were there atChamber?
A great many, I cannot remember, there was a Commission for my Lordof, the Lord, and several other persons. But this belongs not to the Prisoner at the Bar: I mention his Commission.
Were you acquainted with?
Yes, I'le tell your Lordship how I was acquainted, I was in, he had there two Sons; to shew them special favour and kindness (being meer strangers at the Colledge) I did use to transmit some Letters for them to the Kingdom ofin my Pacquet. When I came out of, I did receive Recommendations from them to their Father, and in great civility he received me. This was inthat I came to his house. He lived inor thereabouts. I understood that his Wife was a zealous Protestant; therefore he desired me not to come any more to his house, but for the future to come to his Chamber in the.
Had you ever seen Mr.inbefore?
I never saw him till(77.) to my knowledge. I was several times in his company at his chamber, and he brought me there to shew me some kindness upon the account of his Sons. It was at the, for his Wife being a Protestant was not willing any Jesuits should come to the house. I was to carry him a summary of all the results and particulars of the Consult at theand. The Provincial ordered me to do it, he knowing me, being in that affair often imployed.
Was it the second time you saw him, that you saw the Commissions?
I saw him several times in the month of.
When did you see the Commissions?
In the month ofold stile,new stile.
How came he to shew you the Commissions?
I hearing of their being some, had a curiosity to see them, and he knew me to be privy to the concerns.
How did you know he had the Commissions?
By Letters.
From whom?
From those of the Society at, wherein oneone of the Fathers was certified, that the Commissions were come to, and were in his hand, I saw the Letters at St.before they came to, we read the Letters there before they came to, I had power to open them.
Did you open the Letters?
Yes?
When saw you the Letters at St.?
I saw the Letters at St.in the month of; then they came from; and after I received summons to be at this Consult in the month of; and accordingly we came over.
VVhat time did you come over?
In the month of.
VVhat time went you tochamber? I cannot reconcile the months together.
Did you not say you came toin?
Yes, before I went to St..
How many came over with you?
I cannot tell how many came over together; there were nine of us all Jesuits.
Did you not say you went toin?
That was before I went to St..
Tell how many Priests or Jesuits were lately in, that you know of, at one time.
There was, and have been to my knowledge in the Kingdom of, Secular Priests eightscore, and Jesuits fourscore, and by name in the Catalogue, I think three hundred and odd.
How long had you been inbefore you were at Mr.Chamber?
Not long; because I had Letters in my Pacquet from his Sons, assoon as I had rested a little, I went to him.
What said Mr.to you about the Commissions in his chamber?
Not a word; but seem'd glad.
Did you see them open upon his Table? or did you ask to see them?
They did not lye open upon the Table, but the Commissions were before him; I asked to see them. Mr.(said I) I hear you have received the Commissions from; he said, he had. Shall I have the honour to see some of them? He said, I might; he thought he might trust me; and so he might, because that very day I gave him an account of the Consult.
When was it you gave him an account of the Consult?
In the morning.
You say you were twice there that day.
I was there the whole Forenoon.
That day you saw the Commissions.
I had been there several times the same day, and meeting him at last, he asked me how often I was there before, I said said twice or thrice; but that day was the last time ever I saw him; I have not seen him since to my knowledge.
Was that the first time that you saw him after you came from?
I saw him thrice in, then I went to St., the first time I saw him after I came from thence I saw the Commissions.
What were the Names of those men that came over from St.besides your self?
As near as I can remember, the Rector ofwas one; Father; Sir; the Rector of; one; SirBaronet ; one Father; one, a; I think I made the ninth.
If the Prisoner at the Bar be minded, he may ask him any Question.
I am mighty glad to see that Gentleman Sirin the Court, for I think he was upon my Examination before the Councel, and this man that gives now in Evidence against me, there told the King, he never saw me before; and he is extreamly well acquainted with me now, and hath a World of Intimacy.at that time gave such an Account of my Concern in this matter, that I had orders to go to, I never sawsince I was born, but at that time.
You shall have as fair a Search, and Examination in this matter for your Life as can be, thereforeanswer to whatsaith.
My Lord, whenwas upon his Examination before the Council-board, he saith, I said there that I never saw him before in my Life: I then said I would not swear that I had seen him before in my Life, because my sight was bad by Candle-light, and Candle-light alters the sight much, but when I heard him speak I could have sworn it was he, but it was not then my Business. I cannot see a great way by Candle-light.
The Stress of the Objection lyeth not upon seeing so much, but how come you that you laid no more tocharge at that time?
I did design to lay no more to his Charge then, than was matter for Information. For Prisoners may supplant Evidence when they know it, and bring Persons to such Circumstances, as Time, and Place. My Lord, I was not bound to give in more than a general Information against Mr.;did deny he had Correspondence with Fatherat any time, I did then say he had given him an account of several transactions. And (my Lord) then was I so weak, being up two nights, and having been taking Prisoners, upon my Salvation, I could scarce stand upon my Legs.
What was the Information you gave at that time to the Council against Mr.?
The Information I gave at that time (as near as I can remember, but I would not trust to my memory) was for writing of, in which I did then excuse the Treasonable Reflexions, and called them Base Reflexions at the Council-board; the King was sensible, and so was the Council. I was so wearied and tyred (being all that Afternoon before the Council, and Sunday night, and sitting up night after night) that the King was willing to discharge me. But if I had been urged, I should have made a larger Information.
The thing you accused him of was his own Letter.
He doth not believe it was my Letter.
You here charge Mr.to be the man that gave a Guinny to expedite the business atat the time when you were Examined at the Council-Table, you gave a particular account of attempting to take away the Kings life at, and raising twenty thousand pounds and all those great Transactions; why did you not charge Mr.to be the man that gave the Guinny to the Messenger to expedite the business, when the 80 pounds was sent? that he found out a way of transmitting 200000 pounds to carry on the Design? he consulted the killing the King, and approved of it very well. And of the Instructions for 10000 pounds, and said it was too little for to poyson the King. When you were to give an account to the Council of the particular Contrivance of the Murther of the King at, with a Reward, you did mention one Reward of 10000 pounds to Dr., and would you omit the Guinny to expedite the Messenger, and that he said that 10000was too little; would you omit all this?
I being so tyred and weak that I was not able to stand upon my Legs, and I remember the Council apprehended me to be so weak that one of the Lords of the Council said, that if there were any occasion further to examine, thatshould be ready again, and bid me retire.
You was by when the Council were ready to let Mr.go almost at large.
No; I never apprehended that, for if I did, I should have given a further Account.
What was done to Mr.at that time? was he sent away Prisoner?
Yes, at that time to the Messengers house, and within two dayes after he was sent to, and his Papers were seized.
Why did you not nameat that time?
Because I had spent a great deal of time in accusing other Jesuites.
What time was there betwixt the first time you were at the Council before you told of this matter concerning the King?
When I was first at the Board (which was onnight) I made Information, which began between six and seven, and lasted almost to ten. I did then give a general Account of the Affairs to the Council without the King. Then I went and took Prisoners, and beforenight, I said, I thought if Mr.Papers were searched into, they would find matter enough against him in those Papers to hang him; I spake those words, or words to the like purpose. After that Mr.Papers were searched, Mr.was not to be found; but he surrendred himself the next day.So that onI was commanded to give His Majesty a general Information, as I had given to the Council on; and the next day again, I took Prisoners that night five, and next night four.
How long was it betwixt the time that you were examined, and spoke only as to the Letters, to that time you told to the King & Council or both of them, concerning this matter you swear now?
My Lord, I never told it to the King and Council, but I told it to the Houses of Parliament.
How long was it between the one and the other?
I cannot tell exactly the time; it was when the Parliament first sate.
How came you,to omit yourof it to the Council and to the King at both times?
spoke little of the Persons till the persons came face to face.
Why did you not accuse all those Jesuits by name?
We took a Catalogue of their names, but thosedid accuse positively and expresly we took up.
Did you not accuse Sirby name, and that he accepted his Reward?
Yes, thendid accuse him by name.
Why did you not accuse Mr.by name?
ColemanColeman.
How long was it between the first charging Mr., and your acquainting the Parliament with it?
30thSeptember, until the Parliament sate.
Mr., will you ask him any thing?
Oats,?
Coleman.
He names several times that he met with me in this place and that place, a third and fourth place about business.
Coleman.
Did you hear him speak? How were the Questions asked? Were they thus? Was that the Person? Or, how often had you seen Mr.?
When the Question was asked by my Lord Chancellour, Mr., when were you last in? He said at such a time. Did you see Father? He said he gave him an accidental visit, My Lord Chancellor asked him whether or no he had a Pass? He said, No. Then he told him, that was a fault for going out of the Kingdom without a Pass. Have you a Kinsman whose name isat S.? He said he had one ten years old, (who is in truth sixteen.) That question I desired might be asked. Then the King bade me go on.
Did the King, or Council, or Lord Chancellor ask you whether you knew Mr., or no?
They did not ask me.
Mr., answer the question in short, and without confounding it with length. Were you demanded if you knew M.?
Not to my knowledge.
Did you ever see him? or how often?
He said, he did not know me.
You seemed, when I asked you before, to admit, as if you had been asked this question, how often you had seen him, and gave me no answer, because you were doubtful whether it was the man, by reason of the inconveniency of the light, and your bad sight.
I must leave it to the King what answer I made Mr., he wonders I should give an account of so many intimacies, when I said I did not know him at the Council Table.
It is very strange Mr.should swear now, that he was so well acquainted with me, and had been so often in my company, when upon his accusation at the Council-Table, he said nothing of me more than the sending of one Letter, which he thought was my hand.
I did not say that.
And he did seem to say there, he never saw me before in his life.
Was he asked whether he was acquainted with you? (for those words are to the same purpose) .
I cannot answer directly, I do not say he was asked if he was acquainted with me, but I say this, that he did declare he did not know me.
Can you prove that?
I appeal to Sir, who is now in Court, and was then present at the Council-Table.
Sir, you are not upon your Oath, but are to speak on the behalf of the Prisoner: what did he say?
That he did not well know him.
Did he add, that he did not well know him by the Candle-light? But Mr., when you heard his voice, you said you knew him; why did you not come then, and say you did well know him?
Because I was not asked.
But, Sir, did he say he did not well know him after M.spake? Was Mr.examined before Mr.spake?
Yes.
Mr., you say you were with him at theand, pray, Sir, did he say he did not know him, or had seen Mr.there?
He did not know him as he stood there.
Knowing, or not knowing is not the present question; but did he make an answer to the knowing, or not knowing him?
Did he say he did not well know Mr., or that he did not well know that man?
He said he had no acquaintance with that man (to the best of my remembrance.)
Sir, you were present at Mr.his Examination before the Council; in what manner did he accuse Mr.then?
The question is so particular, I cannot give the Court satisfaction; but other material things then said are now omitted by Mr.; for he did declare against Sir, that five thousand pounds was added, in all fifteen thousand pounds, and that Mr.paid five of the fifteen to Sirin hand.
This answers much of the Objection upon him. The Court has asked Mr.how he should come now to charge you with all these matters of poysoning and killing the King, and yet he mentioned you so slightly at the Council-Table; but it is said by Sirhe did charge you with five thousand pounds (for poisoning the King) to be added to the ten thousand pounds, and hecharged you expresly with it at the Council Table.
The Charge was so slight against me by Mr., that the Council were not of his Opinion: For the first order was to go to, and Sircame with directions to the Messenger not to execute the Order. I humbly ask whether it was a reasonable thing to conceive that the Council should extenuate the punishment, if Mr.came with such an amazing account to the Council,
Mrgave so large and general an Information to the Council, that it could not easily be fixed. Mr.came voluntarily in upon Monday morning. The Warrant was sent out on Sunday night for Mr.and his Papers: His Papers were found and seized; but Mr.was not found at that time, nor all Night, but came on Monday morning voluntarily, and offered himself at SirHouse, hearing there was a Warrant against him: By reason of so many Prisoners that were then under Examination, he was not heard till the Afternoon, and then he did with great Indignation and Contempt hear these vile things, as thinking himself innocent.
If I thought my self guilty, I should have charged my self: I hope his Majesty upon what hath been said, will be so far satisfied as to discharge me.
Mr.then made so good a discourse for himself, that though the Lords had filled up a blank Warrant to send him to, that was respited, and he was only committed to a Messenger. I did say to the Messenger, be very civil to Mr.for things are under Examination, but you must keep him safely. Saith the Messenger, pray let me have a special Warrant, that doth dispence with the Warrant I had to carry him to, and such a Warrant he had. The King went away on Tuesday morning to, and appointed a particular Committee to examine the Papers brought of Mr.and others. His Papers were found in a Deal box, and several of these Papers and Declarations sounded so strangely to the Lords, that they were amazed; and presently they signed a Warrant for Mr.going to.
Did Mr.give a round Charge against Mr.?
He had a great deal to do, he was torepeat in the Afternoon on Sunday when the King was present, all he had said to the Lords on Saturday. He did say of Mr., that he had corresponded very wickedly and basely with the French King's Confessor, and did believe if Mr.Papers were searched, there would be found in them that which would cost him his Neck. And did declare that the fifteen thousand pounds was accepted for the murther of the King, and that five thousand pounds was actually paid by Mr.to Sir. But Mr.at the same time did also declare that he did not see the mony paid, he did not see this particular action of Sir, because at the time he had the Stone and could not be present.
I was not present at that Consult, where the fifteen thousand pounds was accepted, but I had an account of it from those that were present.
It appears plainly by this Testimony, that he did charge you Mr.home, that fifteen thousand pounds was to be paid for poysoning the King, and that it was generally said among them (though he did not see it paid) that it came by your hands,five thousand pounds of it, which answers your objection as if he had not charged you, when you see he did charge you home then for being one of the Conspirators, in having a hand in paying of money for poysoning the King: he charges you now no otherwise than in that manner. He doth not charge you now as if there were new things started, but with the very conspiracy of having a hand in paying the money for murthering the King. What consultation was that you had at the Savoy, in the Month of?
It was about the business of the four Irish Ruffians proposed to the Consult.<|endoftext|>Mr., Pray do you direct your Discourse to the Jury.
Mr., Pray do you Ask him your Questions, that you may put him in that Method you would have him take, to give his Evidence.
My Lord, I would first Ask him this Question: What Conference he had with any persons, Priests or Others, about Murdering any body?
My Lord and the Jury, I have at other times, and in other places, proved what Familiarity I have had with the Priests and Jesuits; and if I have not satisfied the Court, and Others, about it, yet I have done my Duty in endeavouring so to do. My Lord, I have been several times Treated with, not only about the Plot, but by several Persons about Murdering of a Gentleman. They never told me who it was that was to be Murdered; but if I would Undertake it, they, that is,, and, and Mr., and several other, who discoursed with me about it, would find out some to Assist me, and my Reward should be very Considerable.
When was this?
It was inlast, about the beginning, or latter end of.
Well Sir, Go on.
I did Adhere to them all along, for I had a mind to Discover two Years ago, but was prevented; and I only drill'd them on, to know the Party, that I might prevent them. But they would never Discover the Party.
Prithee come to this particular part of the Story.
Afterwards they set me to insinuate my self into the Acquaintance of Sir, not telling me they had any design upon him.
Who did?
, and, and.
was not one, was he?
No my Lord. But they told me that afterwards they would have me introduce them into his Acquaintance. And I had been, I think, Six or Seven dayes together with Sir, at his House, and had got much into his Acquaintance.
By what means did you get into his Acquaintance?
Why, I pretended to get Warrants for the Good Behaviour against persons, that there were none such.
Well, and what then?
This was the Week before the Saturday that he was Kill'd; and I was there every day but Saturday. On theI went to the, and I sent my Boy to see if Sirwere at Home. Sirwas not at Home then.
When was that?
The very Day before he was Kill'd. If he had been at Home, I would have gone over to him, and would have desired him to come over to them.
Were the Priests there?
Yes, my Lord, there was, and, and, and, and another; five: and, as I said, I sent my Boy to see if he were at home, and he brought me word he was not; and if he had, I was to have gone to him, to have fetch'd him thither, that they might Insinuate themselves into his Acquaintance. And indeed, they had Tongue enough tothemselves into any ones Acquaintance. So he not being at home, we came into the City, two of theand I.
Which two.
and. The next Morningcame to my Chamber, and I was not then within; but by Accident I met him, about four of the Clock, in. We went to theTavern; where falling into Discourse, he told me there vvas a Gentleman that vvas to be put out of the vvay; that vvas the Phrase he used, he did not really sayhim; for they don't count it Murther.
No, No, they put it into softer Termes.
They told me it vvas to be done to Night. I asked vvho it vvas, they said it vvas a very material Man: For he had all the Informations that Mr.and Dr.had given in; that several had been imployed in the doing of it, that several Attempts had been made, and that they had miss'd several Opportunities, and had not done it till then; but if he should not be taken out of the way, and the Papers taken from him, the business would be so Obstructed, and go near to be Discovered, to that Degree, that they would not be able to bring this Design to pass, but must stay till another Age before they should Effect it. I asked him again, who it was, he sayd he would not tell me, but it was a very material Man. I told him, that according to my Promise I would Assist; but in such a Case, I should need a great many Men to be with me, he being so considerable a Person. I asked him then, where the Money was, that was formerly promised? he told me no worse a Man was Engaged for it, than my Lord, and Mr.had order to pay it.
What was that Reward?
Four Thousand pound.
Who was it that first named this Gentleman to you to be Sir?
They never named him to me at all.
Let us know when you first knew it to be Sir.
I parted with him then, but came not according to my Promise. I was to meet him at the Cloysters atthat night; but I knew their Design was to Murder some body, and I would not come.I saw him no more till Monday Night, then I met him in Red-Lyon-Court, where he put up his Cane to his Nose; as who should say, I was to blame in not keeping my Promise. And we went together to thein, where he charged me with my breach of Promise. I told him I was taken up by other Company, and unless they would tell me who it was I was to Kill, I would have no hand in it: For I did not know but that it might be my own particular Friend. And I would not murther any private person, unless I knew who it was, and for what Reason. Well, says he, we will tell you more anon if you meet me to night at, at nine a Clock. I did meet him exactly at that time in the Cloysters, where we walk't and talk't a great while. And then he took me into the middle of the Court, and told me, you have don ill, that you did not help in this business; but if you will help to carry him off, you shall have half the Reward. Why said I,?, said he;, sayd I?, sayd he: and so took me by the hand, and led me into the Room through a dark Entry. In the Room were a great many, I can't tell who they all were.
How many were there?
There might stand a great many behind one another. I saw Four or Five.
What kind of Light had they, Mr.?
It was a middle-sized Lanthorn.
Was it a small Light, or a great Light?
It was a small Light.
Had they no Light, but that Lanthorn?
No: And they did not open it till I had had a turn about in the Room.
Did they discourse of carrying him away then?
Yes, they did.
Did you know him, when he lay Dead there?
Yes, your Lordship shall hear how I came to know him. One stept to the Body, and threw off the thing that laid upon him, and I went and Lookt upon him;and he had got about his Neck, such a kind of a fashion'd Cravat as this about my Neck; and I went to try, and could not get my Finger in betwixt. So I saw him, his Bosome was all open, and I knew him presently: For those Jesuits that were there, were not those who had employed me to insinuate my self into his Acquaintance; and so they thought I had not known him. I Asked who it was, they said it was a man that belong'd to a person of Quality. I was mightily struck and daunted, when I knew him: I would fain have perswaded them to have Tyed Weights at his Head and Feet, and Thrown him into the River; and afterwards I would have dragg'd for him, and took him up there. But they did not think that so safe:(said they). I Asked, how they would get him out? They said,. Then I Asked them, which way they would get him into the Chair, and out of the Gate. They said.
What Porter?
The Porter of the House.
Who,?
Yes. As for that, or the Old Man, I do not know that I ever had any particular knowledge of them; but only I looked upon them as ill-designing men, seeing them in the Chappel.
Did you see ere a one of the Three Prisoners there at that time?
No my Lord: But I have such a Remembrance of Faces, that I could tell, if I saw them again, any that I did see there, though the Light was but small. They told me; but how, I did not know. When they press'd me to help to carry him out, I then Excused my self, and said, It was too Early to carry him out yet; but aboutora Clock would be a better time. And I assured them I would come again. Saidto me,. I promised him I would. And he went away, and left me there. I made what speed away I could, for I was very Unsatisfied in my self,having so great a charge upon me, as the Sacrament of the Altar, which after the discovery of the Plot, was Administred to me twice a Week to conceal it, I could not tell how to discover: I went then to, but very restless and disturbed in my mind; and being perswaded by what God was pleased to put into my mind, calling to remembrance that some Murders had been already committed, and greater ones were dayly intended, I was at last convinc't, and could no longer forbear discovery. I wrote to the Secretary of it, and went to the Parliament and gave in my information. And one day I met with Mr.in the Lobby, and knew him, and apprehended him.
I will ask you one question, Had you any discourse with Mr.between the time you saw him with the Body, and the day he was apprehended.
No, I never saw him to this day, to have any converse with him.
Did not you seethat night when you were to have carried him away?
No my Lord.
Nor, nor?
I did see about the Court, andI was told was to open the Gate thatnight. But my Lord, when they found I did not come again, they desisted that night, and kept it off longer, for fear I should come again to stop them.
He did not refuse to help them, but promised to do it and failed: and they finding that he had failed them, would not let the body lye where it was for fear of discovery, but removed back again.
What didsay, when you first took notice of him?
I understood afterwardsthat he was taken upon suspicion, because at that time, his Maid had made a discovery, that he was about that time out of his Lodgings. And while he was there in the Constables Hands Mr.came by, and he desired to see him; and presently after I came thither, and the Constable asked him, Mr., will you see Mr.? No, he said, he would not: Then he put his Hat over his eyes that I might not see his face, and keptit so. The press being great, and being desirous to be private my self, I spoke to the Guard to put all out that had no business there, and they cried out, that all should avoid the Room but Mr.and his Friends. And when he was going out with the rest, he lift up his Hat to see his way; and though before I did not mind him, yet I happened at his passing by me to cast my eyes upon his face, and presently knew him, and cried, Oh! pray Sir stay, you are one of my friends that must stay here. And I presently charged my Guards to take charge of him. Saith the Constable, he is my Prisoner: Is he so, said I? Then you have a very good Prisoner, and pray look safe to him. And then when I went into the House of Lords, I made out my charge against him.
Now if the Prisoners have any questions to ask Mr., they may have free liberty to do it.
I never saw him before in my life.
Do you know any of them?
I know, andvery well.
Pray Mr., was the Dark-Lanthorn atLodging, or at the other place?
At the other place.
Look you here Mr., They carried him toonnight, and he lay there tillnight: What time onwas it that they removed him into?
I was not there when they did remove him.
What time did you see him there?
About Nine or Ten a Clock.
What time was it that you saw him there Mr.?
It was after Nine my Lord.
They had then removed him to, and Mr.asked what they intended to do with the Body? They said, they would carry it out that night, but they did not. But there the Dark-Lanthorn was, and onthey removed him back again.
Now my Lord, if you please, we shall go on to call some Witnesses that were not present at the Murder; for direct Evidence, as to that, can come only out of themouth of some that were concerned in it; but to corroborate by concurrent circumstances, the Testimony which hath been already given. And first we shall call the Constable, to prove that he found Sirin the Fields, in the same manner in which Mr.says they told him they left him.
Mr. Attorney, you promised you would prove, that when these persons were examined, they did deny before the House of Lords, that they knew.
My Lord, in that we were mistaken, I understand now, it was onlydenied that he did know.
Why, did you never know Mr.?
Never in my life.
Mr., have not you seenwith?
Yes, I have, but they usually went by several Names.
Did you ever seeincompany?
Yes, that I have.
Was there no Sentinel set that, that, and that?
My Lord, I am not certain, I took notice of none; if there were any, they were atHouse, and he opened the Gate, when we came out with the Sedan.
Mr., I suppose, could take order with the Sentinel, and give them some entertainment in his own Lodg.
Pray, in what posture did you find Sir?
I found him, my Lord, in a Ditch, with his Sword through him, and the end of it was two handfulls out of his back.
Was he Bloody?
There was no Blood at all, there was no Blood in the Ditch.
Was the Sword sticking in his Body?
Yes, My Lord, but there was no Blood at all when it was taken out; they had run it into another place, but that happened to be against a Rib, and so it could not go through; but there was no blood there.
Was there any bruises on his Breast?
He did look black about the Breast.
My Lord, I would ask, whether his Neck were broken?
Yes, I suppose it was.
How do you know it?
It was very weak, and one might turn his Head from one Shoulder to the other.
Where was his Stick and Gloves?
They were on the Bank-side.
Whose Sword was it?
His Servants said it was his own.
Pray, had he any Money in his Pocket?
Yes, a great deal of Gold and Silver.
Ay, Ay, for they count Theft Sin, but not Murder.
They left that, to let men think he murdered himself.
Well, will you ask this Witness any questions before he goes?
They say they will ask him none.
Then we desire to call the Chyrurgeons that view'd and opened the Body, Mr., and Mr.; both whom were Sworn.
We begin with Mr., Pray, Sir, inform my Lord and the Jury, Did you see the Body of Sir?
Yes, I did view the Body.
When? what time did you see it?
About Twelve of the Clock.
What day of the Week was it?
On, the next day after he was found.
Did you observe his Breast? how was it?
His breast was all beaten with some obtuse weapon, either with the feet or hands, or something.
Did you observe his neck?
Yes, it was distorted.
How far?
You might have taken the Chin and have set it upon either Shoulder.
Did you observe the wound?
Yes, I did. It went in at one place and stopt at a Rib, the other place it was quite through the Body.
Do you think he was killed by that wound?
No, for then there would have been some evacuation of Blood, which there was not. And besides his bosome was open, and he had a Flannel Wastcoat and a Shirt on; and neither those, nor any of his Clothes were penetrated.
But are you sure his neck had been broken?
Yes, I am sure.
Because some have been of opinion, that he hanged himself, and his Relations to save his estate run him through; I would desire to ask the Chyrurgeon what he thinks of it.
There was more done to his neck than an ordinary suffocation; the wound went through his very heart, and there would have appeared some blood, if it had been done quickly after his death.
Did it appear by the view of the body that he was strangled or hanged?
He was a lean man, and his muscles if he had died of the wound, would have been turgid: and then again all strangled people never swell, because there is a sudden deprivation of all the spirits, and a hindring of the Circulation of the blood.
How long do you believe he might be dead before you saw him?
I believe four or five days. And they might have kept him a week and he never swell'd at all, being a lean man. And when we ript him up, he began for to putrify, we made two incisions to give it vent, and the liquor that was in his body did a little smell. The very lean flesh was sonear turned into putrefaction, that it stuck to the Instrument when we cut it.
My Lord here is another Chyrurgeon, Mr.; Pray, Sir are you sworn.
Yes, I am.
When did you see the body of Sir?
Upon friday, the very same day the Gentleman did. I found his neck dislocated, and his breast very much beaten and bruised. And I found two punctures under his left Pap, the one went against the Rib, the other quite through the body under the left Pap.
Do you believe that wound was the occasion of his death?
No, I believe it was given him after his death.
And his neck was broke?
His neck was dislocated, Sir.
Why, that is broken. Now my Lord we shall call SirMaid,. Swear her.
Your Lordship knows that Mr.did say in the beginning, that they had been several times at his House inquiring for him: now we call this person to tell you what she knows about that.
, look upon the Prisoners, and tell my Lord and the Jury whether you know any of them or no.
This man that I now hear called, my Lord, was at my Masters about a fortnight before he died.
What to do?
I don't know, but he asked for Sir.
What time of the day was it?
It was in the morning.
What did he say?
He asked for Sir, and when he came to him, he said, Good morrow, Sir, in, and afterwards spoke to him in, I could not understand him.
I desire she may consider well, and look upon him.
That is the man.
Upon my Soul I never saw him in all my life.
He had a darker coloured Perriwig when he was there, and was about a quarter of an hour talking with my Master.
Are you sure this was the man?
Yes, I am, and that other manwas there that Saturday morning, and did speak with him before he went out.
That you will deny too?
Yes, I do.
How do you know he was there?
I was in the Parlor at that time, making up the fire.
Had you ever seen him before that time?
No, never before that time. I went into the Parlor to carry my Master his Break-fast, and brought a bunch of Keys with me in, and therewas with him. And I went up stairs about some business, and came down again wanting the Keys, which I had left upon the Table; andwas all that time with my Master.
How do you know he was there?
I was in the Parlor and stirred up the fire, and he was there a good while.
How long after did you see him again?
Not till I saw him in.
How long was that afterwards?
A month ago. But it is not the man that brought the note to my Master.
What note?
A note that a man brought to my Master that night before.
What is become of that Note?
My Lord, I cannot tell, my Master had it.
Prithee, tell us the story of it.
There was a man came to my Masters House, and asked if Sirwere within. He said he had a Letter for him; and shewed it me, it was tied up in a knot.I told him my Master was within, but busy; but said I, if you please I will carry it into him: he did so, and I gave it to my Master; when I went out again, the man staid and asked for an Answer: I went in again and told my Master that the man required an Answer. Prithee, said he, tell him I don't know what to make of it.
When was that?
On Friday night.
When? The Friday night before he was murdered?
Yes.
But you Swear thatwas there the Saturday morning.
Yes, he was.
In what Clothes was he then?
The same Clothes that he hath now.
Are you sure they are the same Clothes?
Yes.
Here is a great Circumstance my Lord. I asked her what Clothes he was in when he came to Sir; and she saith, the same that he hath now.
Have you ever shifted your Clothes?
No indeed, I have not.
But for the man that brought the Note, I cannot Swear it is he.
But she did say when she came to see me in, that she never saw me in my life; and my Lord I hope I have sufficient VVitnesses to prove where I was that morning.
She says, she cannot Swear you were the man that brought the Note.
My Lord, I desire she will tell me about what time it was I was there.
It was about nine or ten a Clock.
That agrees with Mr.exactly in point of time. Now if your Lordship please, we will proceed and call Mr., and Mr..
My Lord, we do call these Witnesses to prove, that these men had meetings with Mr.at the Plow.
Pray tell my Lord and the Jury whether you know Mr..
Yes, Sir, I do.
Have you seen him at theat any time?
Yes, Sir, I have.
In what company there? Was Mr.there?
Yes, he was.
Which was he?
And who else?
There was that.
How often?
Several times.
How long before Sirwas murdered?
I cannot tell, my Lord.
Do you remember any other company was with him?
Yes, there were several other company.
Name them.
There was Mr.and Mr..
And yetsaith he never saw.
And there was, he was another of them, and.
Did you know?
Yes, my Lord.
How now? What say you to it Mr., and Mr.? Were you never at the, drinking with Mr.?
Yes, my Lord, several times.
What say you, Mr.?
I have drank with him there.
Do you know?
I know one?
Now will your Lordship please to let me prove, that at the Council he owned he knewand, and now 'tis proved he hath been incompany, he says he does not know.
My Lord, that was a mistake, for I do knowby sight, that is, I knew two Men that used the Chappel very much, and he was one of them.
But you, Witness, say you have seenand them together?
Yes, I have.
How many times?
I cannot tell how many, my Lord, several times.
Have you seen them twice together?
Yes, I have.
Now to settle it I would ask him, with your Lordship's favour, when he came to live with his Master. You, young Man, when did you come to live with your Master at the?
Why, I have been with him two years.
But when was it you came last to live at the?
Inlast.
It was but five Weeks before Sirwas Murdered.
Do you,, know Mr.?
Yes, I do.
Then pray Swear Mr..
Come, pray Sir, do you live at the?
Yes, Sir, I do.
Then pray, do you tell my Lord, and the Jury, if you know any of the Prisoners at the Bar, and which of them.
I know Mr..
Do you know anybody else?
Yes, I know, and I know Mr..
Have you seen these persons at your House?
Yes, I have.
With whom?
I can't tell every body with whom they were.
Were they there with?
Yes, Sir.
Did you know one?
Yes, Sir.
Hath he been at your house?
Yes, Sir, he hath.
Who was with him?
I can't tell justly.
Did you know?
Yes, I did.
Hath he been there?
Yes, he hath.
In what Company?
With.
And with any of the Prisoners?
Yes, but I can't tell particularly with whom.
Now, my Lord, as these were meetings before the fact was committed to consult how to do it; so we at the beginning told you of a meeting after it was done, and that was at. We shall therefore call some Witnesses as to that; and they are, and. First swear.
Do you remember you were sent of a message from theat, and whether? Pray tell my Lord, and the Jury.
I remember it very well; there were three Gentlemen that sent for me to the, and I being sent for did come, and when I came up stairs, they asked me if I knew, I said I knew it very well. Then they asked me if I knew Mr., I told them I thought I did. Then said they, you must carry this Letter to, Esq; at, and deliver it to his own hands, and to no body else. Accordingly away I went, and carried the Letter: I went to the door, and asked if he were within; his Man said he was above stairs, but they would call him to me; and calling him to me, Sir, said I, there are some Gentlemen at theatthat have sent me with a Letter to you. So he looked upon the Letter, and, saith he, go and tell them I will be with them presently. So, may it please you, my Lord, I came again, and when I came, the Gentlemen were there still. Well, said they, go and drink a Glass of Claret, which stood upon the Table, and they gave me Six-pence, and I went away.
Pray look upon Mr., can you remember whether that man was there?
There were three of them, and he looks like one.
Mr., do you remember this was the man you sent?
Yes, my Lord, this was the same Man that was sent.
Well, call the other.
Hark you, do you remember any Company that was at your Masters house two or three Months agon?
Yes, I do.
Do you remember that you heard them talk any thing there?
They pull'd out a Paper and read it.
You Boy, do you know Mr.?
Yes, I do.
Was he there?
He did come to them, my Lord.
What had they to Dinner there?
They had Flounders.
Who bought them?
One of them, I can't tell who.
What had they else?
A Barrel of Oysters.
Pray give my Lord an accompt what you observed and heard.
Sir, I know nothing but that they pull'd out a Paper, and read it, and named SirName. And while I was at the door, some body came and threatned to kick me down stairs.
He saith just as Mr.said in every particular.
Now if it please your Lordship, we desire to call Sir, to prove what Mr.said before the Council, and how particular he was; and did to some of the Lords, who were sent with him to, point out the places.
We call him to shew, that whenwas examined before the King, he was sent with some of the Lords, and Sir, to, where he pointed with his Finger, and shewed the places where all was done; and so we shall shew your Lordship and the Jury, how exact he was in every thing.
Pray Sir, will you tell your knowledge?
My Lord, I was upon the twenty fourth ofwaiting upon his Majesty in Council, and Mr.was sent for, to speak his knowledge concerning this Murder, and he then gave a general Account of things, which, because it did relate to that Bench, and this Corner, and that Room, and that Passage, and that Gallery, it was not understood by the Board, and thereupon his Majesty thought fit to appoint my Lord Duke of, and the Earl of, and Mr.to the Queen, to go thither, and take the Examination upon the Place, and Report it to the Board: And I, being Clerk of of theCouncil, though not in waiting at that time, and having taken notice of what Mr.had there deposed, I did wait upon those Lords, and took the Examination upon the Place. And what I did take upon the place, This was done here, and that there, I drew up into a Report, and the Report is Signed by those two Noble Lords, and was read that Afternoon at the Board; and to that I referr my self.
Pray Sir, Did he shew the particular places to those Lords?
Yes, he did. First, the Bench whereon they were sitting when Sirwas coming down; then the Corner into which they drew him when they had strangled him; then the Place where onewent to stay, which was at the Stairs that lead to the Upper Court, then a little door at the end of the Stables, which lead up a pair of Stairs, and at the head of the Stairs a long dark Entry, and at the top of those Staires, a door on the left hand, which being opened, shew'd us eight steps, which lead up to the Lodgings that were Dr.: In whichwas said to be inhabitant for seven years before. Andassoon as we were gone two steps, there was a little Closet or Cabinet on the right hand, in which there was a Bed, and there he shewed my Lords, This is the Place where we handed him up first, and here we left him, said he, in the care offor two nights.
You were there, Sirupon the place, when he shew'd them these things?
Yes Sir, I was there.
Was it answerable to what he had declared to the King and Council?
Yes, it was answerable to all things he had said in the morning.
And suitable to what he says now?
Yes, suitable to what he sayes now, but only now he sayes more than he said then. And as to what he sayes about the Chambers of Sir, they could not be SirLodgings, for they were not capable of receiving a Person of that Quality.
I said, I did believe they did belong to Sir.
They were Lodgings perhaps that belong'd to his Servants, though not to him.
Sir, I desire to know, whether Mr., when he shew'd these places, and made these Descriptions, did he do it with any hesitancy, or did he do it readily?
Hitherto, my Lord, he went directly and positively, as if any body should walk todoor. But afterwards, when the Lords did desire to know whither the Body was carried, he said, it was into some Room of the house by the Garden; for this is an Outer part of the House, which any body may do any thing in, without their knowledge that are within. And he undertook to lead themto the place as well as he could; and so away we went through the long dark Entry that leads into the Outer Court of the Great House; and crossing the Quadrangle, he leads us to the, and down a pair of Stairs, and so far, said he, I am sure I went; then, assoon as we were down the Stairs, there is a great Square Court, then he began to stagger, as if he did not know his way, but there was no way but to go on hovvever, and on vve vvent, and coming cross the Court, vve came into several Rooms, and going through them, vve came up Stairs again, and so into several other Rooms again. Sure, said he, vve vvere here, but I can't tell, and he vvas in a great Distraction vvhat Room he savv the Body in; but, said he, thus far, I am certain I am right; vvhich vvas according to the Paper, and I refer my self to that.
But, you say, that what he had said to the Lords in the Council, was the same that he said when you were by upon the place?
Yes.
His doubtfulness of the Room does assert, and give Credit to his Testimony, and Confirms it to any honest man in. Here, saith he, I will not be positive, but having sworn the other things which he well remembred, positively, he is made the more Credible for his doubtfulness of a thing which he does not remember, which a man that could swear any thing would not stick at.
Besides, he was not there but by night, and all the Light he had was a dark Lanthorn.
Now, Sir, I would ask you one Question, if you please, Do you remember thatwas Examined at the Council about this matter?
My Lord, these are the Notes that I took upon these Mens Examinations, if your Lordship pleases they may be read.
, We ask you but as to one particular thing, therefore if you please to look upon it, and refresh your Memory, you may read it to your self, and tell us only the substance;
Now Sir, if you please, Do you remember thatwas there?
Yes, I find he was Examined.
Did not he deny there that he knew, but that he knew?
Yes, I do find it here set down that he did deny he knew, but that he knew.
I said I knew one, but not that.
But before the Council he said he knew, not one.
This way of Answering is like the Examination that was taken lately amongst some of them. A Person was asked when he saw such a Priest? He denied that he had seen him in fourteen dayes. But then comes one and proves to his face, that he was with him in Company all Night, within a Week and less. I, sayes he, that's true, but I said I had not seen him in Fourteen Dayes. And so they may take Oaths to serve the King faithfully all the Dayes of their Lives, but in the Nights they may murther him, and keep their Oaths for all that.
I would know, whether theyou know be a Priest or no?
He is not.
Then you do not knowthe Priest?
No, I do not.
Call Mr..
Pray Mr., will you tell my Lord and the Jury what it was that Mr.said about any directions he had to keep all Persons out of, about the twelfth or fourteenth oflast?
My Lord, upon his Examination before the Lords of the Committee,did say he had Orders from the Queen, or in the Name of the Queen, That he should suffer no Strangers, nor any Persons of Quality to come into.
When was it he was to keep them out?
The 12th 13th and 14th of.
What, three days?
Two or three days. And he said that the Prince did come, and he did refuse him, and sent him back again.
Did he say he ever had any such Directions before?
No: he said he never before had any.
It was a very unlucky thing that he had it then.
The Prince might have gone in if he would.
You said you did refuse him, you had order to let none come in.
Had you any such Order?
Yes, my Lord, I had such an Order from the Queen's Gentleman-Usher.
Had you never had such before?
Yes, I have had before, since the Queen came to.
Mr.swears you said you had not any before.
Yes, I had.
Why did you deny it then?
I did not deny it; besides, there were several went in.
We have proved indeed five or six did go in.
For how many days had you that Order?
Two days.
Which two days?
The eleventh and twelfth, I think thereabouts.
Did you say before the Lords, that you never had such Orders before?
No, I did not.
Mr., When you were examined before the Lords, Did you not say you never had such Orders before?
No, I did not say so, my Lord, as I know of; for they did not examine me about that.
You said you would prove it under his own Hand. Prove that.
Mr., Did he write his Name to his Examination?
Yes, he did to one Examination.
Pray look upon that, Is that his Hand?
This was read to him before he Signed it, and then he did Sign it.
I would fain shew it to him, to see whether he Would own it or no.
Yes, that is my Hand.
This is subscribed by.The Information of, Porter at the Gate of; taken before the Right Honourable the Marquess of. This Deponent saith, That about the 12th, 13th, and 14th oflast, he had Order to tell all Persons of Quality, that the Queen was private, and that they were not to come in; and this Deponent saith, The Queen continued so private for two days.
Where is that part of the Examination wherein he said, he never had any such Order before?
He did say so, but it is not in that that hath his Hand to it.
Pray, my Lord, observe this is a kind of reflecting Evidence, and I Would have no more made of it than the thing will bear.
They only bring it, and make use of it against, as a pretence of his.
But it is a very reflecting Evidence.
Surely there is no body here that offers it as such: We use it only to this purpose, to shew that, who was a Party to this Murder, did use all the means that he could to keep it private; and endeavoured to prevent Strangers coming in that Night to discover it, and therefore pretended these Orders. If he had any such Orders, I suppose he will prove them, we do not say he had them; but 'tis a great Evidence, when he pretended to such privacie, that he and his Fellows had something to do that was not fit to be known by every body.
He may make use of any body's Name, and pretend what he will; but I suppose he will prove it from the Gentleman-Usher, if it be true.
We have one Witness more to call, my Lord, and that is one. Call.
He is a Neighbour to, and will give your Lordship an Account what Applications have been made to him, to tamper with him for Money, to keep away, and not give Evidence in this Cause. Pray Sir, are you Mr.Neighbour?
Yes, Sir, I am.
Pray then tell what you know.
I know him very well, his Wife hath been with me last Week, and asked me if I knew what time he was with me on, the 16th of. I desired time to recollect my self: And she called four or five times after, and I did recollect my Memory and told her, That I was not with him at all that.
Why, this was reasonable, and fair enough to do.
It was so, my Lord, but pray had you no Money offered you?
No Sir, none at all; and I told hercould not remember thatwas with him that day.
But you may remember it very well, whencame from the Queen,came to you.
My Lord,was out of Town that, from two a Clock in the Afternoon, till nine at Night.
Well, well, this is nothing: The Woman was willing if she could, to have counterproved the Evidence, and what she did was fair; she offered no Money, nor did it in an indirect way.
My Lord, We have now done with our Evidence for the King, and leave it till we hear what they say.
What do you say for your selves, you shall have all the free liberty you will desire?
In the first place,take God to be my Witness, thatam wholly innocent, as to the Matter that is charged upon me: And as to what is said, that I dogg'd Sir; I can prove that I went into my Lodging at eight a Clock, and did not stir out.
Come, call your Witnesses.
,, Mrs., and.
Let them come in there.
This is DoctorNiece, and his House-keeper.
Well, what do you ask her?
I desire to know what you can say about my being in my Lodging, and not going out.
He hath lived in our Family seven or eight Years.
Your Family, What is your Family?
With my Uncle.
Who is your Uncle?
Doctor; we left him in the House always when we were absent from it, he was always a trusty Servant, never kept ill hours, always came home by eight a Clock at Night.
Always, For how long?
Ever since we came over last into.
When was that?
Inlast.
Were you there that Night Sirwas kill'd?
I was.
VVhat Night was that?
I don't know, my Lord, I heard of it in the Town.
VVhen did you first hear of it?
Thethat he was found.
Did you not hear of it on the?
Yes, I did.
VVho could tell you thebefore?
Why, my Lord, in the Town it was said he was missing from Saturday, and a Thursday he was found.
What can you say concerning, that he was not out after eight a clock that night?
He was a very good Servant to my Unkle, and never kept ill hours, but always came in by eight a clock or before.
Were not you out your self that night?
No not I, never out after that hour.
Pray how can you give such an accompt of Mr., as if he was always in your company?
He came in to wait at Table, and did not stir out afterwards.
Pray what Religion are you of? are you a Papist?
I know not whether I come here to make a profession of my Faith.
Are you a Roman Catholick?
Yes.
Have you a dispensation to eat Suppers on Saturday-nights?
I hope you did not keep him company after Supper all night.
No I did not, but he came in to wait at Table at Supper.
I thought you had kept fasting on Saturday-nights.
No, my Lord, not on Saturday-nights.
How many Dishes of Meat had you to Supper?
We had no Meat, though we did not fast.
Can you speak positively as to this night, the Saturday that he was kill'd?
He was at home that night.
And where was he the Sunday?
He was at home.
And you are sure he was at home every night?
Yes, while we were in Town.
Where was you all that Wednesday-night you speak of?
I was at home in my Lodging.
How is it possible for you to say, that, who was not your constant Companion, did not go out afterwards?
No, he was not my constant Companion.
How then can you charge your Memory that he was at home?
Come, you are to speak truth, though you are not upon your Oath. Can you charge your memory to say, that he came in constantly at eight a clock at night?
Yes, I can, because I saw him come in constantly; and when he came in, I always sent my Maid to bar the door.
Maid, can you say that he was always at home at night?
I can say he never was abroad after eight at night.
Why you did not watch him till he went to bed, did you?
We were always up till eleven a clock at night.
Was he in your company all that while?
I beg your pardon; if your Lordship saw the Lodgings, you would say it were impossible for any to go in or out, but that they must know it within. We were constant in our hours of going to Supper; our doors were never opened after he came in to wait at Supper.
You may say any thing to a Heretick for a Papist.
This is a mighty improbable business.
Where was he a Wednesday-night?
At home.
They have a general Answer for all Questions.
Who kept the Key of your Lodgings?
The Maid.
Hathnever kept the Key?
No, my Lord, the Maid.
How do you know but that the Maid might let him out?
My Lord, Mrs.said at first there was but one Key; but before the Duke ofshe said there was six or seven Keys.
Look you what tricks you put upon us to blindus. You come and tell us that he was every night at home by eight a clock, and did not stir out, for there was but one Lock, and the Maid kept the Key; and yet there were three or four Keys to it.
There was but one Key to that which kept the door fast.
, how many Keys were there?
She confessed there were four or five.
What time was it that you carried him out ofon Wednesday-night?
It was about ten or eleven of the clock.went to fetch the horse.
We had never been out of our Lodgings after eight a Clock, since we came to Town.
When were you out of Town?
In.
Nay, now, Mistris, you have spoil'd all; for inthis business was done.
You have undone the man, instead of saving him.
Why, my Lord, I only mistook the Month.
You Woman
what Month was it you were out of Town?
In.
'Tis apparent you consider not what you say, or you come hither to say any thing will serve the turn.
No, I do not, for I was out of Town in, came to Town the latter end of.
You must remember what you said, that you came toinlast, and from that time he was always within at eight a clock at night.
Except that time that we were out of Town, which was inthe Summer-time. And it is impossible but if the Body was in the House, assaid it was, but I must see him, or some of us must. I used to go every day into that little Room for something or other, and I must needs see him if he were there.
You told me just now you were not upon Confession; and I tell you now so, you are not.
Well, Woman, what say you?
We came to Town upon a Monday,was the Sunday following; and from that time neither he nor the Maid used to be abroad after eight a clock: we kept very good hours, and he always waited at Supper, and never went abroad after he came in to wait at Supper: and the Lodging was so little, that nothing could be brought in, but they must know that were within.
This is a lower Room than the Chamber, is it not?
'Tis even with the Dining-Room, my Lord.
What say you, Sir?
My Lord, it is an extraordinary little place; as soon as you get up eight steps, there is a little square Entry, and there is this Room on the one Hand, and the Dining-Room on the other. I think there is a pair of staires to go down at one Corner of the Entry, as I think, but the Body was laid in a little square Room at the head of the steps.
And must you go into the Room to go to the Dining-Room?
No, 'tis a distinct Room; but the Key was always in the door, and every day some body went into it for something or another.
Will you undertake to say it was always in the door?
Yes, it constantly was.
For my own part I will not judge you: but that his Body should be carried there about nine a clock at night a Saturday-night, and remain there till Monday-night, 'tis very suspitious, that if you were in the House, as you say you were, and used to go into that Room every day, you must either hear it brought in, or see it.
But we did neither, my Lord.
It is well you are not Indicted.
Mr., you know all these things to be false,.
I lay nothing to your charge; but you said before the Duke of, thatwas gone from his Lodgings before that time.
What say you, Sir?
There arose a little quarrel between them about the time that Mr.did leave those Lodgings.said it was a Fortnight after;said when he was upon his Examination, that the same Saturday that Sr.was missing, he was treating with his Landlord, and from that time, to the time he went to his new House, it was about a Week or a Fortnight.
But he did pretend he was gone before?
No my Lord, I did not.
Two Witnesses upon Oath Sware it, and you said it your self, and gave it under your Hand.
My Lord? --
Nay you will not hear, but you will talk, you say one thing now, and you set another under your Hand.
Have you not a Brother that is in the Proclamation, onea Priest?
I have a Brother whose name is.
Is he not a Priest, and in the Proclamation?
I hope, I must not Impeach my Brother here I said upon my Oath he came to Town a Monday, andday was the Sunday following, andwent away a Fortnight after.
She Swore then two or three Days afterDay.
You must know we can understand you through all your Arts. It was not convenient for you at that time to say, that Mr.went away about a Fortnight after, for then the thing that was charged to be done part of it in your House, would have been within the Fortnight, for it was theof, but then you said only two or three Days.
She did say my Lord, that abouttwo or three or four Days after he went away.
I begg your pardon, I only said I could not tell the time exactly.
Well have you any more to say.
There was never a Day but I went into that Room for something or other, and if any body came to see me, there was so little space that the Footmen were always forced to be in that Room.
Were you there upon Sunday?
Yes, my Lord, I was.
Well I will say no more, call another Witness.
What can you say, Maid?
My Lord, I did never miss him out of the House at those Hours.
May be you did not look for him.
I did go down every Night to the Door to see if it were lockt, and I went into the Parlor to see that things were safe there.
You are a Roman Catholick, are you not?
Yes, I am.
Might not he go out of the House, and you never the wiser?
Yes, for I did not watch him continually.
All that she says may be true by the Place. The Servants keep down a paire of Stayres in the Kitchin, and any one may come in or go out having so many Keys, and they not know it that are below.
I went into the Chamber every morning as I went to Market.
Have a care what you say, and mind the Question I ask you, Were you there on the Sunday in that Room where they say Sr.Body was laid?
I cannot say that I was in that Room, but I called in at the Door every Day, and I was the last up every Night.
Ile say that for thee, thou hast spoke
with more care then any of them all.<|endoftext|>Knight,.
My Lord, I cannot say, I am not guilty.
Yes my Lord, I am guilty.
Thomas Harison,.
If I should say I am not guilty, I should wrong my own conscience, yet in matter and form as it is laid down in this Indictment, I am not guilty.
Then you plead not guilty.
My Lord, I desire I may have counsell afforded me, and time to make my defence, for I have been kept close prisoner in a dark Chamber, and had no notice of my Tryal till five of the clock in the morning, that I am altogether unprepared.
I am not guilty.
By the Lords Lawes, and by the good and wholesome Laws of the Land.
God send thee a good deliverance,
Henry Heveningham,.
Not guilty.
I will present an humble Petition to His Majesty and the Parliament, and desire your Lordships to let me return to my lodgings in the Tower, for I have some infirmities upon me.
How wilt thou be tryed?
God send thee a good deliverance.Isaac Pennington, Henry Martin, Gilbert Millington, Robert Tichborn, and Robert Lilborn.
Henry Martin,.
My Lord, I desire the benefit of the Act of Indempnity.
My Lord, If I plead, I loose the benefit of that Act.
My name is not there my Lord, my name is, not,
there is no difference betweenandin Law, the difference is very little in the sound,
art thou guilty or not guilty.
.
Are you guilty or not guilty.
What do you desire counsel for? you are indicted for matter of Treason, for Contriving and Composing the Kings death: you have justification to plead if it be Treason, it is not justifiable; or if it be justifiable, it is not Treason.
How will you be tryed?
God send thee a good deliverance.
, Hold up thy hand, what sayst thouart guilty of this horrid Act of Treason or not guilty.
Sir we must do in this case as in all other cases, either you must plead guilty or not, if you plead not guilty, you shall be heard hereafter: but you must plead guilty or not guilty.
Then plead not guilty.
How wilt thou be tryed?
God send thee a good deliverance.
Robert Tichborn,.
My Lord, I have for some space been kept close prisoner, and I am altogether unable in the Law to speak for my self.
Spare me one word, if the Tryal be matter of Law, give leave for Counsel to plead for me: if I should plead my own case in Law, I might be overpowred, since there are many persons of great eminency and honour will plead against me, but I will not trouble you long if this be the case in matter and form as I am here Indicted, I am not guilty.
By God and the Country.
Owen Roe, Hold up your hand, art thou guilty of this horrid act of Treason or not guilty.
How wilt thou be try'd?
God send thee a good deliverance.
Robert Lilburn,?
I have been close Prisoner my Lord these twenty dayes, and none suffered to come to me, and I am told that I ought to have counsel before I plead.
My Lord, if you over rule me, I cannot help it.
My Lord, I must say in matter and form as I stand indicted, I am not guilty.
By God and the Country.
Call,
are ye guilty or not guilty?
How wilt thou be tryed.
;
Art thou guilty or not guilty.
How wilt thou be tryed.
God send thee a good deliverance.<|endoftext|>Thou here standest charged for High-Treason; This Court requires that thou give a positive answer, whether guilty or not guilty.
There is matter of Fact laid to your charge, which amounts to Treason, and there is no Law allowed in matters of Fact.
We are all here your Jury as well as your Judges; we are the number of two or three Juries, and your Jury is well known, for they are chosen by the Parliament; you are to plead to your Indictment.
If you had looked upon the Act of Parliament, that would have told you; it speaks of examination of witnesses, it speaks of your confession, and answer, and of your Default; and if you do not plead to it, will be very penal to you.
Acts of Parliament make Justice and Law, they are both; they think fit to change the custom of Trials that have been in former times, and all persons must submit to it: And the Parliament hath thought fit to make this Court both Jury and Judges; and therefore I require that you answer, whether Guilty or not Guilty.
You are before your Jury and Judges; Parliaments have great care of the Rights of the people, and have appointed this Court, and His Highness hath appointed you to be tried by us, you ought therefore to plead to your Indictment.
If you have any particular Exception to any man, you may make it; you were Sir of the Parliament, when this Act was made
Although a Prisoner, yet you are bound by Act of Parliament.
You have heard your Charge read, and Plea demanded; the Court again requires of you, that you give a positive Answer, whether Guilty or not?
All the People ofmust submit to the Laws of, to the Authorities of, all must submit to my Lord Protector and Acts ofParliament: We sit here by Authority of his Highness, by a Commission under the great Seal of, and by Authority of Parliament, and you must submit to our Authority.
;.
He may enjoy as much benefit by the Laws as any, if he have not forfeited it, and I desire he may be put to answer.
The Court again require you to plead to you Indictment.
Your Plea then is, that you are not Guilty.
Yes.
What discourse had you with Sirtouching the delivering up of?
What Officer were you Mr.?
I have the command of a Company, and of the.
Mr., what Letter was that Sirsent to his Son?
The Contents were thus, Thatwould speak to the two men to be very importunate with the Twelve. Sirpromised so many men. That he offered Capt.20to raise Forty men.
How many men did he tell you should be atnear?
600 to march into.
What men did he tell youwould raise?
He saidwould raise 50 or 60 men when he pleased; and that Captshould have a deputation to command the Castle under me, he said he had good hopes of Col., and that he had a Commission for him if he would accept of it.
There ought to be no good fellowship in Treason.
I never visited him but by ColCommission. Siraccording to his Engagement upon receit of a Piece gave me another Commission running thus;took it again and burned it.
Sir, was it you that filled up that blank Commission?
Waterhouse12 March, 1657.
Did you see that Commission delivered toby Sir?
Yes, I did, he delivered it to him in the Castle, about the second oflast.
Overton,.
This is the same Commission, and
I here see it is dated 12., 1657.
My Lord, We are upon our Oaths.
I saw Sirgive it to Majorin his own Chamber in the Castle of, and Maj.bid me read it, which I did.
MajAprilMarch.
What Treaty was between Sirand you at? are you an Officer there?
Yes.
How long have you been an Officer there?
About ten years.
What proceedings was there betweenand you? What meetings had you?
was he your prisoner?
Ifhath any thing to object, he may.
I am a Lieutenant to Major, I was desired to go and see16, who told me That he had great confidence in me, I said to him, why? He told me he thought I had good thoughts of the King; his Son told me he heard the King was to come in, and to bring in a considerable Army, but knew not when. Next day I went again to Sirand asked him if he would walk on the Leads, which he did, and there I told him I had been pondering on the words he last spoke to me, who then hugging me said, I have a great deal of confidence in you, there is a design in agitation to bring in the King with a considerable Army, but he did not know how soon it would be, but told me I should have notice of it, and said that the King had promised pardon to all Officers but the Lord Protector and Lord.
-- WaterhouseThomson. WaterhouseThomson,WaterhouseThomsonWaterhouseThomson?Thomson.
Sirhave you any thing else to say?
D. D. Thou standest here charged of High Treason: this Court requires you to give your positive Answer, whether guilty or not guilty.
AustinCoke,Fathers,Rastal's Reports,Plowden's Commentaries.
Dr., I am sorry, truly, very sorry, to see such an one as you in that place; but you are impeached of High Treason: All favour will be shewn you according to the rules of Justice. I think you desire Counsel.
The Court is Counsel for you, your business is to plead to the Indictment; you are required by the Court to answer whether guilty or not guilty.
Dr., we sit here by a Commission under the Great Seal of, in pursuance of an Act of Parliament; that's our Commission.
D.We know our owne Authority, it is not usual to read Commissions to Prisoners; the Laws ofand Acts of Parliament are to be submitted to.
Those that are to judge you are very well known, you consented your self to the Judges, we are all chosen by Act of Parliament, the Parliament hath consented to it; we are chosen Judges, and are your Judges by Act of Parliament.
Here be very many, and we have been all called this morning, as the course is, and we sit now as your Judges.
Dr., I must tell you theis any seventeen, or more of them; if we are here seventeen, or more, we are aby that Commission: We are here I believe forty or fifty.
You are a person of parts, and therefore we may delight to hear you, but we must keep our selves to the business of the Court: You are required by the Court to answer the Impeachment.
Eliz.Leicester'sPlowden
The Doctor did profess his ignorance in the Laws, yet pretends more knowledge than the Court: The Court are here, and know themselves lawfully authorized to try you. Dr., if you please to proceed to give your Answer whether guilty or not, you will find the Justice of the Court to be according to the Laws of.
This Gent. hath it by Tradition, not by his owne knowledge; but the Case he mentions cannot parallel this: The Act of Parliament saith, an hundred and fifty, or any seventeen; here are three seventeens.
I think the Commission is directed to your Lordships, or any seventeen:, &c.The meaning whereof is, that those seventeen, or more respectively, should hear,There were severalforand: 17 for, 13 for, &c. That Case out of, differs clearly from this: For, if a Commission be directed, and there be no, then the Commissioners must all certifie. We humbly conceive that if your Lordships be here seventeen, or more, you are fully authorized to proceed.
In many Cases you have aof persons, such and such men: It's true, here is noof persons, but aof the number; and if there be aof seventeen it is warrantable.
You have heard the words of the Act of Parliament read, Authority is given to the Commissioners, or any seventeen or more of them:; that is, forseventeen, or more of them; and you have heard the judgement of the Court upon that. That which you speak of in relation to my Lord ofCase is true; if a Commission be directed to Commissioners, and noappointed, then all must certifie: But by the Act of Parliament, and the Commission made in pursuance of it, theis seventeen: But here are three.
We did not call our selves to be your Judges, by being named your Judges by Act of Parliament, we have power to declare to you what the Law is by that Act of Parliament, I have declared it.
.
, what you say now, or what you say hereafter besides this, you have time to speak to, as to matter of Law, after matter of fact hath been tryed; if you plead to matter of fact, what you say to the Court as to matter of Law, we shal be ready to heare it, apply your selfe to the Court in matter of fact. The Court asks you whether guilty or not.
, you have offered very much touching the jurisdiction of the Court, in conclusion you must acquiesce; I must put you up to plead, you know the danger if you doe not plead being required; you stand mute and doe not plead, it is as equally dangerous to you as if you had confessed the crimes.
You speak of common friendship; what is common friendship, but to be a friend to the publick Government? if you have been a friend to the Government and peace of this Nation, you need not fear to plead to the Indictment: And therefore I require you to plead to it.
God forbid.
If you please, the Dr. knows that there must be a Judgment in which we must acquiesce: This is that Judicature that calls you before them; you sit by the highest Authority of, an Act of Parliament in the first place, a Commission under the great Seal in the second place, and a Commission of his Highness, against whom, of which the Doctor is one; I desire he may give an Answer to the Impeachment, that being done, we shall have liberty on both sides to speak to what is Justice, and Law, and Fact; if you are not guilty, be you assured that this Court will not take your blood upon them, you have a very fair Court.
The Court hath had much patience in hearing of you thus long, you having not so much as owned their Authority; if you will not own us, we will own you; therefore I require the Clerk to enter it, that we have required you to plead.
, you here stand charged of High Treason against his Highness the Lord Protector, and the Common-wealth; the charge hath been readto you, the Court have demanded whether guilty or not guilty, they again demand of you whether guilty or not guilty.
My Lord, you was pleased to tell the Doctor, that you will own him when he doth not own you, but, my Lord, his flying in your faces, and taxing you this is not to be endured; I wish he would have that consideration of himself, that if he doth not own your Authority, you expect to be owned, and by it he will be supposed to be guilty of all those Crimes that are laid to his charge, and by not pleading he doth confess them; that will be an high scandal to Mr. Doctor; Therefore to vindicate your self, I desire you to answer.
I beseech Mr. Doctor to consider his case, he is not brought as a Champion for the people of, as he stands charged he appears to you to be contrary affected; I humbly beg that he would be pleased to plead, that so his innocency may be clear'd.
My Lord, some of his own Coat have acknowledged the like Authority before him; but if Mr. Doctor be peremptory in this that he will not own your Authority, and plead to his charge, I must do my duty, that is, humbly to pray the Court, that if he refuse to answer, I must pray their Judgment, and acquaint him with the words of the Act;
So that, my Lord, in default of Answer, if Mr. Doctor will not plead to this, my Lord I must thereupon pray that you will proceed according to the Act, as in cases of High Treason which is very penal. I have no more to say.
TrecillaRich. 2.Shipmoney.
, you have heard the Clause of the Act of Parliament read to you, whereby you may understand, either we must proceed upon your Answer, or else to Judgment upon your refusal; if upon your answer you clear your innocency, then those freemen that you speak of may faithfully embrace you; but if you will not answer, we must proceed to Judgment; I am sorry for your Robe sake, but if you will not answer, you cannot acquit your self, you thereby confess it: therefore let me advise you for your Robe sake to follow the best Counsel, that is, to put yourself upon that which Prisoners must do: Answer to it, guilty or not guilty.
Pray who is the Judge? you must clear your self to him.
If there be any here that are of another opinion, let him declare himself:you lose your self mightily in saying this one thing so often, and we lose our time; I require you again to plead.
I can say no more but pray your justice.
Doctor, I am called upon by the Court, because of your refusal to answer, but I pity you very much, and therefore desire once more the patience and favour of the Court, that they would give you leave to answer; therefore Mr. Doctor, that we may not record your standing mute and refusing to answer, I shall once more in favour to you require you to answer. Clerk, stay your hand a while.
you stand here charged on behalf of his Highness the Lord Protector, of Treason against him and this Common-wealth, you have heard the Charge, the Court hath several times demanded your answer, and you refuse; they the third time require your answer whether guilty or not guilty.
Edward?
You have a very great Grand Jury, forty persons, and we have power upon a special Act of Parliament to give order for a Charge to be brought in against you, and we have according to that power and Authority given order for this Charge to be brought in against you, and you are to answer to it.
My Lord, now it is the second part to the same tune; I know there are many others upon the same string when this is resolved; Sir, This is the Grand Jury, the Petty Jury, and your Judge; they require you to give your Answer, whether guilty or not guilty.
For the copy of your Charge it was never granted to any Prisoner indicted for High Treason; For Counsel, you are now upon matter of Fact, whether guilty or not guilty.
I have a word to inform him, I would not press any thing against him which in my Judgment I thought not legal, you have given him your resolution as to the Jurisdiction, there is nothing now to say but guilty or not guilty; he must bring himself to be a party or else nothing can be asked.
Calway'sPortugal.
You are not upon your Triall, you must plead and joyn issue, and then we will consider whether we will try you now or no; Yet there is many a man hath been brought to prison the same day, found the same day, and tryed the same day.
Humphry StaffordHenryLilburn.Nicholas,MaynardRolph,Cook --Dyerfol.: Arundell.
For matter of fact it was never allowed; but if he plead, and if any matter of Law doe arise, that's doubtfull to the Court, then the Court if they doubt of it, assigne Counsell; but the prisoner must plead first to the matter of fact. For a man to be accused the same day, and tryed the same day, is no new thing: For Counsell, if any thing arise in matter of Law then it may be considered: TheEmbass. Brother came, and was accused and tryed the same day. We shall humbly pray that he may plead guilty or not guilty; if any matter of Law arise your Lordships may doe him justice.
England;.
You are now in generals, you speak of several Acts of Parliament, and you would have Counsel to plead, Counsel was never allowed in this case upon such a general desire; Many that stand about you may have a prejudice to you, and think you are loth to plead; I have called upon you often: if we should once record the refusall, it would be very penall. I would advise you to plead to the Indictment.
This is a very ill President to the justice of; I suppose that you will allow him all favour, but the justice ofmust be prefer'd against all persons whatsoever: The jurisdiction is setled to the satisfaction of the Dr. himselfe; if he will bring himselfe a party and aske any thing of you, that must be by pleading, till then he can aske nothing.
I shall desire it may be no more thus.
I shall say no more to you, we must make our Authority appear to you either by trying of you, or judging of you; will you be try'd?
My Lord we must not suffer this, pray if he will not be otherwise satisfied I must require your strict justice. Your words they are seditious: this shews the spirit of the man.
Truly my Lord this is insufferable; Mr. Doctor hath had as much respect as ever any had. I have attended many, I never saw the like in my time; you have had the patience to heare him oppose your selves, your Authority, your persons, and to strike at the root of all. Mr. Doctor I would have you to carry your selfe with more respect. This shews that much of what is charged against him is true: If you will scorn the Court say it positively.
--
Mr. Doctor pray remember that Text,. Will you plead or not?
My Lord, if you please, I did receive your comands to prepare this charge against this Doctor; in obedience to you I have done it, not willingly against your person Mr. Doctor; I have some others to proceed against, if you will please that Mr. Doctor may dispatch one way or other. I must pray your final sentence if you doe not plead immediately.
You have heard that I must require your answer; you must plead guilty or not guilty.
We shall then take consideration of it, now is not a time.
England;.
I am required by the Court, before I enter your refusall I require your answer.
England.
I shall desire, because you may see what I say comes from the Act of Parliament, I shall desire the words may be read to him, what is to be done if he refuse to answer.
I must take you off, you have been required to answer, often required, and having refused, in the name of the Court I require the Clerk to record it, and pray take away your prisoner.
Take him away, take him away.
Esq; Thou standest here charged with High Treason against his Highness the L. Protector and the Common-wealth: You have heard the Charge read; the Court demands your positive answer thereto, whether guilty or not guilty.
You are impeached of High Treason: We require your Answer.
You are to be tryed by the Laws of, Act of Parliament, and Commission under the Great Seal of, in pursuance of that Act.
It is not granted to any.
It is visible who are your Judges, they are named by Act of Parliament: We are your Judges.
The Act of Parliament doth not require it.
You shall have all the privileges that may be; but you must first plead.
My Lord, Pray let him know what is done, to warn him, lest he fall into the same condemnation. There was one but a little before you that demanded the same thing, and the Court hath ruled it otherwise, and he hath received his Sentence. I tell you of it that you may beware, and know how to carry your self. If Mr.will be pleased to answer whether or no guilty of those Crimes, then he shall have a fair Trial, and full Examination: If otherwise, the same Sentence must be required as before; that is, upon refusall, the Judgement pronounced for High Treason.
The Act is publick; the Court are not to give you an account of their authority, or the way of their proceedings; they require your Answer.
You seem to be a young Gentleman; I wish rather you would plead Not guilty, or make an ingenuous Confession.
My Lord President, You have offered that Gent. very seasonable advice, I wish he may be capable of it: And, in these debates, I wish he doth not lose those advantages that are really intended for him. For the Court, it is by Act of Parl. and no Judicature incan require any account of their proceedings.
By way of advise I do acquaint you that there is no Judicature insuperiourto this, but the Parliament immediately; You are here Impeached of a very high Crime, High Treason, it may be a strain of youth, the first step to mercy is confession.
My Lord, this Gent. was a fellow-prisoner with one that went before him, he walks after the same steps, I wish he may not run into the same Error; these things were urged by Dr., and the Court hath ruled that their Authority is sufficient, and therefore my Lord be pleased that this Gent. may plead.
I am afraid you have received ill advise from others, possibly you know what is become of that Prisoner that spake of Counsel; we cannot assign you Counsel as to matter of Fact; the Law and Act of Parliament have made us your Judges, and therefore you are to plead.
I doubt the Gent. is in jest, we are here to attend by command of his Highness the L. Protector; these Gent. are all sworn by Act of Parliament: it is a little slighting of the Court, to appeal from the Court to the Counsel; but (my Lord) I beseech you he may forbear to say he is overborn. You shall have Justice done if you will plead, if not there was a President but now; if you please to put your self upon the Trial, you shall have a fair Trial.
I do tell you the Court hath given Judgment just now in the like case.
I tell you a President, Sirand Dr..
I humbly conceive that this Court is your Court, and you ought to plead it.
All this that you ask of us now we have declared this morning already to one who was before you at the Bar; theof this Commission is seventeen or any more of them: we must require you again to plead.
That is when there is matter of Law, you have alledged nothing, you are now upon matter of Fact.
Your reason and my reason and all reason must submit to the Law: you are now upon matter of Fact, the single question is, guilty or not guilty.
My advise to you is, that you would put your self upon your Tryal.
The Parliament hath thought fit to go this way, and it is not to be disputed, they that live in this nation are not to dispute it: if that Gent. will please to recollect himself, and not (my Lord) thus expostulate and dispute with the Court of Justice, if he please to put himself upon a Tryal, if he thinks himself innocent, I think it is best; and if he refuse it, his sentence is from himself.
We are clearly of opinion, we have not power in this case to appoint any other Jury, not to summon a Jury, we our selves have taken an oath; you would do well to plead.
They do not.
If you will deal ingenuously with the Court, I think that is best.
It was never done; for any Indictment of High Treason was never delivered to any Prisoner.
Cooke.
, you stand here charged of High Treason; to this charge you plead not guilty, is this your Plea?
Do you stand to your Plea not guilty?
I wish Mr.had done this before, and made himself capable of more favour.
We produce this Gent. (I suppose he is well known to the Prisoner) to prove the Charge; I desire he may declare what he knows.
What do you know concerning the discourses of Mr.with you, touching the bringing in of?
I have been in Mr.company several times, and what I can say will not be much; Mr.did once tell me there was such a design as the bringing in of the King, and he did ask me if I did not know of such a thing; I told him no; he was pleased to tell me somewhat of it: I asked him if he was engaged in it; he told me he was not.
What did he tell you concerning his being entrusted by the King therein?
He told me the King wrote to him, to speak to his friends that they would be ready to assist him when he should come intowith force, which he told me was with 7000 men; this was the chief of all.
Did he not say that he had Commissions from the King?
He did not tell me so, but I have heard him say others had had Commissions, two other Gent. in.
Did he not encourage you thereto? what Arguments did he use?
He spoke to me of it several times.
After what manner?
Onely in commendation of the thing; I heard him say that if there were a necessity,folks would come intoto assist them.
Who was present at any of these discourses?
There was none but him and my self.
At what place, and at what time?
Near his own house at several times; I have told you the main of the discourses.
Mr.?
Above a year since.
Mr.?
I do not know what he means by Encouragement, he onely told me of it.
There was no body by.
About what time did he tell you of this Letter?
About half a year since.
Who was by?
No body my Lord.
Did he tell you it was the King that wrote to him, and therefore it was just to assist him.
I think I heard him say so, I cannot take my Oath of it.
Did he tell you what considerable persons were concerned?
I have heard him speak of some persons that were ingaged in this design, Sir, and one; he said that Sirspake to him to speak to me.
When?
Above a year since, it was since the Parliament.
W. Waller.<|endoftext|>On theof this instant, I received the annexed Note from Mr.; on theI went to him; as soon as I came, he told me, he had something to impart to me in private; we went into a Room alone, and he asked me if I did not hear that there were persons making inquiry to find out some that would amuse those that had impeached the Lords, and those concerned about the Plot. I told him I heard nothing of it. He told me there were such, and that I should find the Game would turn another way; and that I might do my self a kindness, if I pleased. I told him my affairs called me for, that I must be gone on thefollowing. He told me it would be worth my while to stay, and asked me if I could not prove that one Mr.had meetings with Mr., and Mr.. I told him no, for he knew there had been no great friendship of late betwixt us (this I look't upon as an Introduction to the design); but he came close to me, and told me, a person had been with him concerning this matter, and that indeed they had a jealousie of Mr.; and if I would discover any thing of that nature against him, I should have 4 or 500for my pains. To this I seemed to hearken (but was much surprized at this unexpected discourse), and did plainly see their design was to turn the Game another way, as he said before. I did not discourage him, but told him I would consider of it; and if I did not go on, I would see him again; and that he knew well I was very hard to believe this Plot; and then he told methat he could bring a Prisoner in that place to drink a Pot of Ale with me, that could give me an account what a Rogue Mr.was; but I being in haste, took my leave of him, he injoyning me to secresie. At my return I could not meet with Mr., but having some business with Sir, and the Ladyhis Daughter, and being full with this Devilish design, I told the story to them, and said, When I was in, I should hear, and they should find that this was the Game they intended to play, To turn the Plot from themselves, and doubted not they would find some to carry it on. On the(in the morning) I went to Mr.house, and acquainted him with it; he desired me to meet him in the evening, because he desired to consider of it; but told me then, he had no reason to slight it, because the morning before, a Knight
had been with him, and told him there was a design against him of the same kind, and desired him to inquire after it. In the evening I met with Mr., who desired me to keep my Correspondence with the said, and to know of him how I should be secured my payments, and what it was they would have me do. On theI went accordingly to him, and told him I had considered of what we had discoursed before, and had stopt my Journey as to that day; he was very glad to see me, and told me, that the party
had been with him again about the business, and I might get 500without any prejudice to my self; I told him that Money would do me a great kindness at this time (for he knew I had waited a long time here, and that it was very hard with me), therefore desired to know what they would have me to do, and how I should be sure of the 500for I expected it should be a person of good credit that would lay down the 500he told me I should not need to question that, for they were of credit enough. But he that came to him
was only imployed to pay the Money; and if I shall tell him that you will do the business, you shall be sure of the Money; not so, said I, First let me know what it is distinctly, and how I shall be sure of the 500or else I will not stir a foot in it, but be gone on. Saith he, Would you have the Money before-hand? then it may be you will not do it. No, said I, that I do not desire. But will you deposite it in a third hand? Truly, said he, that is very fair, anddoubt not but they will do it (fortold him none wasbetter able to carry it on than you; for Mr.Man was formerly your Servant, and preferred by you to him), and told me, that on, by two or three of the Clock, his friend would be with him again; but that he would be shy of discoursing with me; and desired thatwould come to him
on, and thenshould understand more. Upon my return I acquainted Mr.with the whole discourse, and that I was to leave the Town on, having stayed my utmost time, because I had a Suit depending in Chancery, at; and that if I were not there the beginning of the, it would be great damage to me, because my absence would be looked upon as a Contempt; but Mr.requested me to stay until he had acquainted His Majesty, or one of his Secretaries with it, to know his pleasure as to my going, or stay.
theday of, I was within the Evening; he told me his friend
had left him about half an hour before I came, and that he acquainted him with what I propounded (to wit) that 500should be deposited in a third persons hand; and he told me his friend was contented it should be so, and thought it but reasonable, and therefore was willing to put it into a Goldsmiths hand. I asked him if they had considered the method we should carry this on? and whether they had drawn up the Heads of what I was to swear? He told me, no; but his friend would be with him again upon, and that all things should be prepared and ready for me bymorning. I asked him if it would be convenient for me to meet his friend? he told me not as yet, for he was very wary, shy, and fearful of being betrayed. I told him I thought my meeting with him was not material; only, said I, let him be sure to secure the Money, and he needs not doubt of effecting the business: But, said I, 500is not all that I expect from him for this service, that is but a melting Cash, and I have a great charge, and a Wife and six Children, and you know I have lyen a longer time waiting here, almost to my utter ruin, and have been very hardly dealt with. Now, if I accomplish this, I shall lose my interest in all other Parties, and therefore expect he should make me a very good interestwith that Party. Never fear that, said he, you shall have interest enough with them; and if we can but turn off this Plot, there is no danger of effecting our business; for, saith he, the King will believe nothing of it. Well, said I, I must trust to you to make my interest; but I partly see how things are like to go, and think it wisdom to come in with the beginning of the Game. Saith he (Swearing by his Maker) Never fear, if we turn off this Plot, we do our business, and you will be made for ever. But, said I, Why will you defer this while? That is a great while, and delays are not good. Said he, I did not expect you till: But ifhear any thing in the mean time,will write to you, and it shall be left at Mr.Lodging. I hear, said I, the Parliament is Prorogued; and that is true enough, said he; and till they meet again, we can receive no great damage: But, said he, I hear the Apprentices are ready to rise and pull down. Said I, then I suppose that is, because the men
are not executed; What else, said he? and that is our great danger, that the people should run into a Rebellion before we accomplish our business: I asked him if he had taken an Abstract, as he said he would, of what that man in the Prison could Swear, to take off Mr.Evidence; I have not yet, said he, but we are sure enough of him, and shall makeRogue enough. Pray, said I, what will he Swear? That the very morning the Proclamation came forth concerning Sir, Mr.came to his Chamber, and asked him if he had ever seen Sir; For, said he, if I knew what a like man he was, I could easily get 500and however, I am resolved to hazard my Neck, but I will have it; and that he would have had this man go with him toto see the Rooms, and promised to get him Money, if he would go with him. But, said I, Mr., it is said Mr.was out of Town before the Proclamation came out; that is not so, saith he, for this mans Wife went into the Countrey with him. A great deal of discourse more we had, all tending to the incouraging of me to carry on this business, to turn this Plot to be afor the destruction of the, and then I should be made for ever. When I paid the Reckoning, and was coming away, said he, you will always come to your charge, but I hope the end will pay for all.Onthe, at Night, I went to Mr., expecting to have the Moddel how they would have me Swear, and in what Goldsmiths hand they would put the 500But as soon as ever I came to him, he told me that he had been put into such a fright, that he was never in all his life before; for, said he, Mr., Mr., Sir, and another Justice have been with me; they called for Irons, one would have fifty pound weight, another would have an hundred pound weight put upon me. At length Sirbegan to examine me, and told me, he knew I could discover a great deal; for I desired the rest might be put out of the room, and I confest all to him and the other Justice, they both promising me my pardon. Have you confest all, said I? how could I help it, said he? I was never in such a fright in all my life; and they promised me my pardon. What have you confest, said I? I have told them, said he, That 500was to be deposited in a Goldsmiths hand, and that I had sent for a Gentleman, and treated with him about it. Have you told them my name, said I? He paused at that; No, said he; but I must tell them, but I thought first to acquaint you with it. Then said I, it seems you have left me in the lurch, and have made no provision for me; therefore since it is so, you will give me leave to play my own Game; and seeing you have confest, let us now play our Game as well as we can on the other side, and be sure to be ingenuous, and confess whatever we know. I will immediately to Sir, and declare the whole Story. Pray do so, saith he, neglect no time, but go this night. And so we parted.
on or about theof, 1678, I was at thein, where was one, a prisoner there for debt; who desired me to do so much for him, as to carry a Note for a friend of his that was a prisoner also, unto one, that lived in, near my Lodging; and said, If I would procure any of his friends to come to his friend there, he would have Money enough, whereof he should have a share; and also it would be a great kindness to him; whereupon I told him I would, provided he would write it quickly. Whereupon he called forth his friend, and they two consulted together, and he wrote two or three Lines, and gave them me for the said. But whencame to the placewas directed, they told me he was gone out of Town in obedience to the Kings Proclamation. And sotroubled my self no further, but put the Note in my pocket: The next Morning he sent a Messenger to me, to know whathad done in it;desired him to tell the said Mr., that the said Mr.was gone out of Town in Obedience to His Majesties Proclamation. About Ten days afterhad occasion for some waste-paper; and putting my hand in my pocket,lit on this Note thatshould have delivered to, and opened it, and read it, and found in it these words written, or to this effect.This run in my mind, till about theinstant at night; and then being at Mr.Coffee-house at,there met with a paper, intituled, Mr.Edmondbury Godfreys; wherein (amongst other things) there was mentioned twoPriests to be guilty, the one named, and the other;whereupon it came into my mind, that the Man thatcarried the Note for into, must be the same, because by that Note he was committed by the name of, and his name was. The next morning being the 16 of this instant(thinking to have found the samethere),came there; and coming to the aforesaid, and after some secret discourse, I asked him how his friend did thatcarried the Note for? he told me he procured Bail. Thenasked him what he was? he told me that he was a, and one of those that(that Rogue) had impeached.asked him how he could get Bail, being a? he told me, they did not know that he was a; and those that were his Bail, would be Bail for any for money; and he gave them Ten Shillings a piece, and the fellow that procured them Five Shillings; and he got them the Copy of his Commitment for them to move by; and thepromised him, the said, seven pounds. But he had not left it him as yet, and so we left this discourse, and came to other.
he having sent by me a Letter, and a Petition to Mrs., a Gentlewoman that belongs to the Dutchess of(whom he calls Cozen), whereby to get him some money for his present supply: buthaving no opportunity to meet with her, could give him no account of that matter; whereupon he said, that he was in such want, that if he had not help speedily, he should be turned into the Common-side:told him that money was so scarce with me, thatcould not lend him any; but ifcould,would. Whereupon he called me aside into the corner of the Yard, by the Gate, and told me, That ifwould be rul'd by him, he would put me into a way whereby we should have money enough.asked him how? he told me, ifwould but joyn and assist to villify the evidence ofand, those two Rogues; whereuponlaughed at him, and said, It is impossible; their evidence was grounded upon too good a foundation: he told mewas mistaken, andshould hear otherwise in a little while. Upon theofwent again to him, thinking to have gained something of him, what was become of this, but could not; and was taking my leave of him, saying,must go home, forhad some business to write for, to send by Captain, who was to go on; hetold me, he believed he should stop CaptainJourney; I told himhoped not so; he answered, it should not be to his prejudice. To whichanswered, why then with all my heart, forwould not be against any thing that should be for his good. And so there came in onean, that had some business with him. And so we parted.
I being with Mr.at thein, Mr.desired me I would do him the kindness as to
carry another Letter for his Friend to one Capt., who had 
three
or four Employments in theof. I told him I 
would
if it was any kindness to him. Sowithwent together, and wrote a Letter to this Capt.of
the; the Contents were much the same with that I carried
to. I carried it to the, and Capt.was
not at home; so I delivered it to his Wife. As soon as she read
it, the tears were in her eyes; she struck her hand on her breast,
saying,. She thankt me very kindly, and told me, as
soon as her Husband came home, she would give it him. When
I went to Mr.again, he thankt me for carrying the
Letter for his Friendto the; and told 
me
Capt.had been with them, and treated them very civilly
with wine and meat, and had spent five shillings upon them. I
askedwhat Capt.was? He told me he was a
trueman. I asked him if he was a Papist. He hath taken
the Oaths, said he; but he is a well-wisher to us. Onthe 16 of,desired me to carry a Letter 
from
himself to Capt., which Letter signified to him that his
Friendwas gone, and how that he had
promised him 7to discharge himself out of the prison, but 
had not
yet been so good as his word; therefore desired that he would
take some speedy course that he may have the 7to discharge
himself out of prison. This Letter I delivered to Capt.own hand in the. He read it, and told me he was very
glad his Friend was out; but that he had never seen him since;
pray, says he, remember me kindly to, and tell
him, For his kindness to my Friend, I will do him all the
service I can.Upon theofI was desired by Sir, to go to Mr., to try what more I 
could get
out of him. On theI went to him, and told him,
that I had met with Sir; and he seemed to
be angry, and thought we had not discovered all we knew.
And I told, that although he had promise of his
pardon, yet it was expected he should do more for it than
he had done: As for my part, said I, you know I could
discover nothing, but what discourse passed betwixt you and I,
and that I have done to the full. Therefore, if you know
any more, I would advise you to discover it; for since you
have gone thus far,think you ought not to conceal any
thing of what you know more. The Grand thing I perceive
they desire of you, and that which I think is all they can
expect from you, is, That you would declare from whom the
500was to come. He thankt me for my advice, and told
me, that he believed Sirhad not perused
all his Examinations, for he had Answered all the Questions
they had asked him. And if they had any thing more to ask
him, he would Answer them.
 Upontheof, I acquainted Sirwith what he said; he ordered him to be brought to
the Council onmorning, where I met him at the door,
before he was call'd; I told him, I supposed the chief Question
that would be put to him, would be, Whose this 500was?
and begged of him that he would discover what he knew of it.
Upon his coming out from the Council, I asked him if that was
not the question they put to him? he told me it was: I asked
him what account he had given them? he told me he thought
they were satisfied, for they were very kind to him, and promised
him, that so long as they lived, he should have the protection of
that Board.
 On, theoffollowing, Sirseeing me at the Council-door, called me in, and asked
me if I thought I could get any more out of? I told
him I thought he had given him satisfaction when he was before
them, concerning whose the money was. I told Sirthe
discourse I had withat his going into the House, and 
at
his coming back; then he told me, that he had not been
ingenuous with them, for he would confess nothing at first; but after
some Questions being asked in general terms, he told them that
it was to come from some of the Lords in the Tower; anddesired me that I would go once more to see if I could get any thing
from him.
 The next morning the Earl ofdesired to speak with me;
I waited upon him at the Council-Chamber; and he desired me
also, that I would go to Mr.to see what I could get
further from him.
 So ontheof, I did go to Mr., and told him I was not come on a bare visit; but I 
was
commanded by the Earl of, and Sir(whom
he knew had both been very kind to him) to advise him, that
he would be ingenuous, and discover what further he knew in
this business. Truly, said I, I suppose all they do expect from
you, is, that you would make some clear discovery unto them
whose money this 500was; saith he (Swearing by his Soul)did tell them all I knew,thought they had been 
satisfied; no,
said, they are not; and Sirsaith, you 
were
not ingenuous; for you only in general terms told them it was
some of the Lords money in the Tower. Now if you can
remember which of the Lords money it was, it may satisfie them; for
they judg, and so do, and every one else, thatwould
as easily tell you whose it was, as to tell you it was some of the
Lords in the Tower. I could get no more from him a great while;
but after we had sate and discoursed some time, he told me thatwas to be before the Council the next day, and he
believed he should be sent for too; I suppose not, said, 
unless I
have some better account to give them from you: so just upon
my coming away I told him; Mr., I am sorry I can give
no better account of my Journey to you; therefore pray, if you
have any thing more to say, let me know it before I go. After he
had paused a while, By my Soul, said he; I cannot
remember the particular name of any Lord but one. Who is that,
said I? my Lord, saith he; but all the rest were to
contribute to it; fortold me he was to go immediately to 
the
Tower, to get the Money raised; and that it was a difficult thing
to get all the Lords together; and if he should go to them
apart, they might make scruples, and so delay the business;
and therefore he should make all the haste he could to get
the Money ready.<|endoftext|>Masterif you had desired councell, the Court would have assigned you councell.
comming home to my Chamber, about six of the clock in1647. I found Sircame rushing out of my Chamber, and Ientring saw my Wife throwne upon the ground; with all her cloathes torne, the Bed-cloathes torne and hanging halfe way upon the ground, my Wife crying and wringing her hands, with her clothes all torne off her head, her wrist sprained, Sirhaving throwne her violently upon the ground, whereupon (seeing her in this condition) I asked her what was the matter, shee said Sirhad Ravisht her,
Sirtwo or three dayes before he did the Rape, sayd that he would ravish my Wife though hee were sure to be hang'd for it,
upon my Oath here I sweare, That hee sayd hee would force mee to my Bed, and then hee swore God damme him, Hee would lie with mee though hee were sure to die for it, Then hee takes mee and carries mee to a narrow place, betwixt the wall of the Bed, and with his hands forst my hands behinde mee, and lay with mee whether I would or no,
did not your Husband come to the Chamber doore at that time you pretended you were Ravisht, and knockt at the Doore, and I would have opened the Doore for him, whereupon you sayd it is my Husband; Let the drunken sotstay without, and would not suffer mee to open the Doore,
I sayd that if shee were ravisht as shee sayd shee was, shee must take her Oath of it, and indite him for it,
but
being desirous to be further satisfyed in the businesse I often sought for Sir, but could not finde him, for he had fled away from his Chamber. One day I met him accidentally in Holborne, and desired to speake a word with him, he said he knew my businesse, but he was in hast and could not stay; Then I told him I had earnest businesse with him, and I must speake with him, he told me he suspected I had some designe to arrest him, and would not be perswaded to stay, then I prest him that if he would goe and drink a cup of Ale with me, he should come in no danger concerning any arrest at all; and if he then would give me satisfaction, I would not prosecute the Law against him:
onely to know what he could say to excuse himselfe,
why, would you believe him before your Wife?
my meaning was, if he could satisfie me that my Wife was consenting to it, I had rather wave the prosecution, then bring my Wife and my selfe upon the Stage, and this was my intent and no other.
a little before there was my Maide, but I had sent her to the Bakers house for bread for my Children, and in the meane while he lay with me against my will.
when I came from the Bakers, and entring into the chamber, I found my Mistris crying, and wringing her hands, saying she was undone; Also I heard Sirsay, before I went to the Bakers, that he would lie with my Mistris though he were sure to be hang'd for it, and at all timeshee was wont to bee very uncivill and rude when hee came into the Chamber, once hee came into the Chamber when I was there alone, truly I durst not stay in the Chamber, for I alwayes observed, Hee was so lecherously given that any Woman were shee never so meane would serve his turne; At this time hee came into the Chamber a little before I went to the Bakers, I observed hee would faine have throwne my Mistris upon the Bed when I was there, but my Mistris would not yeeld to it, but grew very angry with him, and said hee was a rogue, and spit in his face, yet hee would not let her alone, whereupon I told him, if hee would not be more civill, I would call my Master, and if hee came hee would crack his crowne for using my Mistris so uncivilly, Siranswered hee cared not a fart for my Master, and that for mee I was a base Jade, and hee would make mee kisse his, &c.
he said she should kisse something that was about him, what was that
he said he would make her kisse his Arse,
you must not be so nice in speaking of the truth, being upon your Oath,
then came Masterto tamper with me from Sir, and told me if I pleas'd to accept a hundred pounds, I should have it, if I would be reconciled to Sir;
my Mistris made this answer, shee cared not for Money:
it is true I said so; and this I said, If Sirwould downe upon his knees and confesse that he had wronged me, I would not prosecute him; But also I resolved that he should weare a Paper upon his Breast, or upon his Hatt, acknowledging the injury hee had done unto mee: if hee would doe so I would forgive him.
Masterdesired to know where the place was in the roome where I was ravisht; whereupon I shewed him. Masteranswered, this was such a place for such a businesse, that if I had the strongest woman in England, I could ravish her here whether she would or no.
Masterthough you bee not upon your Oath, you must speake the truth in the feare of God,
I know it my Lord; what I shall say here, I speake it in the presence of God, and I shall speake no more then what is truth:
I hope no body will believe what this Knavewill say, for he is a Knave knowne to all the Court, and all that heare him.
I thanke God this is the second time I ever came in this womans company; the first time was at the Fleece Taverne in Covent-Garden, where shee came to a Dinner to meete with Sir: As soone as shee had set downe at the Table, shee said, that this Roome had bin a very lucky Roome to her, for once before in this Roome, shee had received three hundred pounds for the composition of a Rape, which shee charged a Reverend Divine withall, I shall not stick to name the man, shee said it was Doctor; this Doctor I knew him to be a reverend man, and to my knowledge is long since dead, and in Heaven; and for this Rape, shee said then, shee would not take under two thousand pounds for a composition of Sir, which shee said was little enough, hee having three thousand poundsa yeere.
you should carry your selfe soberly and moderately, otherwise you will disparage all your witnesses.
after shee had sate a while at the Table, she takes her stoole and removes it to sit next to Sir, and there falls hugging and imbracing him; whereupon said hee, surely Lady whereas you say Sirhath ravisht you, I doe beleive rather you have ravisht him, otherwise you would not make so much of him,
after I had seriously look't upon her, and seeing of her a woman of that strength and body, I said, I wondred Sirshould ravish her: She said, do you wonder at that, why? doe you take me behinde the Bed there (there being a Bed in the Roome) and see whether you may not doe it.
afterwards shee asked him, now what will you give my Maide you must give her something? he answered, Ile give her fourty shillings, whereupon shee said, fourty shillings, that's base, you cannot give her lesse then ten pound and a Silke Petticoate; But saith shee, when he went forth of Doores, shee said he gave her nothing but a Groat, and so basely went his way.
tis true shee tooke mee, and shewed mee the place where shee was ravisht.
Why sayd shee should you wonder at that? Then shee put her Leg betweene my Legges, and put her other Legge setting her Foote against the Wall, saying now in this posture as you see mee here, I my selfe could ravish any Woman whatsoever.
the night before shee went to preferre the Bill of Inditement against Sir, shee confest shee had like to have beene distracted and runne mad, for feare the Grand Jury should finde the Bill.
take heede what company you
keepe hereafter, Let this be a warning to
you, you see in what danger you bring
your selfe to in keeping ill
Company.<|endoftext|>,, whither so fast? What, turn'd flincher! Why, you wo' not leave us?
Where are the Women? Pox I'm weary of guzling, and begin to think them the better Company.
Then thy Reason staggers, and thou'rt almost drunk.
No faith, but your Fools grow noisy -- and if a man must endure the noise of words without Sence, I think the Women have the more Musical Voices, and become Nonsence better.
Why, they are at that end of the Gallery; retired to their Tea, and Scandal; according to their Antient Custome, after Dinner. -- But I made a pretence of following you, because I had something to say to you in private, and I am not like to have many opportunities this Evening.
And here's this Cox-Comb most Critically come to interrupt you.
Boys, Boys, Lads, where are you? What do you give ground? Mortgage for a Bottle, ha?, this is your trick; you're always spoiling Company by leaving it.
And thou art always spoiling Company by coming into 't.
Pooh, ha, ha, ha, I know you envy me. Spite, proud spite, by the Gods! and burning envy. -- I'le be judged byhere, who gives and takes Raillery better, you or I. Pox, Man, when I say you spoil Company by leaving it, I mean you leave no body for the Company to Laugh at. I think there I was with you, ha?.
O' my word,, that was a home thrust; you have silenc'd him.
Oh, my dear, let me perish, if thou art not the Soul of Conversation, the very Essence of Wit, and Spirit of Wine, -- the Deuce take me if there were three good things said; or one, understood, since thy Amputation from the body of our Society. -- He, I think that's pretty and Metaphorical enough: I' Gad I could not have said it out of thy Company. --, ha?
Hum, ay, what is't?
O,! What is't! nay gad I'll punish you for want of Apprehension: The Deuce take me if I tell you.
No, no, hang him, he has no tast, -- but dearexcuse me, I have a little business.
Prithee get thee gone; thou seest we are serious.
We'll come immediately, if you'll but go in, and keep up good Humour and Sense in the Company, prithee do, they'll fall asleep else.
I'gad so they will -- well I will, I will, Gad you shall Command me from theto the. -- But the Deuce take me if I say a good thing till you come. -- But prithee dear Rogue, make haste, prithee make haste, I shall burst else. -- And yonder your Uncle my Lordswears, he'll Disinherit you, and Sirthreatens to disclaim you for a Son-in-Law, and my Lordwon't Dance at your Wedding to Morrow; nor the Deuce take me, I won't Write your Epithalamium -- and see what a condition you're like to be brought to.
Well, I'll speak but three words, and follow you.
Enough, enough,, bring your Apprehension along with you.
Pert Cox-Comb.
Faith 'tis a good natur'd Cox-Comb, and has very Entertaining follies -- you must be more humane to him; at this Juncture it will do me Service. -- I'll tell you, I would have mirth continued this day at any rate; tho' Patience purchase folly, and Attention be paid with noise: There are times when Sense may be unseasonable, as well as Truth. Prithee do thou wear none to day; but allowto have Wit, that thou may'st seem a Fool.
Why, how now, why this extravagant proposition?
O, I would have no room for serious design; for I am Jealous of a Plot. I would have Noise and Impertinence keep my LadyHead from Working: ForHell is not more busie than her Brain, nor contains more Devils, than that Imaginations.
I thought your fear of her had been over -- is not to Morrow appointed for your Marriage with, and her Father Sir, come to settle the Writings, this day, on purpose?
True, but you shall judge whether I have not reason to be allarm'd. None besides you, and, are acquainted with the Secret of my Auntviolent Passion for me. Since my first refusal of her Addresses, she has endeavour'd to do me all ill Offices with my Uncle; yet has managed 'em with that subtilty, that to him they have born the face of kindness; while her Malice, like a Dark Lanthorn, onely shone upon me, where it was directed. Still it gave me less perplexity to prevent the success of her displeasure, than to avoid the importunities of her Love; and of two evils, I thought my self favour'd in her aversion: But whether urged by her despair, and the short prospect of time she saw, to accomplish her designs; whether the hopes of her revenge, or of her Love, terminated in the view of this my Marriage with, I know not; but this Morning she surpriz'd me in my Bed. --
Was there ever such a Fury! 'tis well Nature has not put into her Sexes power to Ravish. -- Well, bless us! Proceed. What follow'd?
What at first amaz'd me; for I look'd to have seen her in all the Transports of a slighted and revengful Woman: But when I expected Thunder from her Voice, and Lightning in her Eyes; I saw her melted into Tears, and hush'd into a Sigh. It was long before either of us spoke, Passion had ty'd her Tongue, and Amazement mine. -- In short, the Consequence was thus, she omitted nothing, that the most violent Love could urge, or tender words express; which when she saw had no effect: but still I pleaded Honour and nearness of Blood to my Uncle; then came the Storm I fear'd at first: For starting from my Bed-side like a Fury, she flew to my Sword, and with much ado I prevented her doing me or her self a mischief: having disarm'd her; in a gust ofPassion she left me, and in a resolution, confirm'd by a Thousand Curses, not to close her Eyes, till she had seen my ruin.
Exquisite Woman! But what the Devil does she think, thou hast no more Sense, than to get an Heir upon her Body to Disinherit thy self: for as I take it this Settlement upon you, is, with a Proviso, that your Uncle have no Children.
It is so. Well, the Service that you are to do me, will be a Pleasure to your self; I must get you to engage my Ladyall this Evening, that my Pious Aunt may not work her to her Interest. And if you chance to secure her to your self, you may incline her to mine. She's handsome, and knows it; is very silly, and thinks she has Sense, and has an old fond Husband.
I confess a very fair Foundation, for a Lover to build upon.
For my Lord, he and his Wife will be sufficiently taken up, with admiring one another, andGallantry, as they call it. I'le observe my Uncle my self; andhas promised me, to watch my Aunt narrowly, and give me notice upon any suspicion. As for Sir, my wise Father-in-Law that is to be, my Dearhas such a share in his Fatherly fondness, he would scarce make her a Moment uneasy, to have her happy hereafter.
So, you have Mann'd your Works: But I wish you may not have the weakest Guard, where the Enemy is strongest.
, you mean; prithee why should you suspect him?
Faith I cannot help it, you know I never lik'd him; I am a little Superstitious in Physiognomy.
He has Obligations of Gratitude, to bind him to me; his Dependance upon my Uncle is through my means.
Upon your Aunt, you mean.
My Aunt!
I'm mistaken if there be not a Familiarity between them, you do not suspect: For all her Passion for you.
Pooh, pooh, nothing in the World but his design to do me Service; and he endeavours to be well in her esteem, that he may be able to effect it.
Well, I shall be glad to be mistaken; but, your Aunts Aversion in her Revenge, cannot be any way so effectually shown, as in bringing forth a Child to Disinherit you. She is Handsome and cunning, and naturally wanton.is Flesh and Blood at best, and opportunities between them are frequent. His Affection to you, you have confessed, is grounded upon his Interest, that, you have transplanted; and should it take Root in my Lady, I don't see what you can expect from the Fruit.
I confess the Consequence is visible, were your suspicions just, -- but see the Company is broke up, let's meet 'em.
Out upon't, Nephew -- leave your Father-in-Law, and me, to maintain our ground against Young People.
I beg your Lordships Pardon. -- We were just returning. --
Were you, Son? Gadsbud much better as it is -- good, strange! I swear I'm almost Tipsy -- t'other Bottle would have been too powerful for me, -- as sure as can be it would. -- we wanted your Company, but Mr.-- where is he? I swear and vow, he's a most facetious Person -- and the best Company. -- And, my Lord, your Lordship is so merry a Man, he, he, he.
O foy, Sir, what do you mean? Merry! O Barbarous! I'd as lieve you call'd me Fool.
Nay, I protest and vow now, 'tis true; when Mr.Jokes, your Lordships Laugh does so become you, he, he, he.
Ridiculous! Siryou're strangely mistaken, I find Champagne is powerful. I assure you, Sir, I Laugh at no bodies Jest but my own, or a Ladies; I assure you, Sir.
How? how, my Lord? What, affront my Wit! Let me perish, do I never say any thing worthy to be Laugh'd at?
O foy, don't misapprehend me, I don't say so, for I often smile at your Conceptions. But there is nothing more unbecoming a Man of Quality, than to Laugh; Jesu, 'tis such a Vulgar Expression of the Passion! every body can Laugh. Then especially to Laugh at the Jest of an Inferiour Person, or when any body else of the same Quality does not Laugh with him. Ridiculous! To be pleased with what pleases the Croud! Now when I Laugh, I always Laugh alone.
I suppose that's because you Laugh at your own Jests, I'gad, ha, ha, ha.
He, he, I swear tho', your Raillery provokes me to a smile.
Ay, my Lord, it's a sign I hit you in the Teeth, if you show 'em.
He, he, he, I swear that's so very pretty , I can't forbear.
I find a Quibble bears more sway in your Lordships Face, than a Jest.
Sir, if you please we'll retire to the Ladys, and Drink a Dish of Tea, to settle our Heads.
With all my heart. -- Mr.you'll come to us, -- or call me when you're going to Joke, I'll be ready to Laugh incontinently.
But does your Lordship never see Comedies?
O yes, sometimes, -- but I never Laugh.
No?
Oh, no. -- Never Laugh indeed, Sir.
No, why what d'ee go there for?
To distinguish my self from the Commonalty, and mortify the Poets; the Fellows grow so Conceited, when any of their foolish Wit prevails upon the side Boxes. -- I swear, -- he, he, he, I have often constrained my Inclinations to Laugh. -- He, he, he, to avoid giving them encouragement.
You are Cruel to your self, my Lord, as well as Malicious to them.
I confess, I did my self some violence at first, but now I think I have Conquer'd it.
Let me perish, my Lord, but there is something very particular and novel in the Humour; 'tis true, it makes against Wit, and I'm sorry for some Friends of mine that Write, but -- I'gad, I love to be malicious. -- Nay, Deuce take me, there's Wit in't too -- and Wit must be foil'd by Wit; cut a Diamond with a Diamond; no other way, I'gad.
Oh, I thought you would not be long, before you found out the Wit.
Wit! In what? Where the Devil's the Wit, in not Laughing when a Man has a mind to't.
O Lord, why can't you find it out? -- Why there 'tis, in the not Laughing -- don't you Apprehend me? -- My Lord,, is a very honest Fellow, but harkee, -- you understand me. Somewhat heavy, a little shallow, or so. -- Why I'll tell you now, suppose now, you come up to me -- nay, pritheebe instructed. Suppose, as I was saying, you come up to me, holding your sides, and Laughing as if you would bepiss your self -- I look grave, and ask the cause of this Immoderate Mirth. -- You Laugh on still, and are not able to tell me -- still I look grave, not so much as smile. --
Smile, no, what the Devil should you smile at, when you suppose I can't tell you?
Pshaw, pshaw, prithee don't interrupt me. -- But I tell you, you shall tell me -- at last. -- But it shall be a great while first.
Well, but prithee don't let it be a great while, because I long to have it over.
Well then, you tell me, some good Jest, or very Witty thing, Laughing all the while as if you were ready to die -- and I hear it, and look thus. -- Would not you be disappointed?
No; for if it were a witty thing, I should not expect you to understand it.
O foy, Mr., all the World allow Mr.to have Wit; my Wife says, he has a great deal. I hope you think her a Judge?
Pooh, my Lord, his Voice goes for nothing. -- I can't tell how to make him Apprehend, -- take it t'other way. Suppose I say a witty thing to you?
Then I shall be disappointed indeed.
Let him alone,, he is obstinately bent not to be instructed.
I'm sorry for him, Deuce take me.
Shall we go to the Ladies, my Lord?
With all my heart, methinks we are a Solitude without 'em.
Or, what say you, to another Bottle of Champaign?
O, for the Universe, not a drop more I beseech you, O Intemperate! I have a flushing in my Face already.
Let me see, let me see, my Lord, I broke my Glass that was in the Lid of my Snuff-Box. Hum! Deuce take me, I have encourag'd a Pimple here too.
Then you must mortifie him, with a Patch; my Wife shall supply you. Come, Gentlemen,.
I'll hear no more. -- Y' are False and Ungrateful; come, I know you false.
I have been frail, I confess, Madam, for your Ladyships Service.
That I should trust a Man, whom I had known betray his Friend!
What Friend have I betray'd? Or to Whom?
Your fond Friend, and to me; can you deny it?
I do not.
Have you not wrong'd my Lord, who has been a Father to you in your wants, and given you being? have you not wrong'd him in the highest manner, in his Bed?
With your Ladyships help, and for your Service, as I told you before. I can't deny that neither. -- Any thing more, Madam?
More! Audacious Villain. O what's more, is most my Shame, -- have you not Dishonoured me?
No, that I deny; for I never told in all my Life: So that Accusation's Answer'd; on to the next.
Death, do you dally with my Passion? Insolent Devil! But have a care, -- provoke me not; For, by the Eternal Fire, you shall not scape my Vengance. -- Calm Villain! How unconcern'd he stands, Confessing Treachery and Ingratitude! Is there Vice more black! -- O I have Excuses, Thousands for my Faults; Fire in my Temper, Passions in my Soul apt to every provocation; oppressed at once with Love, and with Despair. But a sedate, a thinking Villain, whose Black Blood runs temperately bad, what excuse can clear? one, who is no more moved with the reflection of his Crimes, than of his Face; but walks unstartled from the Mirrour, and streight forgets the hideous form.
Will you be in Temper, Madam? I would not talk, not to be heard. I have been
a very great Rogue for your sake, and you reproach me with it; I am ready to be a Rogue still, to do you Service; and you are flinging Conscience and Honour in my Face, to rebate my Inclinations. How am I to behave my self? You know I am your Creature, my Life and Fortune in your power; to disoblige you, brings me certain Ruin. Allow it, I would betray you, I would not be a Traytor to my self: I don't pretend to Honesty, because you know I am a Rascal: But I would convince you, from the necessity of my being firm with you.
Necessity, Impudence! Can no Gratitude incline you, no Obligations touch you? Have not my Fortune, and my Person, been subjected to your Pleasure? Were you not in the nature of a Servant, and have not I in effect made you Lord of all, of me, and of my Lord? Where is that humble Love, the Languishing, that Adoration, which once was paid me, and everlastingly engaged?
Fix'd, Rooted in my Heart, whence nothing can remove 'em, yet you. --
Yet, what yet?
Nay, Misconceive me not, Madam, when I say I have had a Generous, and a Faithful Passion, which you had never favour'd, but through Revenge and Policy.
Ha!
Look you, Madam, we are alone, -- pray contain your self, and hear me. You know you Lov'd your Nephew, when I first Sigh'd for you; I quickly found it, an Argument that I Lov'd; for with that Art you veil'd your Passion, 'twas imperceptible to all but Jealous Eyes. This discovery made me bold; I confess it; for by it, I thought you in my Power. Your Nephew's Scorn of you, added to my hopes; I watch'd the Occasion, and took you, just Repulsed by him, warm at once with Love and Indignation; yourDisposition, my Arguments, and happy Opportunity, accomplish'd my Design; I prest the yielding Minute, and was blest. How, I have Lov'd you since, Words have not shown, then how should Words express.
Well, mollifying Devil! -- And have I not met your Love with forward Fire?
Your Zeal I grant was Ardent, but misplac'd; there was Revenge in view; that Womans Idol had defil'd the Temple of the God, and Love was made a Mock-Worship, -- a Son and Heir, would have edg'd Youngupon the brink of Ruin, and left him nought but you to catch at for Prevention.
Again, provoke me! Do you wind me like a Larum, only to rouse my own still'd Soul for your Diversion? Confusion!
Na, Madam, I'm gone, if you Relapse, -- what needs this? I say nothing but what your self, in open hours of Love, have told me. Why should you deny it? Nay, how can you? Is not all this present Heat owing to the same Fire? Do you not Love him still? How have I this day Offended you, but in not breaking off his Match with? Which e're to Morrow shall be done, -- had you but Patience.
How, what said you-- another Caprice, to unwind my temper.
By heaven, no; I am your Slave, the Slave of all your Pleasures; and will not rest till I have given you peace, would you suffer me.
O', in Vain I do disguise me from thee, thou know'st me, know'st the very inmost Windings and Recesses of my Soul. -- Oh! I burn; Married to Morrow! Despair strikes me. Yet my Soul knows I hate him too: Let him but once be mine, and next immediate Ruin seize him.
Compose your self, You shall Enjoy and Ruin him too, -- Will that please you?
How, how? Thou Dear, thou precious Villain, how?
You have already been tampering with my Lady?
I have: She is ready for any Impression I think fit.
She must be throughly perswaded, thatLoves her.
She is so Credulous that way naturally, and likes him so well, that she will believe it faster than I can perswade her. But I don't see what you can propose from such a trifling design; for her first Conversing with, will convince her of the contrary.
I know it. -- I don't depend upon it. -- But it will prepare some thing else; and gain us leasure to lay a stronger Plot: if I gain a little time, I shall not want Contrivance.
Indeed, Madam! Is it Possible your Ladyship could have been so much in Love?
I could not sleep; I did not sleep one wink for Three Weeks together.
Prodigious! I wonder, want of sleep, and so much Love, and so much Wit as your Ladyship has, did not turn your Brain.
O my Dear, you must not rally your Friend, -- but really, as you say, I wonder too, -- but then I had a way. -- For between you and I, I had Whymsies and Vapours, but I gave them vent.
How pray, Madam?
O I Writ, Writ abundantly, -- do you never Write?
Write, what?
Songs, Elegies, Satyrs, Encomiums, Panegyricks, Lampoons, Plays, or Heroick Poems.
O Lord, not I, Madam; I'm content to be a Courteous Reader.
O Inconsistent! In Love, and not Write! if my Lord and I had been both of your Temper, we had never come together, -- O bless me! What a sad thing would that have been, if my Lord and I should never have met!
Then neither my Lord and you would ever have met with your Match, on my Conscience.
O' my Conscience no more we should; thou say'st right -- for sure my Lordis as fine a Gentleman, and as much a Man of Quality! Ah! Nothing atall of the Common Air, -- I think I may say he wants nothing, but a Blue Ribbon and a Star, to make him Shine, the very Phosphorus of our Hemisphere. Do you understand those Two hard Words? If you don't, I'll explain 'em to you.
Yes, yes, Madam, I'm not so Ignorant. -- At least I won't own it, to be troubled with your Instructions.
Nay, I beg your Pardon; but being Derived from the, I thought you might have escap'd the Etymology. -- But I'm the more amazed, to find you a Woman of Letters, and not Write! Bless me! how canbelieve you Love him?
Why Faith, Madam, he that won't take my Word, shall never have it under my Hand.
I Vowa pretty Gentleman, but Methinks he wants a Manner.
A Manner! what's that, Madam?
Some distinguishing Quality, as for example, theorof Mr.; the Solemnity, yet Complaisance of my Lord, or something of his own, that should look a little; he is too much a Mediocrity, in my mind.
He does not indeed affect either pertness, or formality; for which I like him: Here he comes.
And my Lord with him: pray observe the difference.
Impertinent Creature, I could almost be angry with her now.
My Lord, I have been telling my dear, how much I have been in Love with you; I swear I have; I'm not asham'd to own it now; ah! it makes my heart leap, I vow I sigh when I think on't: my dear Lord! ha, ha, ha, do you remember, my Lord?
Pleasant Creature! perfectly well, ah! that look, ay, there it is; who could resist! 'twas so my heart was made a Captive first, and ever since 't has been in Love with happy Slavery.
O that Tongue, that dear deceitful Tongue! that Charming Softness in your Mien and your Expression, and then your Bow! Good my Lord, bow as you did when I gave you my Picture, here suppose this my Picture --
Pray mind, my Lord; ah! he bows Charmingly; nay, my Lord, you sha'n't kiss it so much; I shall grow jealous, I vow now.
I saw my self there, and kissed it for your sake.
Ah! Gallantry to the last degree -- Mr., you're a Judge; was ever any thing so well-bred as my Lord?
Never any thing; but your Ladyship, let me perish.
O prettily turn'd again; let me die, but you have a great deal of Wit: Mr., don't you think Mr.has a World of Wit?
O, yes, Madam.
O Lord, Madam --
An infinite deal!
O Jesu, Madam --
More Wit than any Body.
I'm everlastingly your humble Servant, Deuce take me, Madam.
Don't you think us a happy Couple?
I vow, my Lord, I think you the happiest Couple in the World, for you are not only happy in one another, and when you are together, but happy in your selves, and by your selves.
I hopewill make a good Husband too.
'Tis my Interest to believe he will, my Lord.
D'e think he'll Love you as well as I do my Wife? I'm afraid not.
I believe he'll Love me better.
Heavens! that can never be; but why do you think so?
Because he has not so much reason to be fond of himself.
O your humble Servant for that, dear Madam; well,, you'll be a happy Creature.
Ay, my Lord, I shall have the same reason for my happiness that your Lordship has, I shall think my self happy.
Ah, that's all.
Your Ladyship is in the right; but I'gad I'm wholly turn'd into Satyr. I confess I Write but seldom, but when I do -- keenI'gad. But my Lord was telling me, your Ladyship has made an Essay toward an Heroick Poem.
Did my Lord tell you? Yes I vow, and the Subject is my Lord's Love to me. And what do you think I call it? I dare Swear you won't guesse --, ha, ha, ha.
Because my Lord's Title's, I'gad, ha, ha, ha, Deuce take me veryand Surprizing, ha, ha, ha.
He, Ay, is not it? -- and then I call my Lord; and my self, what d'e think I call my self?
may be, -- 'gad I cannot tell.
, that's all; just my own Name.
I'gad very pretty -- Deuce take me if your Ladyship has not the Art of Surprizing the most Naturally in the World, -- I hope you'll make me happy in Communicating the Poem.
O, you must be my Confident, I must ask your Advice.
I'm your Humble Servant, let me perish -- I presume your Ladyship has Read?
O yes, and, anduponand. -- My Lord you must not be Jealous, I'm Communicating all to Mr..
No, no, I'll allow Mr.; have you nothing about you to shew him, my Dear?
Yes, I believe I have. -- Mr., comewill you go into the next Room? and there I'll shew you all I have.
I'll walk a turn in the Garden, and come to you.
You're thoughtful,?
I'm thinking, that tho' Marriage makes Man and Wife One Flesh, it leaves 'em still Two Fools; and they become more Conspicuous by setting off one another.
That's only when Two Fools meet, and their follies are oppos'd.
Nay, I have known Two Wits meet, and by the opposition of their Wits, render themselves as ridiculous as Fools. 'Tis an odd Game we're going to Play at: What think you of drawing Stakes, and giving over in time?
No, hang't, that's not endeavouring to Win, because it's possible we may lose; since we have Shuffled and Cutt, let's e'en turn up Trump now.
Then I find its like Cards, if either of us have a good Hand, it is an Accident of Fortune.
No, Marriage is rather like a Game at Bowls, Fortune indeed makes the match, and the Two nearest, and sometimes the Two farthest are together, but the Game depends entirely upon Judgment.
Still it is a Game, and Consequently one of us must be a Loser.
Not at all; only a Friendly Tryal of Skill, and the Winnings to be Shared between us. -- What's here, the Musick! -- Oh, my Lord has promised the Company a New Song, we'll get 'em to give it us by the way.
Pray let us have the Favour of you, to practice the Song, before the Company hear it.
You shall have my thanks below.
Gads bud! I am provoked into a Fermentation, as my Ladysays; was ever the like read of in Story?
Sirhave patience, let me alone to rattle him up.
Pray your Ladyship give me leave to be Angry -- I'll rattle him up I Warrant you, I'll firk him with a.
You firk him, I'll firk him my self; pray Sirhold you Contented.
Bless me, what makes my Father in such a Passion! -- I never saw him thus before.
Hold your self Contented, my Lady, -- I find Passion coming upon me by inspiration, and I cannot submit as formerly, therefore give way.
How now! will you be pleased to retire, and --
No marry will I not be pleased, I am pleased to be angry, that's my pleasure at this time.
What can this mean!
Gads my life, the man's Distracted, why how now, who are you? What am I? 'Slidikins can't I govern you? What did I Marry you for? Am I not to be absolute and uncontroulable? Is it fit a Woman of my Spirit, and Conduct, should be contradicted in a matter of this Concern?
It concerns me, and only me; -- besides, I'm not to be govern'd at all times. When I am in Tranquility, my Ladyshall Command Sir; but when I am provoked to fury, I cannot incorporate with Patience and Reason, -- as soon may Tygers Match with Tygers, Lambs with Lambs, and every Creature couple with its Foe, as the Poet says. --
He's hot-headed still! 'Tis in vain to talk to you; but remember I have a Curtain-Lecture for you, you disobedient, headstrong Brute.
No, 'tis because I won't be headstrong, because I won't be a Brute, and have my Head fortifi'd, that I am thus exasperated, -- but I will protect my Honour, and yonder is the Violater of my Fame.
'Tis my Honour that is concern'd, and the violation was intended to me. Your Honour! You have none, but what is in my keeping, and I can dispose of it when I please -- therefore don't provoke me.
Hum, gads bud she says true, -- well, my Lady, March on, I will fight under you then: I am convinced, as far as Passion will permit.
Inhuman and Treacherous.
Thou Serpent and first Tempter of Womankind. --
Bless me! Sir; Madam; what mean you?
, come away, touch him not, come hither Girl, go not near him, there's nothing but deceit about him; Snakes are in his Peruke, and the Crocodile ofin his Belly, he will eat thee up alive.
Dishonourable, impudent Creature!
For Heaven's sake, Madam, to whom do you direct this Language!
Have I behaved my self with all the decorum, and nicety, befitting the Person of SirWife? Have I preserved my Honour as it were in a Snow-House for this three year past? Have I been white and unsulli'd even by Sirhimself?
Nay, she has been an impenetrable Wife, even to me, that's the truth on't.
Have I, I say, preserv'd my self, like a fair Sheet of Paper, for you to make a Blot upon --
And she shall make a Simile with any Woman in.
I am so amazed, I know not what to speak.
Do you think my Daughter, this pretty Creature; gads bud she's a Wife for a Cherubin! Do you think her fit for nothing but to be a Stalking-Horse, to stand before you, while you take aim at my Wife? Gads bud I was never angry before in my Life, and I'll never be appeased again.
Hell and Damnation! this is my Aunt; such malice can be engendred no where else.
Sir, takefrom his sight; leave me to strike him with the remorse of his intended Crime.
Pray, Sir, stay, hear him, I dare affirm he's innocent.
Innocent! why heark'ee, come hither, heark'ee, I had it from his Aunt, my Sister, -- gadsbud he does not care a Farthing for any thing of thee, but thy Portion, why he's in Love with my Wife; he would have tantalized thee, and made a Cuckold of thy poor Father, -- and that would certainly have broke my Heart -- I'm sure if ever I should have Horns, they would kill me; they would never come kindly, I should dye of 'em, like any Child, that were cutting his Teeth -- I should, indeed,-- therefore come away; but providence has prevented all, therefore come away, when I bid you.
I must obey.
O, such a thing! the Impiety of it startles me -- to wrong so good, so fair a Creature, and one that lov'd you tenderly -- 'tis a barbarity of barbarities, and nothing could be guilty of it --
But the greatest Villain imagination can form, I grant it; and next to the Villany of such a fact, is the Villany of aspersing me with the guilt. How? which way was I to wrong her? for yet I understand you not.
Why, gads my life, Cousin, you cannot be so peremptory as to deny it; when I tax you with it to your face; for now Sirgone, you are.
By Heaven, I love her more than life, or --
Fiddle, faddle, don't tell me of this and that, and every thing in the World, but give me Mathemacular Demonstration, answer me directly -- but I have not patience -- oh! the Impiety of it, as I was saying, and the unparallell'd wickedness! O merciful Father! how could you think to reverse Nature so, to make the Daughter the means of procuring the Mother?
The Daughter procure the Mother!
Ay, for tho' I am notown Mother, I am her Father's Wife; and that's near enough to make it Incest.
Incest! O my precious Aunt, and the Devil in Conjunction.
O reflect upon the horror of that, and then the guilt of deceiving every body; Marrying the Daughter, only to make a Cuckold of the Father; and then seducing me, debauching my purity, and perverting me from the road of Virtue, in which I have trod thus long, and never made one Trip, not one; O consider it, what would you have to answer for, if you should provoke me to frailty? Alas! Humanity is feeble, Heaven knows! very feeble, and unable to support it self.
Where am I? sure, is it day? and am I awake, Madam? --
And no body knows how Circumstances may happen together, -- to my thinking, now I could resist the strongest Temptation, -- but yet I know, 'tis impossible for me to know whether I could or no, there is no certainty in the things of this life.
Madam, pray give me leave to ask you one question. --
O Lord, ask me the question, I'll swear I'll refuse it: I swear I'll deny it, -- therefore don't ask me, nay you shan't ask me, I swear I'll deny it. O Gemini, you have brought all the Blood into my face; I warrant, I am as red as a Turky-Cock; O fie, Cousin!
Nay, Madam, hear me; I mean --
Hear you, no, no; I'll deny you first, and hear you afterwards: For one does not know how ones mind may change upon hearing -- hearing is one of the Senses, and all the Senses are fallible; I won't trust my Honour, I assure you; my Honour is infallible and uncomatible.
For Heaven's sake, Madam. --
O name it no more -- bless me, how can you talk of Heaven! and have so much wickedness in your Heart? May be you don't think it a sin, -- they say some of you Gentlemen don't think it a sin, -- may be it is no sin to them that don't think it so; -- indeed, if I did not think it a sin, -- but still my honour, if it were no sin, -- but then, to Marry my Daughter, for the Conveniency of frequent Opportunities, -- I'll never consent to that, as sure as can be, I'll break the Match.
Death and amazement, -- Madam, upon my knees. --
Nay, nay, rise up, come you shall see my good Nature. I know Love is powerful, and no body can help his passion: 'Tis not your fault; nor I swear it is not mine, -- how can I help it, if I have Charms? And how can you help it, if you are made a Captive; I swear it's pity it should be a fault, -- but my honour -- well, but your honour too -- but the sin! -- well but the necessity -- O Lord, here's some body coming, I dare not stay. Well, you must consider of your Crime; and strive as much as can be against it, -- strive besure -- but don't be melancholly, don't despair, -- but never think that I'll grant you any thing; O Lord, no; -- but besure you lay aside all thoughts of the Marriage, for tho' I know you don't Love, only as a blind for your Passion to me; yet it will make me jealous, -- O Lord, what did I say? Jealous! no, no, I can't be jealous, for I must not Love you, -- therefore don't hope, -- but don't despair neither, -- O, they're coming, I must fly.
So then, -- spight of my care and foresight, I am caught, caught in my security, -- yet this was but a shallow artifice, unworthy of my Matchiavilian Aunt: There must be more behind, this is but the first flash, the priming of her Engine; destruction follows hard, if not most presently prevented.
, welcome, thy presence is a view of Land, appearing to my Shipwrack'd hopes: The Witch has rais'd the Storm, and her Ministers have done their Work; you see the Vessels are parted.
I know it; I met Sirtowing away: Come, trouble not your head, I'll joyn you together e're to Morrow Morning, or drown between you in the attempt.
There's comfort in a hand stretch'd out, to one that's sinking; tho' ne'er so far off.
No sinking, nor no danger, -- come, cheer up; why you don't know, that while I plead for you, your Aunt has given me a retaining Fee; -- nay, I am your greatest Enemy, and she does but Journey-Work under me.
Ha! how's this?
What d'e think of my being employ'd in the execution of all her Plots? Ha, ha, ha, by Heaven it's true; I have undertaken to break the Match, I have undertaken to make your Uncle Disinherit you, to get you turn'd out of Doors; and to -- ha, ha, ha, I can't tell you for Laughing, -- oh she has open'd her heart to me, -- I am to turn you a Grazing, and to -- ha, ha, ha, Marrymy self; there's a Plot for you.
Ha! O I see, I see my Rising Sun! Light breaks thro' Clouds upon me, and I shall live in Day -- O my! how shall I thank or praise thee; Thou hast outwitted Woman. -- But tell me, how could'st thou thus get into her Confidence? -- Ha! How? But was it her Contrivance to perswade my Ladyto this extravagant belief?
It was, and to tell you the truth, I encouraged it for your diversion: Tho it made you a little uneasy for the present, yet the reflection of it must needs be entertaining, -- I warrant she was very Violent at first.
Ha, ha, ha, I, a very Fury; but I was most afraid of her violence at last, -- if you had not come as you did; I don't know what she might have attempted.
Ha, ha, ha, I know her temper, -- well, you must know then, that all my Contrivances were but Bubbles; till at last I pretended to have been long Secretly in Love with; that did my business; that convinced your Aunt, I might be trusted; since it was as much my interest as hers to break the Match: Then she thought my Jealousie might qualifie me to assist her in her Revenge. And, in short, in that belief, told me the Secrets of her heart. At length we made this agreement, if accomplish her designsshe has ingaged to putwith all her Fortune into my Power.
She is most gracious in her Favour, -- well, and dear, how hast thou Contrived?
I would not have you stay to hear it now; for I don't know, but she may come this way; I am to meet her anon, after that I'll tell you the whole matter; be here in this Gallery an hour hence, by that time I imagine our Consultation may be over.
I will; till then, success attend thee.
Till then, Success will attend me; for when I meet you, I meet the only Obstacle to my Fortune., let thy Beauty gild my Crimes; and whatsoever I commit of Treachery or Deceit, shall be imputed to me as a Merit -- Treachery, what Treachery? Love cancels all the Bonds of Friendship, and sets Men right upon their first Foundations. Duty to Kings, Piety to Parents, Gratitude to Benefactors, and Fidelity to Friends, are different and particular Ties: But the Name of Rival cuts 'em all asunder, and is a general acquittance -- Rival is equal, and Love like Death an universal Leveller of Mankind. Ha! but is there not such a thing as Honesty? Yes, and whosoever has it about him, bears an Enemy in his Breast: For your honest man, as I take it, is that nice, scrupulous, conscientious Person, who will cheat no body but himself; such another Coxcomb, as your wise man, who is too hard for all the World, and will be made a Fool of by no body, but himself: Ha, ha, ha. Well for Wisdom and Honesty, give me Cunning and Hypocrisie; oh 'tis such a pleasure, to angle for fair-faced Fools! then that hungry Gudgeon Credulity, will bite at any thing -- Why, let me see, I have the same Face, the same Words and Accents, when I speak what I do think; and when I speak what I do not think -- the very same -- and dear dissimulation is the only Art, not to be known from Nature.
My Lord, can you blame my Brother, if he refuse his Daughter upon this Provocation? The Contract's void by this unheard of Impiety.
I don't believe it true; he has better Principles -- Pho, 'tis nonsense. Come, come, I know my Ladyhas a large Eye, and wou'd centre every thing in her own Circle; 'tis not the first time she has mistaken Respect for Love, and made Sirjealous of the Civility of an undesigning person, the better to bespeak his security in her unfeigned Pleasures.
You censure hardly, my Lord; my Sister's Honour is very well known.
Yes, I believe I know some that have been familiarly acquainted with it. This is a little Trick wrought by some pitiful Contriver, envious of my Nephew's Merit.
Nay, my Lord, it may be so, and I hope it will be found so: but that will require some time; for in such a Case as this, demonstration is necessary.
There should have been demonstration of the contrary too, before it had been believ'd --
So I suppose there was.
How! Where? When?
That I can't tell; nay, I don't say there was -- I am willing to believe as favourably of my Nephew as I can.
I don't know that.
How? Don't you believe that, say you, my Lord?
No, I don't say so -- I confess I am troubled to find you so cold in his Defence.
His Defence! bless me, wou'd you have me defend an ill thing?
You believe it then?
I don't know; I am very unwilling to speak my Thoughts in any thing that may be to my Cousin's disadvantage; besides, I find, my Lord, you are prepared to receive an ill impression from any opinion of mine which is not consenting with your own: But since I am like to be suspected in the end, and 'tis a pain any longer to dissemble: I own it to you; in short I do believe it, nay, and can believe any thing worse, if it were laid to his charge -- Don't ask me my Reasons, my Lord, for they are not fit to be told you.
I'm amaz'd, here must be something more than ordinary in this.
Not fit to be told me, Madam? You can have no Interests, wherein I am not concern'd, and consequently the same Reasons ought to be convincing to me, which create your satisfaction or disquiet.
But those which cause my disquiet, I am willing to have remote from your hearing. Good my Lord, don't press me.
Don't oblige me to press you.
Whatever it was, 'tis past: And that is better to be unknown which cannot be prevented; therefore let me beg you rest satisfied --
When you have told me, I will --
You won't.
By my Life, my Dear, I will.
What if you can't.
How? Then I must know, nay I will: No more trifling -- I charge you tell me -- by all our mutual Peace to come; upon your Duty --
Nay, my Lord, you need say no more, to make me lay my heart before you, but don't be thus transported; compose your self: It is not of Concern, to make you lose one minutes temper. 'Tis not indeed, my Dear. Nay, by this kiss you shan't be angry. O Lord, I wish I had not told you any thing. Indeed, my Lord, you have frighted me. Nay, look pleas'd, I'll tell you.
Well, well.
Nay, but will you be calm -- indeed it's nothing but --
But what?
But will you promise me not to be angry -- nay you must -- not to be angry with-- I dare swear he's sorry -- and were it to do again, would not --
Sorry, for what? 'Death you rack me with delay.
Nay, no great matter, only -- well I have your promise -- Pho, why nothing, only your Nephew had a mind to amuse himself, sometimes with a little Gallantry towards me. Nay, I can't think he meant any thing seriously, but methought it look'd odly.
Confusion and Hell, what do I hear!
Or, may be, he thought he was not enough a-kin to me, upon your account, and had a mind to create a nearer relation on his own; a Lover you know, my Lord -- Ha, ha, ha. Well but that's all -- now you have it; well remember your promise, my Lord, and don't take any notice of it to him.
No, no, no -- Damnation!
Nay, I swear you must not -- a little harmless mirth -- only misplac'd that's all -- but if it were more, 'tis over now, and all's well. For my part I have forgot it; and so has he, I hope -- for I have not heard any thing from him these two days.
These two days! Is it so fresh? Unnatural Villain! 'Death I'll have him stripp'd and turn'd naked out of my doors this moment, and let him rot and perish, incestuous Brute!
O for Heaven's sake, my Lord, you'll ruine me if you take such publick notice of it, it will be a Town-talk: Consider your own and my Honour -- nay, I told you you would not be satisfied when you knew it.
Before I've done, I will be satisfied. Ungrateful Monster, how long? --
Lord, I don't know: I wish my Lips had grown together when I told you -- almost a Twelvemonth -- nay, I won't tell you any more, till you are your self. Pray, my Lord, don't let the Company see you in this disorder -- Yet, I confess, I can't blame you; for I think I was never so surpriz'd in my Life -- Who would have thought my Nephew could have so misconstrued my Kindness -- but willyou go into your Closet, and recover your Temper. I'llmake an excuse of sudden Business to the Company, and come to you. Pray, good dear my Lord, let me beg you do now: I'll come immediately, and tell you all; will you my Lord?
I will -- I am mute with wonder.
Well but go now, here's some body coming.
Well I go -- you won't stay, for I would hear more of this.
I follow instantly -- So.
This was a Master-piece, and did not need my help -- tho' I stood ready for a Cue to come in and confirm all, had there been occasion.
Have you seen?
I have; and am to meet him here about this time.
How does he bear his Disappointment?
Secure in my Assistance, he seem'd not much afflicted, but rather laugh'd at the shallow Artifice, which so little time must of necessity discover. Yet he is apprehensive of some farther design of yours, and has engaged me to watch you. I believe he will hardly be able to prevent your Plot, yet I would have you use Caution and Expedition.
Expedition indeed; for all we do, must be perform'd in the remaining part of this Evening, and before the Company break up; lest my Lord should cool, and have an opportunity to talk with him privately -- my Lord must not see him again.
By no means; therefore you must aggravate my Lord's Displeasure to a degree that will admit of no Conference with him. -- What think you of mentioning me?
How?
To my Lord, as having been privy todesign upon you, but still using my utmost Endeavours todissuade him: Tho' my Friendship and Love to him has made me conceal it; yet you may say, I threatned the next time he attempted any thing of that kind, to discover it to my Lord.
To what end is this?
It will confirm my Lord's opinion of my Honour and Honesty, and create in him a new Confidence in me, which (should this design miscarry) will be necessary to the forming of another Plot that I have in my head -- to cheat you, as well as the rest.
I'll do it -- I'll tell him you hindred him once from forcing me.
Excellent! your Ladyship has a most improving Fancy. You had best go to my Lord, keep him as long as you can in his Closet, and I doubt not but you will mould him to what you please; your Guests are so engaged in their own Follies and Intrigues, they'll miss neither of you.
When shall we meet? -- at eight this Evening in my Chamber; there rejoice at our success, and toy away an hour in mirth.
I will not fail.
I know what she means by toying away an hour well enough. Pox I have lost all Appetite to her; yet she's a fine Woman, I lov'd her once. But I don't know, since I have been in a great measure kept by her, the case is alter'd; what was my Pleasure is become my Duty: And I have as little stomach to her now as if I were her Husband. Should she smoke my design upon, I were in a fine pickle. She has a damn'd penetrating head, and knows how to interpret a Coldness the right way; therefore I must dissemble Ardour and Ecstasie, that's resolv'd: How easily and pleasantly is that dissembled before Fruition! Pox on't that a Man can't drink without quenching his Thirst. Ha! yonder comesthoughtful. Let me think: Meet her at eight -- hum -- ha! by Heaven I have it -- if I can speak to my Lord before -- Was it my Brain or Providence? No Matter which -- I will deceive 'em all, and yet secure my self, 'twas a lucky thought! Well this Double-Dealing is aJewel,
Here he comes, now for me --
Mercy on us, What will the Wickedness of this World come to?<|endoftext|>Morrow, my dear Sister; are you for Church this Morning?
Any where to Pray; for Heaven alone can help me: But, I think,, there's no Form of Prayer in the Liturgy against bad Husbands.
But there's a Form of Law in; and I swear, Sister, rather than see you thus continually discontented, I would advise you to apply to that: For besides the part that I bear in your vexatious Broils, as being Sister to the Husband, and Friend to the Wife; your Example gives me such an Impression of Matrimony, that I shall be apt to condemn my Person to a long Vacation all its Life. -- But supposing, Madam, that you brought it to a Case of Separation, what you urge against your Husband? My Brother is, first, the most constant Man alive.
The most constant Husband, I grant'ye.
He never sleeps from you.
No, he always sleeps with me.
He allows you a Maintenance suitable to your Quality.
A Maintenance! do you take me, Madam, for an hospital Child, that I must sit down, and bless my Benefactors for Meat, Drink and Clothes? As I take it, Madam, I brought your Brother Ten thousand Pounds, out of which, I might expect some pretty things, call'd Pleasures.
You share in all the Pleasures that the Country affords.
Country Pleasures! Racks and Torments! dost think, Child, that my Limbs were made for leaping of Ditches, and clambring over Stiles; or that my Parents wisely foreseeing my future Happiness in Country-pleasures, had early instructed me in the rural Accomplishments of drinking fat Ale, playing at Whisk, and smoaking Tobacco with my Husband; or of spreading of Plaisters, brewing of Diet-drinks, and stilling Rosemary-Water with the good old Gentlewoman, my Mother-in-Law.
I'm sorry, Madam, that it is not more in our power to divert you; I cou'd wish indeed that our Entertainments were a little more polite, or your Taste a little less refin'd: But, pray, Madam, how came the Poets and Philosophers that labour'd so much in hunting after Pleasure, to place it at last in a Country Life?
Because they wanted Money, Child, to find out the Pleasures of the Town: Did you ever see a Poet or Philosopher worth Ten thousand Pound; if you can shew me such a Man, I'll lay you Fifty Pound you'll find him somewhere within the weekly Bills. -- Not that I disapprove rural Pleasures, as the Poets have painted them; in their Landschape everyhas her, every murmuring Stream, and every flowry Mead gives fresh Alarms to Love. -- Besides, you'll find, that their Couples were never marry'd: -- But yonder I see my, and a sweet Swain it is, Heaven knows. -- Come,, don't be angry, he's my Husband, and your Brother; and between both is he not a sad Brute?
I have nothing to say to your part of him, you're the best Judge.
O Sister, Sister! if ever you marry, beware of a sullen, silent Sot, one that's always musing, but never thinks: -- There's some Diversion in a talking Blockhead; and since a Woman must wear Chains, I wou'd have the Pleasure of hearing 'em rattle a little. -- Now you shall see, but take this by the way; -- He came home this Morning at his usual Hour of Four, waken'd me out of a sweet Dream of something else, by tumbling over the Tea-table, which he broke all to pieces, after his Man and he had rowl'd about the Room like sick Passengers in a Storm, he comes flounce into Bed, dead as a Salmon into a Fishmonger's Basket; his Feet cold as Ice, his Breath hot as a Furnace, and his Hands and his Face as greasy as his Flanel Night-cap. -- Oh Matrimony! -- He tosses up the Clothes with a barbarous swing over his Shoulders, disorders the whole Oeconomy of my Bed, leaves me half naked, and my whole Night's Comfort is the tuneable Serenade of that wakeful Nightingale, his Nose. -- O the Pleasure of counting the melancholly Clock by a snoring Husband! -- But now, Sister, you shall see how handsomely, being a well-bred Man, he will beg my Pardon.
My Head akes consumedly.
Will you be pleased, my Dear, to drink Tea with us this Morning? it may do your Head good.
No.
Coffee? Brother.
Pshaw.
Will you please to dress and go to Church with me, the Air may help you.
Sir.
What Day o'th Week is this?
, an't please your Worship.
! bring me a Dram, and d'ye hear, set out the Venison-Pasty, and a Tankard of strong Beer upon the Hall-Table, I'll go to breakfast.
Stay, stay, Brother, you shan't get off so; you were very naught last Night, and must make your Wife Reparation; come, come, Brother, won't you ask Pardon?
For what?
For being drunk last Night.
I can afford it, can't I?
But I can't, Sir.
Then you may let it alone.
But I must tell you, Sir, that this is not to be born.
I'm glad on't.
What is the Reason, Sir, that you use me thus inhumanely?
Sir.
Get things ready to shave my Head.
Have a care of coming near his Temples,, for fear you meet something there that may turn the Edge of your Razor. -- Inveterate Stupidity! did you ever know so hard, so obstinate a Spleen as his? O Sister, Sister! I shall never ha' Good of the Beast till I get him to Town;, dearis the Place for managing and breaking a Husband.
And has not a Husband the same Opportunities there for humbling a Wife?
No, no, Child, 'tis a standing Maxim in conjugal Discipline, that when a Man wou'd enslave his Wife, he hurries her into the Country; and when a Lady would be arbitrary with her Husband, she wheedles her Booby up to Town. -- A Man dare not play the Tyrant in, because there are so many Examples to encourage the Subject to rebel. O! a fine Woman may do any thing in: O'my Conscience, she may raise an Army of Forty thousand Men.
I fancy, Sister, you have a mind to be trying your Power that way here in; you have drawn theCount to your Colours already.
Theare a People that can't live without their Gallantries.
And somethat I know, Sister, are not averse to such Amusements.
Well, Sister, since the Truth must out, it may do as well now as hereafter; I think one way to rouse my Lethargick sotish Husband, is, to give him a Rival; Security begets Negligence in all People, and Men must be alarm'd to make 'em alert in their Duty: Women are like Pictures of no Value in the Hands of a Fool, till he hears Men of Sense bid high for the Purchase.
This might do, Sister, if my Brother's Understanding were to be convinc'd into a Passion for you; but I fancy there's a natural Aversion of his side; and I fancy, Sister, that you don't come much behind him, if you dealt fairly.
I own it, we are united Contradictions, Fire and Water: But I cou'd be contented, with a great many other Wives, to humour the censorious Mob, and give the World an Appearance of living well with my Husband, cou'd I bring him but to dissemble a little Kindness to keep me in Countenance.
But how do you know, Sister, but that instead of rousing your Husband by this Artifice to a counterfeit Kindness, he should awake in a real Fury.
Let him: -- If I can't entice him to the one, I wou'd provoke him to the other.
But how must I behave my self between ye.
You must assist me.
What, against my own Brother!
He's but half a Brother, and I'm your entire Friend:If I go a step beyond the Bounds of Honour, leave me; till then I expect you should go along with me in every thing, while I trust my Honour in your Hands, you may trust your Brother's in mine. -- The Count is to dine here to Day.
'Tis a strange thing, Sister, that I can't like that Man.
You like nothing, your time is not come; Love and Death have their Fatalities, and strike home one time or other: -- You'll pay for all one Day, I warrant'ye. -- But, come, my Lady's Tea is ready, and 'tis almost Church-time.
And was she the Daughter of the House?
The Landlord is so blind as to think so; but I dare swear she has better Blood in her Veins.
Why dost think so?
Because the Baggage has a pert, she reads Plays, keeps a Monkey, and is troubled with Vapours.
By which Discoveries I guess that you know more of her.
Not yet, Faith, the Lady gives her self Airs, forsooth, nothing under a Gentleman.
Let me take her in hand.
Say one Word more o'that, and I'll declare my self, spoil your Sport there, and every where else; look'ye,, every Man in his own Sphere.
Right; and therefore you must pimp for your Master.
In the usual Forms, good Sir, after I have serv'd my self. -- But to our Business: -- You are so well dress'd,, and make so handsome a Figure, that I fancy you may do Execution in a Country Church; the exteriour part strikes first, and you're in the right to make that Impression favourable.
There's something in that which may turn to Advantage: The Appearance of a Stranger in a Country Church draws as many Gazers as a blazing Star; no sooner he comes into the Cathedral, but a Train of Whispers runs buzzing round the Congregation in a moment; -- Who is he? whence comes he? do you know him? -- Then I, Sir, tips me the Verger with half a Crown; he pockets the Simony, and Inducts me into thebest Pue in the Church, I pull out my Snuff-box, turn my self round, bow to the Bishop, or the Dean, if he be the commanding Officer; single out a Beauty, rivet both my Eyes to hers, set my Nose a bleeding by the Strength of Imagination, and shew the whole Church my concern by my endeavouring to hide it; after the Sermon, the whole Town gives me to her for a Lover, and by perswading the Lady that I am a dying for her, the Tables are turn'd, and she in good earnest falls in Love with me?
There's nothing in this,, without a Precedent; but instead of riveting your Eyes to a Beauty, try to fix 'em upon a Fortune, that's our Business at present.
Pshaw, no Woman can be a Beauty without a Fortune. -- Let me alone, for I am a Mark'sman.
Ay.
When were you at Church before, pray?
Um -- I was there at the Coronation.
And how can you expect a Blessing by going to Church now?
Blessing! nay,, I ask but for a Wife.
Truly the Man is not very unreasonable in his Demands.
Well Daughter, as the saying is, have you broughtto confess?
Pray, Father, don't put me upon getting any thing out of a Man; I'm but young you know, Father, and I don't understand Wheedling.
Young! why you Jade, as the saying is, can any Woman wheedle that is not young, you'r Mother was useless at five and twenty; not wheedle! would you make your Mother a Whore and me a Cuckold, as the saying is? I tell you his Silence confesses it, and his Master spends his Money so freely, and is so much a Gentleman every manner of way that he must be a Highwayman.
Landlord, Landlord, is the Coast clear?
O, Mr., what's the News?
No matter, ask no Questions, all fair and honourable, here, my dear
Two hundred SterlingPounds as good as any that ever hang'd or sav'd a Rogue; lay 'em by with the rest, and here -- Three wedding or mourning Rings, 'tis much the same you know -- Here, two Silver-hilted Swords; I took those from Fellows that never shew any part of their Swords but the Hilts: Here is a Diamond Necklace which the Lady hid in the privatest place in the Coach, but I found it out: This Gold Watch I took from a Pawn-broker's Wife; it was left in her Hands by a Person of Quality, there's the Arms upon the Case.
But who had you the Money from?
Ah! poor Woman! I pitied her; -- From a poor Lady just elop'd from her Husband, she had made up her Cargo, and was bound for, as hard as she cou'd drive; she told me of her Husband's barbarous Usage, and so I left her half a Crown: But I had almost forgot, my dear, I have a Present for you.
What is't?
A Pot of Cereuse, my Child, that I took out of a Lady's under Pocket.
What, Mr., do you think that I paint?
Why, you Jade, your Betters do; I'm sure the Lady that I took it from had a Coronet upon her Handkerchief. -- Here, take my Cloak, and go, secure the Premisses.
I will secure 'em.
But, heark'ye, where'sand?
They'll be here to Night.
D'ye know of any other Gentlemen o'the Pad on this Road?
No.
I fancy that I have two that lodge in the House just now.
The Devil! how d'ye smoak 'em?
Why, the one is gone to Church.
That's suspitious, I must confess.
And the other is now in his Master's Chamber; he pretends to be Servant to the other, we'll call him out, and pump him a little.
With all my Heart.
Mr., Mr.?
The Roads are consumed deep; I'm as dirty as oldat. -- A good pretty Fellow that; who's Servant are you, Friend?
My Master's.
Really?
Really.
That's much. -- The Fellow has been at the Bar by his Evasions: -- But, pray, Sir, what is your Master's Name?
;
This is the most obstinate Curl --
I ask you his Name?
Name, Sir, ---- I never ask'd him his Name in my Life.
What think you now?
Plain, plain, he talks now as if he were before a Judge: But, pray, Friend, which way does your Master travel?
A Horseback.
Very well again, an old Offender, right; -- But, I mean does he go upwards or downwards?
Downwards, I fear, Sir:.
I'm afraid my Fate will be a contrary way.
Ha, ha, ha! Mr.you're very arch. -- This Gentleman is only travelling towards, and wou'd be glad of your Company, that's all. -- Come, Captain, you'll stay to Night, I suppose; I'll shew you a Chamber -- Come, Captain.
Farewel, Friend --
Captain, your Servant. -- Captain! a pretty Fellow; s'death, I wonder that the Officers of the Army don't conspire to beat all Scoundrels in Red, but their own.
Gone! andhere! I hope he did not listen; I wou'd have the Merit of the discovery all my own, because I wou'd oblige him to love me.
Mr., who was that Man with my Father?
Some Recruiting Serjeant, or whip'd out Trooper, I suppose.
All's safe, I find.
Come, my Dear, have you con'd over the Catechise I taught you last Night?
Come, question me.
What is Love?
Love is I know not what, it comes I know not how, and goes I know not when.
Very well, an apt Scholar.
Where does Love enter?
Into the Eyes.
And where go out?
I won't tell'ye.
What are Objects of that Passion?
Youth, Beauty, and clean Linen.
The Reason?
The two first are fashionable in Nature, and the third at Court.
That's my Dear: What are the Signs and Tokens of that Passion?
A stealing Look, a stammering Tongue, Words improbable, Designs impossible, and Actions impracticable.
That's my good Child, kiss me. -- What must a Lover do to obtain his Mistress.
He must adore the Person that disdains him, he must bribe theChambermaid that betrays him, and court the Footman that laughs at him; -- He must, he must --
Nay, Child, I must whip you if you don't mind your Lesson; he must treat his --
O, ay, he must treat his Enemies with Respect, his Friends with Indifference, and all the World with Contempt; he must suffer much, and fear more; he must desire much, and hope little; in short, he must embrace his Ruine, and throw himself away.
Had ever Man so hopeful a Pupil as mine? come, my Dear, why is Love call'd a Riddle?
Because being blind, he leads those that see, and tho' a Child, he governs a Man.
Mighty well. -- And why is Love pictur'd blind?
Because the Painters out of the weakness or privilege of their Art chose to hide those Eyes that they cou'd not draw.
That's, my dear little Scholar, kiss me again. -- And why shou'd Love, that's a Child, govern a Man?
Because that a Child is the end of Love.
And so ends Love's Catechism. -- And now, my Dear, we'll go in, and make my Master's Bed.
Hold, hold, Mr., -- You have taken a great deal of Pains to instruct me, and what d'ye think I have learn't by it?
What?
That your Discourse and your Habit are Contradictions, and it wou'd be nonsense in me to believe you a Footman any longer.
'Oons, what a Witch it is!
Depend upon this, Sir, nothing in this Garb shall ever tempt me; for tho' I was born to Servitude, I hate it: -- Own your Condition, swear you love me, and then --
And then we shall go make the Bed.
Yes.
You must know then, that I am born a Gentleman, my Education was liberal; but I went toa younger Brother, fell into the Hands of Sharpers, who stript me of my Money, my Friends disown'd, and now my Necessity brings me to what you see.
Then take my Hand -- promise to marry me before you sleep, and I'll make you Master of two thousand Pound.
How!
Two thousand Pound that I have this Minute in my own Custody; so throw off your Livery this Instant, and I'll go find a Parson.
What said you? A Parson!
What! do you scruple?
Scruple! no, no, but -- two thousand Pound you say?
And better.
S'death, what shall I do -- but heark'e, Child, what need you make me Master of your self and Money, when you may have the same pleasure out of me, and still keep your Fortune in your Hands.
Then you won't marry me?
I wou'd marry you, but --
O sweet, Sir, I'm your humble Servant, you're fairly caught, wou'd you perswade me that any Gentleman who cou'd bear the Scandal of wearing a Livery, wou'd refuse two thousand Pound let the Condition be what it wou'd -- no, no, Sir, -- but I hope you'll Pardon the Freedom I have taken, since it was only to inform my self of the Respect I ought to pay you.
Fairly bit, by-- hold, hold, and have you actually two thousand Pound.
Sir, I have my Secrets as well as you -- when you please to be more open, I shall be more free, and be assur'd that I have Discoveries that will match yours, be what they will -- in the mean while be satisfy'd that no Discovery I make shall ever hurt you, but beware of my Father. --
So -- we're like to have as many Adventures in our Inn, ashad in his -- let me see, -- two thousand Pound! if the Wench wou'd promise to dye when the Money were spent, I gad, one wou'd marry her, but the Fortune may go off in a Year or two, and the Wife may live -- Lord knows how long? then an Inkeeper's Daughter; ay that's the Devil -- there my Pride brings me off.
Ha, ha, ha, my dear Sister, let me embrace thee, now we are Friends indeed! for I shall have a Secret of yours, as a Pledge for mine -- now you'll be good for something, I shall have you conversable in the Subjects of the Sex.
But do you think that I am so weak as to fall in Love with a Fellow at first sight?
Pshaw! now you spoil all, why shou'd not we be as free in our Friendships as the Men? I warrant you the Gentleman has got to his Confident already, has avow'd his Passion, toasted your Health, call'd you ten thousand Angels, has run over your Lips, Eyes, Neck, Shape, Air and every thing, in a Description that warms their Mirth to a second Enjoyment.
Your Hand, Sister, I an't well.
So, -- she's breeding already -- come Child up with it -- hem a little -- so -- now tell me, don't you like the Gentleman that we saw at Church just now?
The Man's well enough.
Well enough! is he not a Demigod, a, a Star, the Man i'the Moon?
O Sister, I'm extreamly ill.
Shall I send to your Mother, Child, for a little of her Cephalick Plaister to put to the Soals of your Feet, or shall I send to the Gentleman, for something for you? -- Come, unlace your Steas, unbosome your self -- the Man is perfectly a pretty Fellow, I saw him when he first came into Church.
I saw him too, Sister, and with an Air that shone, methought like Rays about his Person.
Well said, up with it.
No forward Coquett Behaviour, no Airs to set him off, no study'd Looks nor artful Posture, -- but Nature did it all --
better and better -- one Touch more -- come. --
But then his Looks -- did you observe his Eyes?
Yes, yes, I did -- his Eyes, well, what of his Eyes?
Sprightly, but not wandring; they seem'd to view, but never gaz'd on any thing but me -- and then his Looks so humble were, and yet so noble, that they aim'd to tell me that he cou'd with Pride dye at my Feet, tho' he scorn'd Slavery any where else.
The Physick works purely -- How d'ye find your self now, my Dear?
Hem! much better, my Dear -- O here comes our Mercury!
Well, what News of the Gentleman?
Madam, I have brought you a Packet of News.
Open it quickly, come.
In the first place I enquir'd who the Gentleman was? they told me he was a Stranger, Secondly, I ask'd what the Gentleman was, they answer'd and said, that they never saw him before. Thirdly, I enquir'd what Countryman he was, they reply'd 'twas more than they knew. Fourthly, I demanded whence he came, their Answer was, they cou'd not tell. And Fifthly, I ask'd whither he went, and they reply'd they knew nothing of the matter, -- and this is all I cou'd learn.
But what do the People say, can't they guess?
why some think he's a Spy, some guess he's a Mountebank, some say one thing, some another; but for my own part, I believe he's a Jesuit.
A Jesuit! why a Jesuit?
because he keeps his Horses always ready sadled, and his Footman talks French.
His Footman!
Ay, he and the Count's Footman were Gabbering French like two intreaguing Ducks in a Mill-Pond, and I believe they talk'd of me, for they laugh'd consumedly.
What sort of Livery has the Footman?
Livery! Lord, Madam, I took him for a Captain, he's so bedizen'd with Lace, and then he has Tops to his Shoes, up to his mid Leg, a silver headed Cane dangling at his Nuckles, -- he carries his Hands in his Pockets just so --
and has a fine long Perriwig ty'd up in a Bag -- Lord, Madam, he's clear another sort of Man than I.
That may easily be -- but what shall we do now, Sister?
I have it -- This Fellow has a world of Simplicity, and some Cunning, the first hides the latter by abundance --.
Madam.
We have a great mind to know who this Gentleman is, only for our Satisfaction.
Yes, Madam, it would be a Satisfaction, no doubt.
You must go and get acquainted with his Footman, and invite him hither to drink a Bottle of your Ale, because you're Butler to Day.
Yes, Madam, I am Butler every Sunday.
O brave, Sister, O my Conscience, you understand the Mathematicks already -- 'tis the best Plot in the World, your Mother, you know, will be gone to Church, my Spouse will be got to the Ale-house with his Scoundrels, and the House will be our own -- so we drop in by Accident and ask the Fellow some Questions our selves. In the Countrey you know any Stranger is Company, and we're glad to take up with the Butler in a Country Dance, and happy if he'll do us the Favour.
Oh! Madam, you wrong me, I never refus'd your Ladyship the Favour in my Life.
Ladies, Dinner's upon the Table.
, We'll excuse your waiting -- Go where we order'd you.
I shall.
Well,, I find you're a Marksman.
A Marksman! who so blind cou'd be, as not discern a Swan among the Ravens.
Well, but heark'ee,.
! call me, all that Romance can in a Lover paint, and then I'll answer. O, I read her thousands in her Looks, she look'd likein herHarvest, Corn, Wine and Oil, Milk and Honey, Gardens, Groves and Purling Streams play'd on her plenteous Face.
Her Face! her Pocket, you mean; the Corn, Wine and Oil lies there. In short, she has ten thousand Pound, that's the English on't.
Her Eyes --
Are Demi-Cannons to be sure, so I won't stand their Battery.
Pray excuse me, my Passion must have vent.
Passion! what a plague, d'ee think these Romantick Airs will do our Business? Were my Temper as extravagant as yours, my Adventures have something more Romantick by half.
Your Adventures!
Yes, The Nymph that with her twice ten hundred Pounds With brazen Engine hot, and Quoif clear starch'd Can fire the Guest in warming of the Bed -- There's a Touch of Sublimefor you, and the Subject but an Inn-keeper's Daughter; I can play with a Girl as an Angler do's with his Fish; he keeps it at the end of his Line, runs it up the Stream, and down the Stream, till at last, he brings it to hand, tickles the Trout, and so whips it into his Basket.
Mr., as the saying is -- yonder's an honest Fellow below, my LadyButler, who begs the Honour that you wou'd go Home with him and see his Cellar.
Do myto the Gentleman, and tell him I will do my self the Honour to wait on him immediately.
What do I hear? softPlay, and fairsing?
Pshaw! damn your Raptures, I tell you here's a Pump going to be put into the Vessel, and the Ship will get into Harbour, my Life on't. You say there's another Lady very handsome there.
Yes, faith.
I'am in love with her already.
Can't you give me a Bill uponin the mean time.
No, no, Friend, all her Corn, Wine and Oil is ingross'd to my Market. -- And once more I warn you to keep your Anchorage clear of mine, for if you fall foul of me, by this Light you shall go to the Bottom. -- What! makePrize of my litte Frigat, while I am upon the Cruise for you
Well, well, I won't -- Landlord, have you any tolerable Company in the House, I don't care for dining alone.
Yes, Sir, there's a Captain below; as the saying is, that arrived about an Hour ago.
Gentlemen of his Coat are welcome every where; will you make him a Complement from me, and tell him I should be glad of his Company.
Who shall I tell him, Sir, wou'd. --
Ha! that Stroak was well thrown in -- I'm only a Traveller like himself, and wou'd be glad of his Company, that's all.
I obey all your Commands, as the saying is.
S'Death! I had forgot, what Title will you give your self?
My Brother's to be sure, he wou'd never give me any thing else, so I'll make bold with his Honour this bout -- you know the rest of your Cue.
Ay, ay.
Sir, I'm yours.
'Tis more than I deserve, Sir, for I don't know you.
I don't wonder at that, Sir, for you never saw me before, I hope.
And pray, Sir, how came I by the Honour of seeing you now?
Sir, I scorn to intrude upon any Gentleman -- but my Landlord --
O, Sir, I ask your Pardon, you're the Captain he told me of.
At your Service, Sir.
What Regiment, may I be so bold?
A marching Regiment, Sir, an old Corps.
Very old, if your Coat be Regimental,
You have serv'd abroad, Sir?
Yes, Sir, in the Plantations, 'twas my Lot to be sent into the worst Service, I wou'd have quitted it indeed, but a Man of Honour, you know -- Besides 'twas for the good of myCountry that I shou'd be abroad -- Any thing for the good of one's Country -- I'm afor that.
One of the first, I'll lay my Life
You found thevery hot, Sir?
Ay, Sir, too hot for me.
Pray, Sir, han't I seen your Face atCoffee-house?
Yes, Sir, and attoo.
And where is your Company now, Captain?
They an't come yet.
Why, d'ye expect 'em here?
They'll be here to Night, Sir.
Which way do they march?
Across the Country -- the Devil's in't, if I han't said enough to encourage him to declare -- but I'm afraid he's not right, I must tack about.
Is your Company to quarter in?
In this House, Sir.
What! all?
My Company's but thin, ha, ha, ha, we are but three, ha, ha, ha.
You're merry, Sir.
Ay, Sir, you must excuse me, Sir, I understand the World, especially, the Art of Travelling; I don't care, Sir, for answering Questions directly upon the Road -- for I generally ride with a Charge about me.
Three or four, I believe.
I am credibly inform'd that there are Highway-men upon this Quarter, not, Sir, that I cou'd suspect a Gentleman of your Figure -- But truly, Sir, I have got such a way of Evasion upon the Road, that I don't care for speaking Truth to any Man.
Your Caution may be necessary -- Then I presume you're no Captain?
Not I, Sir, Captain is a good travelling Name, and so I take it; it stops a great many foolish Inquiries that are generally made about Gentlemen that travel, it gives a Man an Air of something, and makes the Drawers obedient -- And thus far I am a Captain, and no farther.
And pray, Sir, what is your true Profession?
O, Sir, you must excuse me -- upon my Word, Sir, I don't think it safe to tell you.
Ha, ha, ha, upon my word I commend you.
Well, Mr., what's the News?
There's another Gentleman below, as the saying is, that hearing you were but two, wou'd be glad to make the third Man if you wou'd give him leave.
What is he?
A Clergyman, as the saying is.
A Clergyman! is he really a Clergyman? or is it only his travelling Name, as my Friend the Captain has it.
O, Sir, he's a Priest and Chaplain to the French Officers in Town.
Is he a French-man?
Yes, Sir, born at.
A French-man, and a Priest! I won't be seen in his Company, Sir; I have a Value for my Reputation, Sir.
Nay, but Captain, since we are by our selves -- Can he speak English, Landlord.
Very well, Sir, you may know him, as the saying is, to be a Foreigner by his Accent, and that's all.
Then he has been inbefore?
Never, Sir, but he's a Master of Languages, as the saying is, he talks Latin, it do's me good to hear him talk Latin.
Then you understand Latin, Mr.?
Not I, Sir, as the saying is, but he talks it so very fast that I'm sure it must be good.
Pray desire him to walk up.
Here he is, as the saying is.
Save you, Gentlemen's, both.
A French-man! Sir, your most humble Servant.
Och, dear Joy, I am your most faithful Shervant, and yours alsho.
Doctor, you talk very good English, but you have a mighty Twang of the Foreigner.
My English is very vel for the vords, but we Foregners you know cannot bring our Tongues about the Pronunciation so soon.
A Foreigner! a down-right Teague by this Light.
Were you born in, Doctor.
I was educated in, but I was borned at, I am a Subject of the King of, Joy.
What King of, Sir, speak.
Upon my Shoul Joy, I cannot tell you as yet.
Nay, Captain, that was too hard upon the Doctor, he's a Stranger.
O let him alone, dear Joy, I am of a Nation that is not easily put out of Countenance.
Come, Gentlemen, I'll end the Dispute. -- Here, Landlord, is Dinner ready?
Upon the Table, as the saying is.
Gentlemen -- pray -- that Door --
No, no fait, the Captain must lead.
No, Doctor, the Church is our Guide.
Ay, ay, so it is.
-- Come, my dear Boy -- Let's have that Song once more.
No, no, we shall disturb the Family; -- But will you be sure to keep the Secret?
Pho! upon my Honour, as I'm a Gentleman.
'Tis enough. -- You must know then that my Master is the Lord Viscount; he fought a Duel t'other day in, wounded his Man so dangerously, that he thinks fit to withdraw till he hears whether the Gentleman's Wounds be mortal or not: He never was in this part ofbefore, so he chose to retire to this Place, that's all.
And that's enough for me.
And where were you when your Master fought?
We never know of our Masters Quarrels.
No! if our Masters in the Country here receive a Challenge, the first thing they do is to tell their Wives; the Wife tells the Servants, the Servants alarm the Tenants, and in half an Hour you shall have the whole County in Arms.
To hinder two Men from doing what they have no mind for: -- But if you should chance to talk now of my Business?
Talk! ay, Sir, had I not learn't the knack of holding my Tongue, I had never liv'd so long in a great Family.
Ay, ay, to be sure there are Secrets in all Families.
Secrets, ay; -- But I'll say no more. -- Come, sit down, we'll make an end of our Tankard: Here --
With all my Heart; who knows but you and I may come to be better acquainted, eh -- Here's your Ladies Healths; you have three, I think, and to be sure there must be Secrets among 'em.
Secrets! Ay, Friend; I wish I had a Friend --
Am not I your Friend? come, you and I will be sworn Brothers.
Shall we?
From this Minute. -- Give me a kiss -- And now Brother--
And now, Brother, I will tell you a Secret that will make your Hair stand on end: -- You must know, that I am consumedly in Love.
That's a terrible Secret, that's the Truth on't.
That Jade,, that was with us just now in the Cellar, is the arrantest Whore that ever wore a Petticoat; and I'm dying for love of her.
Ha, ha, ha -- Are you in love with her Person, or her Vertue, Brother?
I should like Vertue best, because it is more durable than Beauty; for Vertue holds good with some Women long, and many a Day after they have lost it.
In a Country, I grant ye, where no Woman's Vertue is lost, till a Bastard be found.
Ay, cou'd I bring her to a Bastard, I shou'd have her all to my self; but I dare not put it upon that Lay, for fear of being sent for a Soldier. -- Pray, Brother, how do you Gentlemen inlike that same Pressing Act?
Very ill, Brother; -- 'Tis the worst that ever was made for us: Formerly I remember the good Days, when we cou'd dun our Masters for our Wages, and if they refused to pay us, we cou'd have a Warrant to carry 'em before aJustice; but now if we talk of eating, they have a Warrant for us, and carry us before three Justices.
And to be sure we go, if we talk of eating; for the Justices won't give their own Servants a bad Example. Now this is my Misfortune -- I dare not speak in the House, while that Jadedings about like a Fury -- Once I had the better end of the Staff.
And how comes the Change now?
Why, the Mother of all this Mischief is a Priest.
A Priest!
Ay, a damn'd Son of a Whore of, that came over hither to say Grace to theOfficers, and eat up our Provisions -- There's not a Day goes over his Head without Dinner or Supper in this House.
How came he so familiar in the Family?
Because he speaksas if he had liv'd here all his Life; and tells Lies as if he had been a Traveller from his Cradle.
And this Priest, I'm afraid has converted the Affections of your.
Converted! ay, and perverted, my dear Friend: -- For I'm afraid he has made her a Whore and a Papist. -- But this is not all; there's theCount and Mrs., they're in the Confederacy, and for some private Ends of their own to be sure.
A very hopeful Family yours, Brother; I suppose the Maiden Lady has her Lover too.
Not that I know; -- She's the best on 'em, that's the Truth on't: But they take care to prevent my Curiosity, by giving me so much Business, that I'm a perfect Slave. -- What d'ye think is my Place in this Family?
Butler, I suppose.
Ah, Lord help you -- I'll tell you -- Of a, I drive the Coach; of a, I drive the Plough; on, I follow the Hounds; a, I dun the Tenants; on, I go to Market; on, I draw Warrants; and a, I draw Beer.
Ha, ha, ha! if variety be a Pleasure in Life, you have enough on't, my dear Brother -- But what Ladies are those?
Ours, ours; that upon the right Hand is Mrs., and the other is Mrs.. -- Don't mind 'em, sit still, Man --
I have heard my Brother talk of my Lord, but they say that his Brother is the finer Gentleman.
That's impossible, Sister.
He's vastly rich, but very close, they say.
No matter for that; if I can creep into his Heart, I'll open his Breast, I warrant him: I have heard say, that People may be guess'd at by the Behaviour of their Servants; I cou'd wish we might talk to that Fellow.
So do I; for, I think he's a very pretty Fellow: Come this way, I'll throw out a Lure for him presently.
Corn, Wine, and Oil, indeed -- But, I think, the Wife has the greatest plenty of Flesh and Blood; she should be my Choice -- Ah, a, say you so -- Madam -- Your Ladyship's Glove.
O, Sir, I thank you -- what a handsom Bow the Fellow has?
Bow! why I have known several Footmen come down fromset up here for Dancing-Masters, and carry off the best Fortunes in the Country.
That Project, for ought I know, had been better than ours, Brother-- Why don't you introduce me.
Ladies, this is the strange Gentleman's Servant that you see at Church to Day; I understood he came from, and so I invited him to the Cellar, that he might show me the newest Flourish in whetting my Knives.
And I hope you have made much of him?
O yes, Madam, but the Strength of your Ladyship's Liquour is a little too potent for the Constitution of your humble Servant.
What, then you don't usually drink Ale?
No, Madam, my constant Drink is Tea, or a little Wine and Water; 'tis prescrib'd me by the Physician for a Remedy against the Spleen.
O la, O la! -- a Footman have the Spleen. --
I thought that Distemper had been only proper to People of Quality.
Madam, like all other Fashions it wears out, and so descends to their Servants; tho' in a great many of us, I believe it proceeds from some melancholly Particles in the Blood, occasion'd by the Stagnation of Wages.
How affectedly the Fellow talks -- How long, pray, have you serv'd your present Master?
Not long; my Life has been mostly spent in the Service of the Ladies.
And pray, which Service do you like best?
Madam, the Ladies pay best; the Honour of serving them is sufficient Wages; there is a Charm in their looks that delivers a Pleasure with their Commands, and gives our Duty the Wings of Inclination.
That Flight was above the pitch of a Livery; and, Sir, wou'd not you be satisfied to serve a Lady again?
As a Groom of the Chamber, Madam, but not as a Footman.
I suppose you serv'd as Footman before.
For that Reason I wou'd not serve in that Post again; for my Memory is too weak for the load of Messages that the Ladies lay upon their Servants in; my Lady, the last Mistress I serv'd call'd me up one Morning, and told me,, go to my Ladywith my humble Service; tell her I was to wait on her Ladyship yesterday, and left word with Mrs., that the Preliminaries of the Affair she knows of, are stopt till we know the concurrence of the Person that I know of, for which there are Circumstances wanting which we shall accommodate at the old Place; but that in the mean time there is a Person about her Ladyship, that from several Hints and Surmises, was accessary at a certain time to the disappointments that naturally attend things, that to her knowledge are of more Importance.
Ha, ha, ha! where are you going, Sir?
Why, I han't half done. -- The whole Howd'ye was about half an Hour long; so I hapned to misplace two Syllables, and was turn'd off, and render'd incapable --
The pleasantest Fellow, Sister, I ever saw. -- But, Friend, if your Master be marry'd, -- I presume you still serve a Lady.
No, Madam, I take care never to come into a marry'd Family; the Commands of the Master and Mistress are always socontrary, that 'tis impossible to please both.
There's a main point gain'd. -- My Lord is not marry'd, I find.
But, I wonder, Friend, that in so many good Services, you had not a better Provision made for you.
I don't know how, Madam. -- I had a Lieutenancy offer'd me three or four Times; but that is not Bread, Madam -- I live much better as I do.
Madam, he sings rarely. -- I was thought to do pretty well here in the Country till he came; but alack a day, I'm nothing to my Brother.
Does he? Pray, Sir, will you oblige us with a Song?
Are you for Passion, or Humour?
O le! he has the purest Ballad about a Trifle --
A Trifle! pray, Sir, let's have it.
I'm asham'd to offer you a Trifle, Madam: But since you command me --
Very well, Sir, we're obliged to you. -- Something for a pair of Gloves.
I humbly beg leave to be excused: My Master, Madam, pays me; nor dare I take Money from any other Hand without injuring his Honour, and disobeying his Commands.
This is surprising: Did you ever see so pretty a well bred Fellow?
The Devil take him for wearing that Livery.
I fancy, Sister, he may be some Gentlemen, a Friend of my Lords, that his Lordship has pitch'd upon for his Courage, Fidelity, and Discretion to bear him Company in this Dress, and who, ten to one was his Second too.
It is so, it must be so, and it shall be so: -- For I like him.
What! Better than the Count?
The Count happen'd to be the most agreeable Man upon the Place; and so I chose him to serve me in my Design upon my Husband. -- But I shou'd like this Fellow better in a Design upon my self.
But now, Sister, for an Interview with this Lord, and this Gentleman; how shall we bring that about?
Patience! you Country Ladies give no Quarter, if once you be enter'd. -- Wou'd you prevent their Desires, and give the Fellows no wishing-time. -- Look'ye,, if my Lordloves you or deserves you, he'll find a way to see you, and there we must leave it. -- My Business comes now upon the Tapis -- Have you prepar'd your Brother?
Yes, yes.
And how did he relish it?
He said little, mumbled something to himself, promis'd to be guided by me: But here he comes --
What singing was that I heard just now?
The singing in you're Head, my Dear, you complain'd of it all Day.
You're impertinent.
I was ever so, since I became one Flesh with you.
One Flesh! rather two Carcasses join'd unnaturally together.
Or rather a living Soul coupled to a dead Body.
So, this is fine Encouragement for me.
Yes, my Wife shews you what you must do.
And my Husband shews you what you must suffer.
S'death, why can't you be silent?
S'death, why can't you talk?
Do you talk to any purpose?
Do you think to any purpose?
Sister, heark'ye;
I shan't be home till it be late.
What did he whisper to ye?
That he wou'd go round the back way, come into the Closet, and listen as I directed him. -- But let me beg you once more, dear Sister, to drop this Project; for, as I told you before, instead of awaking him to Kindness, you may provoke him to a Rage; and then who knows how far his Brutality may carry him?
I'm provided to receive him, I warrant you: But here comes the Count, vanish.
Don't you wonder,, that I was not at Church this Afternoon?
I more wonder, Madam, that you go dere at all, or how you dare to lift those Eyes to Heaven that are guilty of so much killing.
If Heaven, Sir, has given to my Eyes with the Power of killing, the Virtue of making a Cure, I hope the one may atone for the other.
O largely, Madam; wou'd your Ladyship be as ready to apply the Remedy as to give the Wound? -- Consider, Madam, I am doubly a Prisoner; first to the Arms of your General, then to your more conquering Eyes; my first Chains are easy, there a Ransom may redeem me, but from your Fetters I never shall get free.
Alass, Sir, why shou'd you complain to me of your Captivity, who am in Chains my self? you know, Sir, that I am bound, nay, mustbe tied up in that particular that might give you ease: I am like you, a Prisoner of War -- Of War indeed: -- I have given my Parole of Honour; wou'd you break yours to gain your Liberty?
Most certainly I wou'd, were I a Prisoner among the; dis is your Case; you're a Slave, Madam, Slave to the worst of, a Husband.
There lies my Foible, I confess; no Fortifications, no Courage, Conduct, nor Vigilancy can pretend to defend a Place, where the Cruelty of the Governour forces the Garrison to Mutiny.
And where de Besieger is resolv'd to die before de Place -- Here will I fix;
With Tears, Vows, and Prayers assault your Heart, and never rise till you surrender; or if I must storm -- Love and St.-- And so I begin the Attack --
Stand off -- Sure he hears me not -- And I cou'd almost wish he -- did not. -- The Fellow makes love very prettily.
But, Sir, why shou'd you put such a Value upon my Person, when you see it despis'd by one that knows it so much better.
He knows it not, tho' he possesses it; if he but knew the Value of the Jewel he is Master of, he wou'd always wear it next his Heart.and sleep with it in his Arms.
But since he throws me unregarded from him.
And one that knows your Value well, comes by, and takes you up, is it not Justice.
hold, Villain, hold.
Do you hold.
What! Murther your Husband, to defend your Bully.
Bully! for shame, Mr.; Bullies wear long Swords, the Gentleman has none, he's a Prisoner you know -- I was aware of your Outrage, and prepar'd this to receive your Violence, and, if Occasion were, to preserve my self against the Force of this other Gentleman.
O Madam, your Eyes be bettre Fire Arms than your Pistol, they nevre miss.
What! court my Wife to my Face!
Pray, Mr., put up, suspend your Fury for a Minute.
To give you time to invent an Excuse.
I need none.
No, for I heard every Sillable of your Discourse.
Ay! and begar, I tink de Dialogue was vera pretty.
Then I suppose, Sir, you heard something of your own Barbarity.
Barbarity! oons what does the Womancall Barbarity? do I ever meddle with you?
No.
As for you, Sir, I shall take another time.
Ah, begar, and so must I.
Look'e, Madam, don't think that my Anger proceeds from any Concern I have for your Honour, but for my own, and if you can contrive any way of being a Whore without making me a Cuckold, do it and welcome.
Sir, I thank you kindly, you wou'd allow me the Sin but rob me of the Pleasure -- No, no, I'm resolv'd never to venture upon the Crime without the Satisfaction of seeing you punish'd for't.
Then will you grant me this, my Dear? let any Body else do you the Favour but that French-man, for I mortally hate his whole Generation.
Ah, Sir, that be ungrateful, for begar, I love some of your's, Madam. --
No, Sir. --
No, Sir, -- Garzoon, Madam, I am not your Husband.
'Tis time to undeceive you, Sir, -- I believ'd your Addresses to me were no more than an Amusement, and I hope you will think the same of my Complaisance, and to convince you that you ought, you must know, that I brought you hither only to make you instrumental in setting me right with my Husband, for he was planted to listen by my Appointment.
By your Appointment?
Certainly.
And so, Madam, while I was telling twenty Stories to part you from your Husband, begar, I was bringing you together all the while.
I ask your Pardon, Sir, but I hope this will give you a Taste of the Vertue of the English Ladies.
Begar, Madam, your Vertue be vera Great, but 
Garzoon
your Honeste de vera little.<|endoftext|>Good-Morrow, Madam; the Sun and you are up Betimes to Day.
Yes; but we did not go to Bed together.
No, or he had not rose so soon. But pray now was you any where late last Night?
At.
He in Town, and I not know it!
You was not to be found. Had you come, you'd been in Love with Matrimony, to have seen a Man of Sense so happy in it.
Excuse me; 'twould rather have frightn'd me, to have seen it able to impose upon the best Understanding.
He talks prodigiously of thehe owes to both our Friendships.
I owe more to your Friendship than he does, but must show my Gratitude in Silence.
Pray, does the Lady seem as much oblig'd as he?
'Tis hard to tell. You know that Fophad made great Impressions; and nothing is so difficult to get rid of as a Fool.
Except the Passion fair Ladies have for keeping 'em.
That's civil. -- ButI fear will grow impatient. I've made her wait this Hour. --
Hold, Madam! I'd forgot. -- Iscome with her Brother?
Is that all you stopt me for. She is.
Pray, Mr., How come you to enquire after?
Only to know, if after her late Illness, she's as handsome as she was.
To other People she is: But I believe she won't seem so to you.
Why d'think so?
Because she is the same. And that is what has no Charms for you, I know.
In any Body but you, I hope you mean, Madam?
No Matter what you hope, my Meaning is as easily understood as yours, Sir.
I wou'd always have my Meaning plain, Madam, that I might ever appear your Humble Servant.
And her Slave.
Do you Dream?
No, I am awake: Mine are Visions all. Come, come! Throw off the Mask. D'think I have forgot, when she was last in Town, how with an affected Negligence you Courted her, as Life; told her her Faults only to be thought sincere, when e'er you spoke your Love, and prais'd her Virtues; thou poor Dissembler!
You shall reform me then: I will dissemble no longer, since it displeases you. Pray, Madam, have you lately heard from Mr. -- him, who won a Thousand Pounds atof you, and generously forgave the Debt.
Insulting Monster! To reproach me with what Necessity, Confusion, and Surprize subdu'd me too; when Love and Choice resign'd me up to you.
Your Love resign'd to me no more than your Want did to him. And I'm not Casuist enough to decide which is best, between Two Things that generally produce the same Effect.
Then there is no deciding which is worse, the Devil or you. Since Ingratitude and Mischief, Falshood and Ruin, proceed alike from both, thou Faithless, Base, Perfidious Man.
Thou very very -- true Woman!
I begin to wish I'd had no Hand in this Marriage; but he forc'd me to use my Interest with, to influence; 'twas never my Judgment: But here he is.
, welcome, welcome to the Man that owes his Peace and Happiness to you; say, how can my Gratitude repay the Joy you gave me with.
Why, just the Way you do, by being happy with her. Believe me, Friend, I am as glad to see thee pleas'd, as Knaves wou'd be to have thee griev'd. -- I need not ask how your Wife does, since your Joys seem without Allay.
They are indeed,. And --
Hold, I guess what you would say; Rapturous Love,Fields, and all the Joys that Poets ever dream'd of, are much surpass'd by yours.
, thou art in the Right; I am happier if possible than thou hast spoken; and what's impossible to her?
That's hard to say. In the mean Time, Is it possible for you to tell me where you was a-going.
No farther, now I've met you; though I had a Compliment this Morning from my Rival, to tell me, even the Plague, much less the Summer, cou'd not empty, whilst my Wife and I were here. -- What do you think of visiting him? His Lodgings are hard by. 'Twill amuse an idle Hour.
I should readily consent, if I was not sure he had a Thousand idle Ones to be reveng'd on us.
You continue still most implacable to him, and poor.
Because they are most monstrously Incorrigible. -- The Foppery ofputs one out of Countenance Ten Times a Day. You are as dear to him one Moment as his own Affectations; and the next, he's as great aStranger to you as to true Sense or good Breeding: Then his Conversation is a perpetual War with Words, which the Ladies and their Favourites not understanding, admire for Wit. In short, he's a meer Perspective, pleases at a Distance, but when you are near, you'll find the Colours are upon an insensible Wall. -- However, if you've a Mind, I'll go, though Fifty to One he'll not be at Home.
I shou'd have thought for that very Reason, you wou'd have gone. But how come you to fancy a Man of his Fashion shou'd be Abroad so early?
Such a one would be most likely, for want of Entertainment at Home, and a Desire to trouble other People: But I have another Reason to think so; the Coxcomb, ever fertile in Foppery, has taken lately into his Head a Fancy of changing his Name, and seeing none on certain Days, but some particular People. I luckily call'd one of those Times, and his Servants told me that his Master went by the Name of, and that Day saw none but Courtiers.
He was in the right, or he would have got a new Name.
I thought so, and forgave all his other Follies for the Sake of this one, since it hinder'd my seeing him.
This is strangely absurd, and wou'd seem monstrous even upon the Stage, where 'tis lawful to represent Figures larger than the Life.
In my Opinion the Poets have no great Obligation to Mankind for that Liberty; 'tis no more than granting them what's impossible: I've seen more Gigantick Fools upon the Theatre of the World, than were ever shewn at the-- What do you think of a Coxcomb walking over an intimate Acquaintance of Six Foot High, and bowing to a Dwarf with a Nick-Name, at the further end of a Gallery; and then excusing himself to the Man he trod upon, by saying he did not see him? There is another Species not unlike these Things, who look as saucily upon you when they are in Power, as on their Footmen when they ask their Wages; and the Moment they are turn'd out, ready to go of your Errand, and professing Friendship to a Doorkeeper: Is not this as prodigious as a Man's changing his Name? Death! changing one's Nature, or having no Nature at all,is being more athan ever Fiction dream'd on -- Wretches without Honour or Sense!
You must confess this in Honour to their Sense, they all suspect one another.
And you must allow, in Reproach to it, they all trust one another.
Your Satyr turns extreamly upon great Men; 'tis lucky for the Crowd, they pass by uncensur'd.
Because little Villains are meerVermin, carry no Venom in 'em; but the Crimes of Great Men, like the poisonous Serpents, conceal Destruction under their exterior Lustre: Their Examples are so many Commands to the inferior World, and the heedless Herd are caught as Apes and Monkeys are, by an ignorant Admiration and Propensity to mimick those who only make Slaves and Jests of 'em -- But does your Indulgence for an Ass continue still? Won't this Fop cure you of your Charity for the Fool?
Nothing can cure me of the Value I have for his Truth.
Yes: Believing him will; I'll answer for it, the Rogue is as unsincere as a First Minister, and would lie as fast, if he had Language enough to be Intelligible; but want of that makes all he says neither true nor false; for Giberidge cannot properly be called either.
Fie, Fie;is a well natur'd honest Fellow; and let me tell you, good Nature and Complaisance will attone for the want of infinite good Qualities, that are requisite to excuse the Defect of them.
Pox of his Complaisance and good Nature; 'tis the Effect of Idleness, and want of Inclinations of his own: Then for being honest, 'tis Fear keeps him so.
Nay, you must allow him Courage.
Yes. If you'll try it as you do Gold, by the, he'll turn the Scale against.
There's a surer way of trying Gold, by Fire.
Which to my Knowledge he can't stand on a Training Day. I've seen him start and look Pale at a Squib at my Lord-Mayor's Show.
Involuntary Motions --, we are told, would often faint.
Ay. Butwas a Lion when he came to himself; and then 'tis the other's most an Ass. To be sincere, I hate this Fool worse than.
Come, you're too severe upon poor, in preferringto him.
I differ with you; I can forgive a Coxcomb sooner than a Fool. Fops are like those Insects that fly about in hot Weather, rather troublesome than hurtful: Creatures that in common Justice must be annihilated, for they have not Virtues enough to save 'em, nor Vices enough to damn 'em.
I always thought Coxcombs less pardonable than Fools, because their Faults are generally of their own acquiring, and the others impos'd by Nature.
So is the Cruelty of Tygers, Wolves, and Mountain Cats, natural too, and therefore in my Opinion the more to be fear'd, by as much as 'tis harder to change Nature than reform Custom. As to the Coxcomb, amuse 'em with Women; take all the Letters they receive from their Creditors for; Give 'em Ribbons, Essence, fine Cloaths and Flattery, and you may sooth the harmless Things into doing any Good that does not interrupt their Folly. But a Fool is a veryBull-dog, you may injure, but can't oblige him; they are despis'd as Dull and Little, and Men never know their Strength and Activity, till they feel it at their Throats.
Coxcombs have a flower, but full as sure a way of killing, by torturing of your Ears; though I confess bad is the best. But I've forgot, How does my friend? He's no Fool, I hope.
No; but he makes a great many by passing upon them for a Wit.
Poh. He cou'd not do that if he had not Wit.
Pardon me; 'tis but resolving, and by the help of Party, you may have a good Character as easy as a bad one: You're a Patriot at St.Coffee-House, and a Rebel at the; Fool in one Company, and a Philosopher in another. But don't imagine from this, that I think he wants plain Sense and Honesty.
Well, an useful Understanding passes most current in the World.
Ay: As Farthings do in a Market, they're the ready Change for Things of least Value there.
I grant you, Wit, like Painting, is valuable, as it entertains us; but whoever gazes all his Time away, will be left Naked, Dry and Hungry.
I'm glad Wit has any Thing in common with Virtue. But in the Pleasure of meeting you, I forgot a little Business I had to do.
Shall I see you at Dinner?
Most certainly. I intended if I had not met you.
Dear! What has kept you so long? I waited for you as impatiently as the Country Ladies do for the Assizes or a Horse-Race; you must expect for the first Month nothing but rural Similies.
For the first Month? For your whole Life, I hope; since I would always have you bring your Images from the Seat of Innocence and Quiet.
O, Yes! they're as innocent asandwithout their Aprons: But then, believe me, they're as ignorant too.
I'm glad to find neither Marriage, nor the Country, have been able to spoil thy Gaiety. You stand a little indebted to me; for sure, had you had that Creature of some Twenty several Shops, that Fop, you wou'd have been a miserable Woman.
Perhaps not. -- I can't tell whether 'twould not have been better if I had Married him, for then Fifty to One I should have dislik'd him by this Time.
And don't you, as it is?
What if I did not?
If you didn't, I should think you in the Green-Sickness, and pin'd for Trash, whilst the Luxuriousoffer'd you his Luscious Store.
Shu! 'tis but a lusty Surfeit, and one's well for ever. -- Prithee, dear, -- Why so severe? You over-rul'd my Inclinations in this Match: Besides, you know, Child, our Affections are no more in our Choice than our natural Complexions, therefore we are no more accountable for loving a Fool, than liking an ill Face; we'll be judg'd by my Sister.
I was just defending the Cause of Fools; What is your Opinion?
That 'twas generously done, Madam, to defend your greatest Enemies.
Pish -- But what do you seriously think, are they really despicable or no?
Not in their own Opinions; I'll answer for 'em, or they were not Fools.
Horrid! But answer me directly, is not a Fool as entertaining as a Farce.
I grant you. But wou'd you, because a Farce diverts you for half an Hour live with?
Nay! I vow she's in the Right on't. One goes to see Monsters or the Tombs for Amusement; but I shou'd be sorry to be lock'd up with them.
Because they can't talk to one.
In that, I think 'em preferrable to Fools.
O fye, Sister! Never go about to persuade me, that a living Fool has not more Merit with us, than the Seven Wise Masters of.
Lord! here's the more fashionable Drums and Trumpets coming in the Name of Congratulatory Visits,. Let us be gone.
To give you Joy upon your Marriage, Madam, were needless. All I can wish you, is, May your Happiness know no Change.
For Heavens sake! Why, confine me? What if I shou'd change my Inclinations?
Why, 'twoud be as unpardonable in you, as to change your Face, since you must do both for the worse.
But without changing one's Inclinations, one might be as well Ugly as Handsome; as they who have no Variety of Passions, may as well be Poor as Rich.
Sir, your humble Servant!
Madam, your Slave! You've left the Country Desart in Spight of Spring, and Winter flourishes now you are here.
It does not seem so by your Shoes.
Shoes! What do you mean?
They are not Dirty, that's all.
O! I never walk, but at Chapel, the Drawing-Room, or the House of Commons.
I thought the Members sat at the House of Commons.
Admirable! But 'tis cruel to rob me of a Pun: You might as well disrobe me, Ha! I think that was well enough.
Madam, I'm extreamly glad to see you so well in Health, and with a Husband!
I'm oblig'd to you, Sir. I'm happily possess'd of both.
O dear, I joy to see thee!
You do! -- Gad, I met you just now, and you did not know me.
I ask Ten Thousand Pardons. I was thinking, and did not see you.
I believe the latter, because you trod upon me. Prithee, What was you thinking on?
Gentlemen, you'll excuse me. We all dine together, I hope.
As I was a Saying, What was your Thoughts employ'd on?
Why? -- A Criticism on one of Mr.Plays, where he exposes Men of Quality, by making 'em Fops and Fools.
I have heard Judges say, he drew exactly after Nature.
Good,; very good. --, when shall I hear thee say such a Thing? Thy Wit is like a certain Friends of ours, who to be very sharp, bids you kiss his A---, and laughs. You know him,?
Yes, to have no Sharpness, but what he owes to his Amours. And tho' his Satyr comes from his Mouth like other Men's, 'tis not from his Brain.
But his Stomach; sweetly intimating his Breath is sowre. -- Sweet and Sowre. -- You know.
I perceive,is as well pleas'd withas Mr..
He's as pleas'd with a Fool as Mr..
What's that,?
Why, as much as to say,, I am very well pleas'd when thee and I meet. Ha!
A fair Hit. But I thought every Body knew a Jest and you were inseparable; and that 'twas impossible to find the one without the other.
I'm sure one can never find you without the obliging'st Things in Nature. I'll tell you,, a Pun I made t'other Day: I was maintaining at, that theTroops were the bravest Fellows in the World. Why so, Sir? says the Brigadier. Why so, Sir, says I, the Reason's plain, for they always Rush-on when they must go fight: So I went Abroad and told it; and Folks made me blush, by saying I had too much Wit.
O, I'm sure thou art no Cheat!
I wish he is not, for he looks like a Man.
And what then?
Nothing. But that they are too often Cheats.
Cry you Mercy! that Turn escap'd me.
No Matter what I look like, I know what you talk like.
Prithee now, What?
Why, like one that hates ev'ry Body who have not as much Wit as your self.
You wrong me, my Quarrel was only with those who have so little, that their going upon Two Legs looks like playing of Tricks. How long have we been Foes,?
I'll tell you, if you won't think me a Fool for repeating his Words.
Ay, tell him, tho' he was the only Man I desir'd you not to tell.
Then I am the only Man he ought to tell, for I hope thou never spok'st well of me.
If you're grave, I'm dumb. -- 'Twas the simplest Thing in the World: The Day we din'd last together,negligently went into the Room before, sate upon his Right Hand at Table. -- And worst of all, took the Glass of Wine he call'd for, and with it his Stomach; for he cou'd not eat out of Anger.
Is that all, I'm sorry for it, dear: To make thee amends, thou shalt go to Heaven before me, if thou canst.
Well then, Are we Friends?
Entirely. What think you of a Turn in the Park till Dinner?
Agreed. -- I find we all dine together.
Don't you come,,will go into the Room before you, and take your Glass again.
is my good Friend, I will stay and Dine, for all them. -- Beside, I have a Design to ask him for his rich Sister: I know he loves me; but then he lovesbetter. I wish I cou'd make 'em fall out, then shou'd I have her snug to my self.
How comes this Fool to stumble on this frightful Probability? I am alarm'd! And something must be done, for shou'd it be a Match,is lost! For his Behaviour just now sufficiently confirmed me, if she gives her Consent, his will not be wanting.
What's that you are resolving to try,?
To vex 'em that vex me.
Who are they?
No Matter. But mayhap I may fit 'em as well. Will you carry me up and introduce me to Mr.Sister?
With all my Heart.
Fools are often lucky at guessing. -- I must improve this Hint, tho' the Fancy of a Fool; for shou'd it be Real, I am lost.
What think you,?
Ladies, your Servant! -- I was just coming up to you. This honest Gentleman, Madam, is a Friend of your Husband's; and desires to be known to you and your Sister.
Recommended by you, and my Husband's Friend, are Merits will always make him welcome here.
O Lord! Madam, I am welcome where-ever I go. All People love honest: I am known every where by the same Name.
That proceeds from your being every where the same Thing, I dare say, Sir.
Yes, Madam; for I am the same I was the Hour I was Born; never have any Thing to do, but to go to Plays and Opera's, or where People ask me: 'Twould kill another Man to do as I do.
No, sure, for he would die first.
D'you think so; thank God I'm as healthy as a Horse; pardon the Comparison.
If the Horse does, I do. But pray, Sir, Was you never in Love? That wou'd try the Strength of your Heart, more than all you have mentioned.
She likes me, I see -- She talks of Love,
-- Never but with a Cousin of my own, who is as like me as ever she could Stare; just such a Face for all the World, and such a Humour; every-body said we shou'd have made a charming Couple; but she was my Second Cousin; had she been my First, I might lawfully have married her.
It is unlucky for the rest of Womankind -- You'll never love so truly again; our first Passion is ever the sincerest.
She's at it again.
Not so neither, Madam; your Ladyship methinks is as like her in Person as any Thing, only indeed you are not so facetious. Gemini, the Jokes we used to crack upon our Neighbours, and upon one another: I shall never forget one she made upon me at a Christning; said she, I believe your Father and Mother were both Maids when they were married; because when Two Maidenheads meet they always get a Fool. Ha! ha!
I believe by that your Cousin's Father and Mother were not Maids when they married, for she was no Fool.
How come you to know that? No more they were; and that broke off the Match, for they say she was a Bastard.
I thought, being your Relation made it impossible.
Not so neither: For by paying so much Yearly to the Poor, I was told the Spiritual Court would wink at it.
This must break her Heart sure?
No; that was too tough, as they say, but it did turn her Brains.
Then she was cured of her Passion, I suppose, Sir?
No, Madam; I told you Truth, I never tell any Thing else: Your Brother always said I was too honest to live in this World.
But happily you have another Quality, that always thrives, though Honesty don't.
If it is any Errand, Madam, I'll go. I've nothing to do.
I thank you, Sir, 'tis what I hope will employ us all. The Company and Dinner wait.
If I am not mightily mistaken,, your Inclinations are not different from mine; here is none but my Friend, honest; I may speak freely of a Design I long have wish'd to execute, by binding of our Friendships by the Name of Brother: Tell me; Do you like my Sister well enough to say that seriously which you have so often spoken to her in Gallantry?
I like her, as one that has her Sexes Beauties with her Brother's Mind; so well, that I conjure you by our Friendship, put not the least Constraint upon her Actions: Let her make me happy; or at least leave me the Pleasure of reflecting I have not made her miserable.
'Tis generously answer'd. You have my Consent; now gain her your own way. -- But shall we go in? The Women talk'd of Tea.
'Tis so; just as I expected, they are to be married I find.
To be Married! then his Suspicions and my Fears are true -- But stay, I'll hear more.
Her Sexes Beauty with her Brother's Mind; those were his Words.
Then Hell's blackest Falshood was in them.
He is in Love, I see -- But I may spoil his Sport. If I could make him banishhis House -- For she seems to like me -- I'll try.
Leave that to me,, for I've overheard all you've been saying, and will join my Interest to advance you in her Esteem; and for your Comfort, knowSister hates: Yet further for your Hopes, if you can keep a Secret, she is, I know, in Love with you. Her Brother will, she tells me, this Day force her to marry, if some Means are not found out to avert the Blow.
What d'you think of makingjealous ofwith his Wife? -- If you'll tell me what to say, -- I'll swear any Thing.
That won't do -- Her Passion lies so much another Way; -- besides, he is so indifferent in his Behaviour, the Malice will appear.
I know well enough who you mean, 'tis. -- I saw him Whisper, and put a Note into her Hand rising from Table, and went away immediately.
No; I have a better Prospect -- But let us be gone, -- they'll miss us else -- How quick to fear is Guilt! -- Go wait for me at my House.
Nay, 'tis endless to dispute, you are a Wit, and will always be in the Right.
That I am both, appears in nothing so much as admiring you.
Flattery, after one is married, is downright Abuse, because we know 'tis Flattery.
And yet 'tis then we want it most.
How so, pray?
Because we generally discover Faults that won't bear Truth, which we conceal'd before.
Ay, but the Disease is then grown desperate, and Sleeping Draughts are best to quiet what's incurable.
I'm of your Opinion; and it shou'd go near to quiet, if I prepar'd it.
Monster! but tell me, what wou'd you say if a Woman shou'd endeavour to make a Fool of you?
Why, that she was inclined to love me, and so endeavour'd to make me what was most agreeable to her.
Your Wit, Sir, makes you forget here are Women in the Room.
You and your Sister's always does, Madam -- Therefore--
Prithee hold your Tongue, and keep your Compliment, for I wou'd not be a Wit for the World.
Why, Madam -- 'tis the best Security against Envy.
Ay, but 'tis not the best Security against Hatred,.
I wonder it shou'dn't, -- 'tis the harmlessest Thing upon Earth, it never infects any Body.
You're intolerable; I'm surpriz'd you escape.
If you mean the Power of your Eyes, Madam, I have not escap'd?
Ridiculous Creature; I would rather hear you rail than praise, because I'm sure you're sincere then.
Nay, I'm Dumb, Madam; I say nothing.
You need not be Dumb to say that.
Nay, if you begin to be severe on one another, do it to some Purpose, e'en marry and be heartily reveng'd; so I leave you to decide the Quarrel --we must go into the City.
, thee and I will make a Visit -- Sister, you'll entertain.
Now I find myself in earnest, I'm as aukward as Sir-- how near are Sincerity and Dullness allied! full as near as strong Desire and Impotence. I'm so Silly and so Serious, that I'm downright Speechless --
I wonder, Madam, where your Brother is gone.
Wou'd you have me go and inquire, Sir -- He looks shamefully Guilty, and I'm glad to see it.
For God's sake, Madam; I only ask'd.
A most happy Expedient truly; but I interrupted some Jest, I fear -- You seem to be in a most pleasant Humour.
That's pardonable in you, Madam, who can make such good ones of your own.
I'm oblig'd to you, Sir, for that Power.
You are, but 'tis sorely against my Will.
I shou'd be sorry to oppose your Will, whilst you have that dying Look.
I'm glad you think me in so desperate a Condition, you'll the easier believe what I say, since the Words of even dying Criminals are seldom doubted.
I wou'd be glad to know what you have to discover, that makes you so sollicitous to be believ'd.
Truth of great Importance, that will, if I recover, concern my Life.
But if you shou'd not recover, what wou'd you leave me?
I have nothing I can call my own; you, like a bold Invader, have born away by force what else my Faith and Love had offer'd.
And what had my Brother's Visit to do with this Speech? Why did you not at once open your Snuff-box, and then the Case?
Truly, from not thinking well of myself, nor ill enough of you, to ask you to resign the World for me.
Tho' you pretend too much Modesty to ask it, I'll be sworn you have Vanity enough to expect it.
Rather say, I've Love enough to wish it, and too much, I fear, to be easy under a Disappointment.
Love from you sounds like Religion from Atheists, they never name it but in Ridicule or Complaisance to the Company.
I beg you not to think -- because I laugh at theProphets, I'm so insensible as to reject Truths enforc'd by Miracles.
Ay, but Women like a little of the Prophet, a Man to win us must see Visions and dream Dreams till he is quite out of his Senses, and then we'll believe him sent by Love.
You are to blame, your Interest is the same with true Religion, a Man loves you the more for being in his Senses.
How comes it then all your Lovers in Romances and Novels are raving?
Faith, unless their Authors were so, I can't tell; or if that was a Proof, as you pretend, it ought to be a kind of Mortification, for it looks as if you were not the proper Objects of Reason's Worship.
Yes, but we love to be serv'd implicitly; it shows our Power. Now your Reason is an inquisitive Free-thinker, that rather prescribes than obeys.
It only inquires that it may serve you as you deserve, a Doctrine Women of your Merit ought to propagate, and scorn the Offering of Ignorance, that daily sacrifices to Idols. -- Believe me, the want of Sense makes every Victory ridiculous.
Too much Sense has often the same effect as too little.
Then there are fewer ridiculous Things in the World than I imagin'd.
And so you wou'd have us increase the Number and marry.
And why not -- for People are generally fondest of their own Jests.
Nay, 'tis a secure Way of never being without one.
Which in a Month's time every Body will laugh at but ourselves.
Does not that Thought frighten you?
Not when I think how many happy Ages will rowl round me, and of the painful Hours I am to count without you.
And so you are really in Love.
As certainly as any one must be that saw you.
And how certain is that, pray?
Why just as certain as that you don't think I flatter when I tell you so.
Odious! I don't think of the Matter.
I'm glad to hear it, you'll the likelier consent.
Since you've help'd me to an Excuse I can't tell but I may.
Then let us lose no Time.
But for all that I'll venture -- tho' I'm in the wrong to consent thus easily, for Men generally measure the Value of Things by the Difficulty they have in obtaining 'em.
Quite contrary, Madam, nothing dignifies a Benefit so much as a readiness in conferring it; and Men never like any thing for the sake of the Difficulty, but despise all Difficulties for the sake of what they like; the Charm is in the Prize, not in the Hardship -- But in return to your Goodness, I beg you wou'd make your own Terms.
No, Love is free as Air, and, like it, grows distemper'd by Confinement: You shall be absolute, for I shou'd hate the Good you did me by Compulsion, and scorn whatever little Contracts without Love produc'd.
Generous Creature -- I'll instantly inform your Brother of my blest Success with you; he, I'm sure, will not delay my Happiness.
Madam, your Slave -- You're opportunely come to help me in the choice of a Snuff-box for the Woman I love best.
That will require, Sir, what you won't agree to, my knowing the Lady, for our Tasts may differ.
Impossible, you may as easily differ from yourself.
That mayn't be so hard a Task, perhaps. But are you awake, do you know what you say?
I vow to God, Madam, I mean nothing, but that my Mistress is an Angel, and you are another -- And Angels must always like the same Thing.
Yes, indeed, Madam, I'm sure that's what he meant -- If your Ladyship had but heard what he said of your Wit and Beauty!
Fie, Mrs., I wou'd have some Tea.
There is some just ready, Madam.
Ay, but I hate this publick Room, one's kill'd with idle People.
Ay, Madam, I have a charming Room above Stairs your Ladyship never saw; with thecharmingest rich Covering for a Bed that ever came into. Will you be pleas'd to walk up, Madam?
I'll follow you, Mrs.-- Your Servant, Sir.
Nay, you must not exclude me, Madam.
Oh! pray, Madam, have Mr.Fancy in the Covering; all the Ladies say he has a charming Fancy in a Covering.
Is Mrs.to be seen?
I'll let her know you are here, Madam.
I'll try how she's inclin'd, before I give a loose to my Revenge; but why shou'd I be angry with? I shew'd him first the way to change his Love, by being false myself -- Fool that I was, first to give him up my Person, Honour, and my Heart, and then to wrong him; he's a Wretch we shou'd despise, that cou'd forgive an Injury in Love; for such an Easiness bespeaks Indifferency for us, or else a Meanness in the Lover's Soul, that everlastingly condemns our Choice -- But here's-- Be calm my Griefs.
You'll forgive me, dear, and yet I don't know how to expect it, when I consider what kept me so long.
If this was it
I must approve your better Choice.
'Tis silly to own it; but I've been as angry with Mother, as ever Mother was with a Child.
What Part provok'd you so?
Don't you see -- her Obstinacy in wandring from her Husband, contrary to his Will and common Sense -- I can't help thinking it like some of our fine Ladies, who think their Husbands inhumanly cruel, if they won't believe they wou'd resist the Charms of all Mankind united for their sake, and yet won't sacrifice such a Trifle as a publick Place or Visit to his Quiet.
You'll make some Man envied, and all Womankind asham'd, when you marry, if you reason thus.
The latter will be against my Will then; for all I propose in Marriage, is to make two People as happy as I can, by never doing any thing to be asham'd of myself.
Then you do think of marrying?
And what will surprize you more, I'll marry from having thought on't.
By no means, since you judge too well to chuse amiss -- shou'd I not be too curious to ask the happy Man -- Now hold my Heart.
Not at all, since my own Inclinations are confirm'd by my Brother's Approbation -- though, perhaps, you'll laugh when I name him, 'tis.
I wish you may have reason to laugh.
What's the Danger?
He's a Man, that's all.
Or between you and I,, I wou'd not have him; wou'd you?
I! not for the-- What stoop to be the Refuge of a Fop, who brings me the Refuse of the whole Town; and, tir'd of Life, wou'd bury himself with me!
Yet you persuadedin my Brother's Favour, whom you knew a Man of Pleasure.
Because I knew him to be a Man of Honour.
Is nottoo a Man of Honour?
I can't tell, I never trusted him.
Then when he's mine I beg you never will -- for believe me,, if he offers to borrow then, it must be out of Extravagancy.
What d'ye mean, Madam.
Nothing, but that I'm glad to be marry'd well; we Women without a Husband are like Sheep without a Shepherd, expos'd to Wolves and Foxes.
And Marriage, like a Shepherd, saves you from Wolves and Foxes, only to sell you to the Butcher's Knife, a Husband.
And so you wou'd have me graze my Life out, be shorn once a Year to support the Woollen Manufactory, cloath Fools, and comfort decay'd Constitutions -- No, that will never do while my own is so good -- But don't you think I'm wild,?
You are in the way of being tam'd, remember I say so.
I'm glad of it, for to tell you the truth, I'm quite tir'd of this savage Life.
But had you not better live in a Tree than a Cage?
No, if I had a kind Master, 'twere better than being disturb'd by hunting Fools and Hawks.
Well, I shall wonder at nothing, after your declaring in favour of the perfidious Sex with the Frankness of a downright Libertine.
I'll venture to say one thing, Madam, without thinking myself a Libertine: To subdue our Inclination to our Duty, is all I know of Virtue; for 'twere ridiculous to pretend a Merit in the Conquest of what didn't oppose us.
To have a Nature pure, and refin'd from all Passion, is sure a higher degree of Excellence.
But since such a one is not upon Earth, I shall insist 'tis in Resistance we acquire our Fame.
Well, I cou'd never come up to you -- What, go to Church and declare to the whole Congregation that I've the Inclinations of a Brute! Oh! I am ready to faint at the Thought of it!
May be you think the Place too publick; that puts me in mind of a Lady, who wou'd never taste Wine at Table where ev'ry Body drank it, and got a red Face by drinking strong Waters in her Closet.
Red Face, Madam -- mine is no redder than yours.
Yes it is -- No -- Now 'tis pale again.
I've gone too far
I must dissemble, or my Looks will betray me -- I beg Pardon, dear, I've only rallied all this time.
I'm glad to hear it, I protest I was almost out of Temper, to hear you maintain an Argument so different from your former Conversation -- I hope I have said nothing I shou'd not, I mightily fear I have.
Nothing I assure you, but what I shou'd have said in your Case -- Here's your Brother, he seems pleas'd.
, you must be Witness this Night to the greatest Happiness of my Life, next to-- Sister,overjoy'd me with the News of your Consent, and begs I'll not delay. So I'm resolv'd I will not sleep till he's pleas'd -- You may sleep as much as you think fit.
I may, without blushing, own an Esteem that's authoriz'd by you -- tho' my Friendhas almost put me out of Humour with Mankind.
Lord, Child, I told you I was but in jest.
If she'll follow your Example, I'll answer for it she'll change her Mind. I must dance at your Wedding, remember,.
'Twere kinder to dance at one's Funeral, for that is the End of our Sorrows, the other the Beginning.
Did not I tell you how averse she was -- What is it, dear, has chang'd you so o'th' sudden?
Banter, meer Banter.
Nothing else, I assure you -- Lord, did you never say a Thing for the sake of saying it?
Never; and I thank God I have not Wit enough to teach my Tongue a Language different from my Heart.
May no Time nor Chance dissolve the happy Union then; and so I take my Leave of you.
You'll be here,-- I'll invite the Company that din'd here, if they're to be found.
If I am able you may command me.
Did you ever see any thing so alter'd? What can it mean?
I can't guess; a secret Sorrow seem'd to hang about her, that discover'd itself the more she labour'd to conceal it.
It's odd, this strange Dislike to Matrimony shou'd seize her at this time. I remember nothing Gayer at your Wedding than she was.
If I did not know Malice and Envy had Ten thousand Tongues, and they all false, her Conduct would almost tempt me to believe common Fame; and that her Aversion to your marryingwas like some memorable Patriot's Hatred to absolute Power, they could not endure it in any Hands except their own. -- But I had forgot my Friend; I am accountable to him for every Hour I lose. Come, Sister, let's go in and prepare ev'ry thing.
From-- But here's my Husband; he's now grown painful to me. Our Hate encreases with our Crimes; and the Sight of him we have injur'd is like the Ghost of one we have murder'd; it haunts away our Peace, awakes our Guilt, and fills our Soul with Horror.
Here she is
What! retir'd, and talking to yourself: Trust me, my Dear, it is unkind to rob my Eyes and Ears of all that can delight 'em. I've been this Hour in search of you to let you know I'm resolv'd this Evening to give my Sister to, if you approve of it.
Your Judgment, Sir, is too good to want a Woman's Skill.
Believe me, my, 'tis mightily your Interest to have my Judgment good; for it speaks wondrous Things in praise of you. But why so cold? Has any thing displeas'd my Love?
Sudden Vapours and Sickness at my Stomach.
Come, prithee cheer up, and glad my Heart that knows no Joy while thou art sad. Here's, she'll join to chase away your Cares.
Lord, I have no Cares -- but your importuning me to fly without Wings -- that is, to be merry when I have no Reason.your Servant.
Your Servant: What makes you out of Humour, Child?
Ridiculous Question! Why, what makes one old and ugly? Something we can't help, for one would be neither of the three by Choice.
But why are you not as ready to help Nature in the Improvement of your Humour, as you are artful in mending your Complexion, and concealing your Age?
Because, being better humour'd were to cultivate a Weakness that puts it in your Power to impose upon us, whilst looking young and handsome enables us to cheat you. And 'tis in Love as 'tis in Play, you must be the Knave or the Fool.
This is a way of Reasoning pardonable in none but those ruin'd by Play. I hope no ill Run has turn'd you Gamester, Madam.
No Matter: I shall never attempt repairing my Loss by one who understands all the Game. You are in no Danger, Sir.
In no Danger,! Is he not going to be married? I told you you'd change your Mind.
So will he, if he has not chang'd his Nature.
Don't you think this Behaviour ofmost prodigious?
Not at all; but your Friend and you are so censorious, 'tis not safe to speak or look before you.
I've done -- I leave you for a Minute to hasten the Bride.
Pray don't be in too great a Hurry; for I'm engag'd for an Hour., Shall I set you down any where?
With all my Heart, if you go near the.
Your Liberty is now upon the Brink of Fate, as a Man's Life is when the Enemy appears in the Field. Don't you, like many of 'em, wish to make up the Quarrel, and part Friends?
No; for I would no more preserve my Freedom at the Price of my Love, than I would my Life at the Expence of my Honour.
Courage,, the Enemy is as well determin'd as you: See you keep firm when she appears.
Pleasure will keep my Constancy in this, as Reputation wou'd do in the other.
I'll send and invite the Company that din'd here.
Do: In the mean time I'll go to the, and bespeak some of the Ensigns of. Such as Favours, &c.
Mrs., d'ye esteem this Essence essential?
I'll assure you, Sir, 'tis as fine as ever was put in Hair.
What's in that Paper?
Cravats, Sir.
May I crave at what Price you sell 'em?
Twelve Pound the Dozen is the lowest, if you'll take my Word, Sir.
If I should take your Word, wou'd you not take me up?
Good God! Why shou'd you think so?
Because 'twould be taking what was another's.
O, Sir, You are dispos'd to be merry; however, I'llventure to take your Word. Here's a charming Piece of Lace: To be sure I'll use you as well as any Body.
Madam, your Ladyship's most humble Servant. I hope, Madam, your Head and Ruffles pleas'd your Ladyship.
By no means, Mrs., nor any Body else.
I wonder at that, Madam; they were the same Pattern with my Lady.
And therefore I, nor no Body else lik'd them. I would assoon have my Stays made by her Measure, or let her sit for my Picture, as have any thing I wear made by her Pattern.
What d'ye mean that overgrown Blue-Coat Girl, who has always as much Muslin about her Face as she has Affectation, or Decay in it?
Indeed she's in Fashion now to be sure.
Silly; She has been as long out of Fashion as out of her Teens.
And out of Lovers.
Or Modesty, for she has yet the Assurance to snuff those dim Eyes of hers, and twinkle after Hearts.
Then when she would be obliging or civil, she's as nauseous as the oldHospitality, that brings you Ale and Cheese for Breakfast: Or as a certain Knight's Lady that gives you Wine of her own making: I wou'd as live drink Water of her own making.
Well, surely an old Jest, or an old Story, is not duller than Love in an old Man or Woman.
Or 'tis as dull as a Country Town in Sermon-time.
Ay, or a Country Town at any time: Or as foolish as neglecting it in the Young.
Madam, I thank you for the Hint.
Well, Mrs., I'll send you that monstrous Head and Ruffles; and if you can reduce them to a size fit for a Christian, you'll do Miracles. Sir, your Servant.
You won't take less than Twenty Shillings a Cravat?
If I would I'm sure, Sir, you would not have the Conscience to ask 'em cheaper.
Lay by a Dozen, with some Essence, sweet Mrs., and I'll send for 'em to Morrow.
Madam, Mr.is below.
Show him up. He is an old Admirer of mine. I could, if he would assist me in my Revenge, be tempted to do that out of Malice, which I shall never do out of Love; for, I fear, is too great a Fool to be of any use.
Love and the Hickup have seiz'd me so of the sudden, I can't tell the dear Creature how much I love the Tip of her little Finger.
Shall I get you any thing to bring up the mighty Nothing you are big with?
Three Go-downs of you would do me more good than warm Water.
You want warm Water to wash those Hands of thine, and that dear dirty Face. Why, Man, thou'rt as dirty as a Chymist.
And as hot as his Fire.
Foh! And as windy as the Bellows that blows it. But prithee where hast been?
That's not to the purpose; shall I tell you where I would be?
Where all drunken Men generally would be, in the Place they are oftner troublesome than pleasing.
Methinks you Women shou'd like Drunkenness, for it opens Mens Purses, and shuts their Eyes.
But not their Mouths, Beast: Women hate Drunkards, for they neither keep their Words nor a Secret.
And you Women all keep your Words, because no Body will take 'em. Then for your Secrets you never trust us with any, but the Subject of a Quarrel betwixt you and your She Friend, how inhumanly she made you wait at Home to go with her to the Opera;be deny'd to seventy or eighty Bosom Friends; and neglect paying a hundred Visits that the last Winter was too short to pay: but indeed you're not sorry, since you've heard her Character, of any Pretence to break off an Acquaintance that had neither Credit or Entertainment.
Hold, you Brute, wou'd you have me believe, if we repos'd greater Confidence, you wou'd not deceive us? I would as soon trustat Play.
It's better doing that than never play.
To those that have the Rage of Gaming.
Do you never divert yourself with those dear Fingers? Let me buss 'em. I warrant they are always full of Court-Cards that crowd about 'em as about Favourites, to guide 'em to the Port of Preferment.
Nonsense! What does the Fool mean by Fingers, Favourites, Port and Preferment?
If you do not know what I mean I'll explain myself.
No, trust that to any Understanding rather than your own; 'twill be to your Advantage
Nay then --
If you're thus rude, I vow I'll keep my Resolution, and --
Till it spoils in this warm Weather; but it shan't be my Fault.
Stand off, Impertinence; d'ye think this Impudence will prevail?
If that don't, I have neither Wealth, nor Beauty; and for Modesty that never did; so I have no Hopes.
Your Case is not so desperate as you imagine perhaps -- If you, in return to any Favour you wou'd obtain, will.
Name it.
Let the Proposal be what it will, you promise?
Provided it be not Murder, Treason, nor Marriage, I do promise.
None of them; and upon this Condition, an Hour hence I'll meet you at. Remember you perform.
Keep your Appointment, and you shall find I will perform, and Wonders too.
Where's your Master?
I don't know, Sir. My Lady is at Mrs.Shop. She sent the Coach and me away with Mrs., with Orders to return in an Hour, and wait for her here.
Your Servant, Mrs.; how goes new Fashions and old Promises?
Why truly, Sir, neither to my Advantage.
Have you had no Ladies this Afternoon?
None, except Madam.
Is it long since she went?
O, Sir, at least an Hour: Mr.and she just staid to laugh at my Lady, and went away.
What, together! It's pretty odd, send her Coach and her Servants away.
Your servant, Mrs.; I wish, for your sake, little Heads may go out of Fashion. Pray make hast with what I sent about.
Ha! is not thatandcoming out of a Hackney-Coach?
Don't this look strange,?
By no means, Madam, 'tis the commonest thing in Life.
and I had certainly been kill'd; for the Coach broke at; and if Mr.had not come by, I know not what we should have done without him. Pray, Heaven,has kept the Coach.
I live but to serve the Fair, Madam.
And your Friend, Sir.
After them.
Both at once sometimes.
I'm frighten'd to Death; he seems suspicious.
Sir, you are expected at our House to Night. I'm the unluckiest Creature.
I'll not fail.
I hope, Sir, you'll come and see the last of your humble Servant.
How soon, pray?
You can never come too soon. In an Hour at farthest.
I'll not fail waiting on you.<|endoftext|>Bid the Coach set up, and let the things be brought in here My Daughter come! God bless you!
I am o'er joy'd to see your Ladiship, and to see you look so well.
Your Ladiships most humble Servant.
, How do you like these figur'd Velvets; this I design for the Bed and Hangings; this Violet colour suits agreeably with this Buff.
Most extreamly well, Madam; does your Ladiship design a Mixture?
I had thoughts of Paining and Bordering it with this Crimson and Green; but that sort of Furniture has been my aversion, ever since I saw my odious LadyAppartment set forth with Scotch Plad and Damask.
Confusion! How his Eyes are fix'd on her, as if his Soul received her Charms, and wanted pow'r to hide it!
I don't look well to day, Mr.
Your Ladiship can never look other.
, thou won't flatter me; I have not red enough have I?
But from the Eyes to the Chin, and looks like the Raddle upon a Sheep's Back.
Your Ladiship is mistaken, I never saw you look better; there's a Curl indeed out of order with the motion of the Coach; Hold, incline your Head: So, very well, that Pink-colour'd Riband suits agreeably with your Complexion.
But do you really think, Mr, I look so well to Day.
He has reason to hope, Madam, that your Ladiship may look better to morrow Night.
Have you catch'd hold of that report, who made you so wise?
Him that is to make your Ladiship so happy.
Indeed, indeed, Mr., it derogates from you to talk with Girls: When I had a Mother, I durst never think of approaching her without Fear and Trembling. Now a Young thing as soon as ever she has bid farewell to Bibs and Aprons, is ready for a Love, and thinks her self with Noise and Impudence, better to be liked, than her Mother with all her Experience.
Sirdesires to know if your Ladiship be at leisure.
Always to him; I shall be glad of his Company Daughter, I have taken that care of your Fortune, as deceives not the Trust my late Lord reposed in me, Sirand I, have agreed upon your Marriage; my Authority secures your Consent.
Marriage, Madam, is a thing I have not thought on, yet 'tis a Journey for Life, and that once consider'd, we ought to do every thing to make it as easie to us as possible.
Sir, your Servant; where have you been since dinner?
Be Dad, taking a Glass to this pretty Lady's health, Madam your Servant.
Your most humble Servant.
, a very pretty Lady.
I cou'd think so to, if 'twere not of the latest.
Give me thy Hand sweet heart, thou'rt welcome to Town, be Dad with all my heart.
What think you of a Walk in the Garden; the Lovers are engag'd, and we wou'd leave them together.
We wait upon you.
Which dost thou like best, my Dear, the Town, or Country.
The Town, Sir, beyond Comparison, all good Judges are of my Opinion, I hope you are one of them.
Before George not I, yet if it had not been for me you had been there still; I persuaded my Lady to send for you up, and have provided a Husband for thee, Girl, what say'st thou to a Husband, heigh.
'Tis a sort of Creature, has not yet fallen under my Consideration.
All in good time, Child; I like thee ne'er the worse for that. You don't look like the forward things of the Town, that Marries a Man only to Cuckold him, Ods bobs thou wilt not do that, I hope, Child.
I don't understand you, Sir.
Come, we will be better acquainted, and then thou shalt understand me, heigh: to say truth, the way of making Cuckolds is soon understood.
Pray, Sir, at once forgive, and satisfie my curiosity; have you spent your time mostly in the Town or Country.
Be Dad, Child, the Country; I never came tobut in times of Parliament, which thank Heaven were not very frequent in our late Reigns; do I look like your Sickly, the dregs of nothing but Pox and Wine, Hemh, -- Hemh, -- shew me any young Fellow of them all, that can match me in Health and Vigour; neither Stone, nor Gout, nor the relicts of any Distemper, but love of thee, Child.
Love of me, sure you mistake your self, one wou'd have imagin'd it, any other under the Sun at your Age.
Why there, be dad you'r out, there's none Lovers but us old Fellows, the Young ones don't think it worth their time; shew me such another as Old Sir; why Child he does nothing but look Babies in her Eyes all day, but bedad I believe he sees but in Imagination, unless he borrows the assistance of Spectacles: He sets her, before George, in a great Chair in the very middle of a Chamber, and himself for hours together at her Feet, upon a Foot-stool, in admiration of her; there's encouragement now.
My Ladyand her Counsel are in the Parlor, Sir, looking over the Writings, she desires your Company.
I come, I come; Sweet Mistriss your Servant, till I see thee again.
I cameto your deliverance, I imagin'd how you were teiz'd.
O hideous!, did I think in Nature, there had been such an ill bred, awkard thing; why he's so great a Monster already, Horns can't make him worse.
And yet my Ladysays you must Marry him.
What with twelve thousand Pound, a great deal of Youth, no contemptible stock of Beauty, besides an untainted Reputation, that out-weighs them all; believe me,, I'm not so far ignorant of my own worth, to bury it in him.
I wish you don't ruine your self by the Refusal.
That Marriage is the greatest, and you must use all your Interest with my Mother to prevent it; or resolve to make me the most unhappy Creature breathing.
All aids that are in my power you may command: But has not your Journey tir'd you, you will not be for the Park this Evening.
The Name has unweary'd me; I'll but change my Cloathsand be ready for you.
My Ladyhas tir'd poor; he has left her to her Bonds and Conveyances, and is gone to the Park before; wou'd not you wish to meet him there?
Why thy question? He is my Mothers, and never can be mine; but we trifle: will you favour me with your Company, whilst I am Dressing?
I'll follow you.
Yes,, my Interest pulls too strong against you, to leave you a Moment to your self till I have put it out of Fortunes power to injure me,.
Pray, Gentlewoman be pleased to wear your Mask, till we're got out of this Road of Foppery; I had better have gone Ten Miles about.
Lord, Mr., 'tis so hot, my Mask stifles me; but where are you going? I am sure Walking is not your Business, especially in this place.
Yes, Wife, to chuse, that you may have the pleasure of comparing your old damned Jealous Husband, to these Gay stuttering Fops, that sail along by us; Here's your Gallant, Mr., coming, put on your Mask, I say; Not for the World, I warrant you.
'Tis too late, he has seen me, Husband, 'twill be uncivil.
Mr., your Servant; The fairhere! Since when is it, Sir, you have been so far reconciled to our Lewd end of the World, to trust this Lady amongst us.
Hum, Sir, not too much of trusting neither, but yet, as you say, 'tis a dangerous place, for an old Fellow, that has an Handsom Wife; Have you not that Opinion of her, Mr.?
All the World must allow her that Character, but Faith, my Friendship to you, hinders me to think of her, as I would, if she were not thy Wife.
And you, forsooth, Have not you a just Esteem of Mr.Merit?
As I ought, I know my Duty to you, Husband, and never had a thought against it.
Why, very well, since you are both so indifferent, 'twere no great harm, if you never see one another again. As to you, Gentlewoman, 'tis Mortifying you too much, to suffer the Visits of a Man, who has not Sense to know your Worth; And, let me tell you, Mr., I Love my Wife, and don't like People that slight her Charms, and prefer my Friendship to her Beauty, therefore till you come better prepared to do her justice, your Visits will be but offensive, and if ever you make another, I shall conclude you have taken a Friends Advice. Come, Wife.
Go thy ways, for an old Jealous, I wish be-gad, I could say, Cuckold, but my honest Endeavours shall not be wanting to make thee, that thou believest thy self.
Thank God for my deliverance, I'm got into the open Air again, without the incumbrance of an old Woman, who is not satisfied, unless you confine your Eyes to the Curse of meeting none but hers.
If thou art weary already, what wilt thou be when the Noose is fixt, and no kind relieving Hand can do thee the curtesy of unslipping it.
I confess, I have given the Town reason to believe, I cou'd allowandthe two ends of time, to meet in our expected Wedlock.
The Opinion of thy Sense was not forfeited by that, we always believed, thou hadst enough to distinguish between the glittering Metal and the Allay; But are you not resolved to Marry my Lady.
So far from it, that I wou'd run my self into any other Noose in, to avoid hers;is the Goddess here; You have doubtless heard her Father left her a Fortune of 12000on Condition she Married with my LadyConsent, else Shame and Beggery to be her Portion.
That any Man shou'd be so far wedded to the Follies of his Wife to desire the entailing of them upon his Posterity.
I have held a long Age of Dissimulation with her Mother to permit her return to Town, and get her Fortune secured,engaged my Father with the hopes of Marrying her, and doubtless I shou'd prevail over the old Lady, if it were not for another; but this is the hardest part of my Confession, for I think, whatsoever Custom can persuade, that Man's a Villain, who boasts a Lady's Favour.
Begad if our Town Ladies come to know how well thou art principled, thou may'st e'en make thy own Markets amongst them, 'tis not to be matched in thy green years, which commonly reckons the pleasure of telling as the foremost delight in an Amour.
I am not Beaux enough for that yet. To be short then,who you know lives with, and governs my Lady, did me the honour to like me, and I had reason to believe my self Master of her first Favours, I cou'd not shake off her fondness, tho' all mine was secretly addrest to, for whose sake I was forced to dissemble with.
Begad that was slavery enough, for the trouble of getting handsomly rid of a Mistress, is ten times more than what it costs to make her such.
She catch'd the discovery from my Eyes, and unknown toperswaded her Mother to send her into the Country, then to confound me further, the old Lady grew fond of me,putting it into her Head, that I wou'd Marry her, by which means, she constantly secured her self of seeing me, being in the same House, and reasonably thought, the interest she had in my Heart, ran no hazard, by bestowing my Person upon an old Woman.
Then how comes it, she has sufferedto return, for I perceive she manages at pleasure.
'Twas conditionally, I Married my Ladyto morrow, and consented thatshould be bestowed upon my Father.
And how do you think to evade either.
'Tis for that reason I make this discovery to engage your assistance,will not suffer her to sign for her Daughters Portion, till the moment of Execution, but my present uneasiness is to entertain, I have ordered Musick and Dancing after Supper, if possible engagein your Affairs, that she may not concern her self with mine.
You have ordered your own without considering my applications tomay ruine me with.
Quite contrary, that Coquet never likes a Man so well as when he does not seem to be fond of her, trust my Opinion; besides 'twere no Obligation if you did not run a little hazard for your Friend.
You shall command me, and now I consider, I'le bring Sir, who is Fop enough, to think all Women that have fine Cloaths Beauties; him I design for the old Lady, if she shou'd happen to like him 'twere no ill way of getting rid of her.
That will be admirable, but be sure plyclose, she's handsom enough to reward your pains, and because of her interest with my Lady, the only Enemy I can apprehend, -- They are come into the Walk, we'll meet them at the next turn.
Your Lad'ships most joyful humble Servant, you'r welcome to Town; how long have you done it the honour to grace it with your presence.
But to day, Madam, I'm pleased at the good fortune of meeting you so soon.
your Servant, O Gud I've been at the Play-house, where there has been the odiousest Play, so dull, that o' my Conscience, I shan't abide to set my foot in it again this Twelve Month.
I believe there was very little Company there this Weather; how come you to prefer that Diversion to?
O Gud, you may very well ask, for 'twas no choice of mine, an Alderman's Wife and Daughter did me the displeasure to Dine with me, and press'd me beyond decency to go with them; O Jesu, what a vexation 'tis to be with those precise sort of People, that wou'd not go out of their Road, tho' to be less odious.
They were famously set out, I warrant you.
O most unsuitably, the very sight of their Trappings wou'd have made you died of heat, of all things I hate Winter Cloaths in Summer; what say you?
That there are a sort of People that think Finery never out of season.
Lard,, I finish't a Copy of Verses last night, which I have sent to half a score of my Friends for their approbation, I bestow'd the last upon admirable Sir, but I'le send you one of them.
You'l not fail.
Lard, Madam, what do you take me for?must come in too for a Judge.
Pray, what was the Subject?
I know none so Entertaining as her self.
O, Madam, your most grateful Servant, 'twas upon the different Addresses I have had made to me of late; O Jesu, such a glut of Foppery and Mankind; I long to breath a little of the Country Air, that I may get rid of this Town Lumber, and entertain my Muse alone with the reflections of what she has left behind.
But, who is that Sir, he's sprung up since my reign.
O Gud, a very pretty Gentleman,, so Airy, so well Drest, so Handsom.
See how Opinions differ, if you'l take mine,, he's the most out-cast Fop in Nature, he once made the Campagne, but all he remembers of it, is running to, which has given him fears enough to keep at home all his life after.
, Will you favour me with your Company to night, we have Musick and Dancing?
I'le wait upon you anon, 'tis my Lady Junket's Visiting day, and she'l never pardon me, if I omit my Devoir.
O, that old Gossipping thing, she'l never have lost the relish of youth, but wishes so well too't, she'l bring young loving things together in spight of their Hearts.
Fye, Gude I hate you, for being so censorious, because she allows the freedom of her Apartment to Quality of both Sexes; A Lady of her age can't be friendly or so, but presently she is thought procurish.
O, very friendly, and then so grateful, one Treat shall make her yours all her life after.
Ladies, your humble Servant, 'tis a delicate Evening.
Sir, your Servant, see,is stealing away, go after, and bring her back.
I have ill Nature enough to break an Appointment, and I fancy here is one.
I have that to say which it concerns you to know, favour me but with an opportunity after Supper, and letknow nothing of it.
In the Garden I'le expect you.
Ten thousand ages, till then, O, do not fail me, my Heart will suffer unspeakably if you shou'd.
No more, take my word I'le be there.
O Jesu, sureyou have lost your senses, who wou'd be seized thus.
Together, and so thoughtful, I see the growing evil.
Let me be nothing, Madam, if ever I saw any thing so killing as your Eyes, they have Charms, my Heart never understood before.
Yours is a general gallantry to the whole Sex, Sir.
Lard, Sir, what a loss shou'd we have had, if you had made the Campagne.
I must confess I staid in pure Charity to the fair Sex, to expose them, by my absence, was an inhumanity my Heart cou'd not agree to.
I fancy, Sir, you are very fortunate in Amours.
Let me expire, Madam, if I have any reason to complain, but those fair Eyes, makes me forget, every thing but themselves.
I swear Mrs., you talk pleasantly, come, shall we not be going?
When you please;we must not leave you behind.
You'l give me leave to wait on you to your Coach, Ladies.
Sir, not so fast, come back,
I've a word with you.
Pax on you, let me go, I must wait upon the Ladies, 'tis such an omission, that I shall never be pardon'd, nor deserve the Esteem of a Gentleman amongst them.
You may appologize for that anon, I call'd you back, to give you a little Advice.
Be sudden then, I cannot live, divided from.
The old fire, that flames upon sight of every new Face, but I design you for another, who exceeds her in advantages, as much as you do all the Play-house Beaus in Dress and Gallantry.
No ill Comparison; who is it? I dye to know.
First then, she's prodigious rich, wears extravagant fine Cloaths, and has the best way of putting them on.
O, of all things, I love a Lady well Drest, let me be nothing, if one that is other, does not look mean, and as if she were to be loved according.
Then she's Amorous, and will no doubt be presently taken with you.
'Pshaw, Pax, so they all tell me, I cou'd have bated her that part of the Character, 'tis surfeiting.
Her Fortune however is enviting, if you apply your self to her, she's rich enough to reward your labour.
Let me expire, if thou dost not talk scandalously, I hope 'tis not Matrimony thou hint'st at.
Why, you're too much a Man of Mode, to make the burthen uneasie to you; a Civil Husband, and so forth, is all that a Wife can rationally expect from you.
Gad, now I think on't, Cold Civility to a Wife, gives one a good air, let me dye, if I cou'd be fond of an Angel that I was once Married to, but to be seen abroad with her, were an extravagance, I shou'd never forgive my self for.
Or if it shou'd happen, once in an Age, I fancy, you you wou'd make just such meen, as my Lord, and his Lady, when they are together in one Coach at.
Just for all the World, or let me expire, let me never breath, if I have not been passionately in love with her uneasie Frowns, and even ravish't to find during the whole Park time shehad not bestow'd one word, nor look, upon her Lord, one wou'd have sworn, but by her Frowns, she had not known him to be so near her.
Gad, I think he matches her, his lolling back in his Coach, without glance or motion, speaks as much mortification as her sulleness, the best we can conclude is, that they'r heartily weary of one another.
Shew me that Married Couple who are not, but then there's good Management in those Affairs, as in all others; Is it reasonable to disgust one self with a Wives Company, only to oblige the Town with Matter for remark, let her take her Coach, and leave me the freedom of my Chariot, I'le give her the Ceremony of the Glass as we meet, pass on and make no uneasie reflections of the heavy load intail'd upon Mortal life.
Besides, my Widow will set all uneasiness aside, and repair the breach you have made in your Estate.
The Campaign, the Campaign, let me be nothing, if I did not loose Baggage to the value of 1500all my Dressing Plate, Wardrobe, and Military Accoutrements, and was glad to secure my self at, with only the days Provision upon my Back, thou art my Friend, to whom I may own such a Misfortune, let me expire, if ever I was in such a Consternation since I was born into the World.
'Tis now Eight a Clock; do you know my Ladyhere in the Square, any body will tell you the House, I'll meet you there at Nine.
Adieu; I'll walk over the Park to my Lodgings, write an Excuse to an Expecting Lady, who does my Company the Honour to sigh for it, and then I'll be certain to wait upon you.
Why trulywe have had but a sorry Day on't.
Indifferent, Master, besides those that came to inquire after Stolen Goods; the Party that wou'd know the Cause why she did not conceive, paid us notably.
Look out some body knocks,.
O Gemini, Master! 'Tis Mr., the Turky Merchant, and Madamhis Wife; I am very well acquainted with her Maid, Mrs..
Peace, we must not pretend to know them till the Stars have been consulted: I'll to my Study, mind your hits,and get what intelligence you can.
Where's your Master, Friend, I hope 'tis not too late to speak with him.
In his Study, Sir; I'll go and acquaint him with your being here; He does not use to appear after Sun.
Lord, Husband, you are the strangest Man in the World, what will People think of you?
What, Mistress, you'r afraid the Devil should speak Truth, and discover your Abominations.
The Devil's the Father of Lyars, how shou'd he speak Truth.
You are the Mother of Lyars, and that Cuckold maker, one of your vile Disciples.
Because you heard he courted me before I was Married, you think I must needs be naught with him.
No, no, very Good in your sense, I warrant; Naught, why thou art not a Citizen's Wife for nothing; thou hast more grace I trust in the Lord, than not to think Cuckolding thy Husband a good honest practicable Thing; those are naught who do it so awkardly that the World is acquainted with it; nay their very Husbands, who are always the last in knowing the Favours that are done them.
But sure, you don't believe, that an ignorant block-head of a Fortune-teller, should speak any thing like Truth.
I'll tell you what I believe though, Mistriss, in my case of Enquiry your Ladiship can exceed all the Cunning men in, and read our Fortunes to a Tittle; but the Devil's in't, you won't make me as wise as your self, but put me here upon unlawful means, the Sin will lye at your door, Wife, you'd as good confess, and save charges into the Bargain.
If I should, I'm sure you wou'd not believe me.
The Devil take me then; Come be quick, before Master Astrologer comes.
Lord, Husband, what do you take me for? Why, if it were so, do you think I'd be such a Fool to confess.
No; Thou'rt wiser o' my Conscience, but be sure you are as trusty to other Folks; you Women have she Friends that you discover your failings to, and that way the Secret comes about; 'tis for your Interest, as well as mine, to keep the matter private, if 'twere but for the sake of preserving your Lovers, they are squeamish amongst such a glut of Womens Flesh, and are disgusted by that which has been blown upon; but see the Devil appears to decide our Controversie.
Is your business with me, Friend.
Yes, Mr., I've a doubtful Question to be resolved, therefore there's something by way of Encouragement, only whether my Wife do me Justice, you understand me Friend; I'm plaguily afraid of being a Cuckold, an ignorant Cuckold, Sir, for that's all; Pray consult the Stars, that I may come to the knowledge of my good Fortune.
We'll erect a Scheme, or as the Vulgar term it, cast a Figure, and give you the Opinion of the Stars thereupon.
He's Conjuring; we shall immediately see the Devil in the Circle.
Are you so silly to believe it, he seems to be a sorry ignorant Knave, that has more Will than Power to do Evil.
They say a Woman can out-wit the Devil, and I believe out-Face him too -- Well, Mr., have you done? What do the Stars say, am I represented with Horns like Capricorn, with a certain Tall young Gentleman in my Figure, who does my Wife the Honour to Love her, better then she can her Husband.
Your Wife, Sir, looks like a good Virtuous Lady, and your Figure speaks you to be a mighty dissatisfy'd Person, a little troubled in your Brain with Jealousie; but either my Skill deceives me, or you have no occasion for it.
How say you Master, do you like my Wife too? does the Stars denote me for further Cuckoldom, what encouragement do they give you, to take her part for she's so bad, not one Devil in Hell dares do it without a Bribe.
Is that one question all you wou'd have resolved.
Ay Friend, and I see 'tis more than thou canst do, thou art going to convince me of the Vanity and Folly of all those who have helped thee to deceive themselves.
How, Sir, do you undervalue my Profession?
O no, Sir, Your Profession is a very Learned Profession; but I much doubt the Skill of the Professor.
Were it not for this Virtuous, Good Lady, I cou'd show you a Proof of my Art wou'd make you tremble; yet verily it may be a means to acquit her; how say you, Sir, if you dare stand it, I'll raise a Familiar to convince you, and protect your Wife near me.
Wou'd you frighten me into an Opinion of your Art, you that can't tell a Man whether, or no, he's a Cuckold; I have no Faith in you, and therefore dare stand the Worst.
From Hell's deep Center, hither am I come, To warn thee, Mortal of thy heavy doom; Thy Wife is Chaste, yet shalt thou not believe, Thy Visionary Doubts, thy Mind deceive;Therefore remain accurst, and may'st thou find, Thy constant plague, in thy suspicious Mind.
Mr., accept of this Gratuity; my Husband faints! Lord, I wish his fears have not taken away his use of Hearing, He'll never remember what the Devil said to him.
Sir, Sir; How fares it with you?
Lord! How do you do, dear Husband? I'm frighted out of my Wits; I'll never venture to the Devil again with you, you shall e'en go by our self, next time for me.
Ay poor Wife; as thou say'st thou wilt, I believe, forsake me in all Perils; but is he gone are you sure.
Gone; Yes, Sir, what do you think; by vertue of my Art I can lay as well as raise -- This 'twas to be incredulous, and undervalue the Mysteries of Knowledge; I was forced to use extraordinary means to convince you: O the Blindness and Stonyheartedness of the Ignorant.
Pray let a Coach be call'd -- I'm very ill -- but Master, your Skill in the, shan't make me believe my Wife the Fairer.
'Tis the Capricio of all Old Men, Jealous of every thing that's Younger than themselves.
Ay, poor Lady; Heaven endow you with Patience -- There's a Coach, Sir.
Is there, come Wife; good Night Friend.
Sir, your Servant; Madam your Servant:wait upon the Gentry to the Coach.
Verily this Evening has helped the Morning, and both together made a good Day, few better. --
Now,thou didst it admirably.
Ay, Master, did not I; He little thinks, that from my hiding place, I over-heard all he said; but how did the Habit set upon me.
As like as the Devil cou'd be, every one in there way,all Trades have their Cheats, and this is to be said for ours, we do it with their own consents.
Ay, Master, better this than worse, every thing wou'd fain live, and we do but our honest endeavours thereto.
Come, let's go in and pray, to morrow may but prove as good a Day.
To Morrow, Siris the happy day.
Be-gad, I long for the Sack-posset, and throwing the Stocking; that was the Fashion when I was Married, and a good Sociable one too; I mean to make use of it still. He, he, he! I have bin telling her, how eager all the young Fellows will be of hitting the Bride in the Face; but be-dad, I hope I shall hit her better somewhere else; before, I'll try to get a Nap in this Chair, and Dream of to Morrow, before to Morrow comes.
Siris falling asleep over his Wooing. When we force Nature beyond her self, she must return for a recruit.
Be-gad Madam! You don't know what an Insipid Fellow I am this way; I never Love taking fruitless pains: If I had not a real Inclination for you; the Devil take me, I if wou'd pretend it. For where's the satisfaction of dissembling; when that, which shou'd be a reward to our endeavours, disgusts our Inclinations.
You Men of the Town, never value a Woman for her self, 'tis only to increase the Wretched number, tho' your selves are never the better for it.
That's only seen amongst the Loose, Idle part of Mankind; who not setting a value upon their own Reputations, think it no fault to Expose a Lady.
Well, not disputing any further your Talent of Secrecy, what Security can you give of your Sincerity?
Your Charms, and the opinion the World has of my Sense: Be-gad, wou'd you have a more undoubted one? If a Woman be very handsome, and meets with a Man who has Wit enough to know and value it; the Consequence speaks it self, and needs no Corroborating Evidence.
Well, enough of this to Night; I receive you for my Lover, and as such, you must do me what Service I desire.and you, are mighty Friends. Has he told you nothing of his concern for?
He's to Marry her Mother -- Besides Child! I never care to hear those sort of secrets, for fear they shou'd expect mine in return.
However indifferent you are, I'll tell you one, tho' theReport runs of to Morrow., must Marry my Ladyprivately this Night, and if you please, you shall have the Honour of bestowing her upon him.
Your Commands wou'd make greater difficulties easie; but Pox, why this haste, to bring a young Fellow into slavery? Does he know the Design?
She carried him hence to tell him: I can't imagine how she'l bring it about; for I fancy, one must be a good deal out of Countenance, to let a young Fellow know, one has a mind to lye with him, one Night sooner than he design'd.
Ay, or desired; for if I were to be Mr., that wou'd be my Case always with an old Woman: But where is he now?
Shut up with her in her Closet; if you'l stay a Moment, I'll go see what's become of 'em.
If we don't take care, this Gipsey will be too cunning for us all; Pox take Sir; Where can he stay?
Is Madamhere? My Lady Enquires for her.
No Child, she's just gone; but here's a Friend of yours, wou'd be glad to see you at my Lodgings.
I assure you Mr., you are mistaken in me; I wou'd not be a Whore, if you wou'd keep me a Coach and Six Horses, to tend me all days of my Life.
Nay, now I'm sure you lye.
Pox take all oldWomen; I stinck of Petter as bad as her self: I fancy it to be like our Perriwiggs, that retain the scent of Tobacco, after being in a City Coffee-House.has told you.
Yes, yes -- Have you seen?
Where shou'd I see her, in her Mother's Closet? Be-gad, you wou'd have laught your self to Death, to hear her break the business to me. She was in so good a Humour, that had I not wanted Witnesses, she wou'd have sign'd, without consulting her Oracle,.
'Tis pity, the Poor Lady shou'd be disappointed of a Husband; Sirshall Marry her.
But how? I don't think it feasible.
We'll try to turn our Modern Comedy Plots into good, sober, earnest, and make her Marry one for another.
Impossible!is her shadow, and not to be deceived. They stay Supper for us; my appointment holds with; the Musick will amuse the rest of the Company; if possible, don't letfollow us.
If she follows you, I'll follow her, I assure you, for I've talked my self, into a kind of liking of her; but we must not leave the old Gentleman behind us. Sir, Sir! How sound he sleeps? He's taking up his Rents before-hand, and providing for to Morrow Night, which he Fancies will be no good one of rest to him: They stay Supper for you Sir.
Supper, why, what's a Clock?
Near ten, Sir: Shall we wait upon you down?
I had rather you shou'd wait upon me up, Sir, a good Bed in my Country is worth ten Suppers; but be-dad, I must not tell my Mistress so till I am her Master. Come along.
We wait upon you Sir.
Where's Sir, that he has not honoured us with his Company?
I left him taking a Grace-Cup with your Ladyships Chaplain. Mr.will be too hard for him, they are so used to their Sanctified Wine they can swallow a large share of our unhallowed Juice of the Grape. Be pleased to know my Friend, Sir.
As such I must ever value and esteem him.
Your Ladyship's most Obedient Servant; let me Expire, if ever I saw any thing so taking as your Ladyship's Civility.
Lard Sir! Do you consider whose in the Company? These young Ladies will have reason to Quarrel at your Judgment, or rather I shou'd be displeased at your insincerity.
Let me expire Madam, if ever I saw any thing so ingaging as your Air. O that Dress, that Dress Madam! The Devil take me if the Drawing Room in all its Birth-night finery, can shew us any thing equal to it.
I wish I had but as good a Title to the rest of your Commendations; but time was, when they might have passed upon me with less injustice.
Be-gad Madam, no time like the present: The Sun is not in his glory till he is mounted to the Meridian, let me dye; if I can imagine your self, cou'd ever exceed your self.
Lard, Sir, your'e extream Courtly! How unfortunate have I bin till now, in wanting your Acquaintance! I never had so sudden an esteem for any one. O! I Love a well bred Man, in my Soul -- Good Breeding -- There's no Charm exceeds it. Pray Sirhave you not bin abroad?
Yes Madam, I have fetch't the Tour of all the Courts in, made some small residence in, but their Gravity disgusted me, and therefore made haste to pass into, which had every thing that a well bred Gentleman cou'd desire, either to Instruct or Entertain.
Lard, 'tis strange! I durst have sworn that very thing by your Air, your janty, way of Dress, your Perriwig. Oh Jesu! How ravishing the Curls fall to cover your Face, and leave us almost nothing besides to Contemplate. Ah! how far you exceed all that ever I saw in the Art of Powdering., don't you think SirDresses extreamly well?
Undoubtedly, Sir, I beg your Pardon I did not see you sooner -- Heigh, this is Gallantry indeed! What a new Dress!
The Devil take thy Foppery; was it for this, thou madest us stay for thee?
I had a Misfortune, just as I was crossing to my Lodging, a filthy Carman dash't me most intolerably, a just reward for being on foot in the dirty Street; I was forc'd to change my Cloaths before I was fit for this shining Assembly.
Sir, your most devoted, Admirer -- Lard, my Lady, did you ever see anyhave that Air? Never cou'd Madam, the Princess, have hoped a Copy, so transcending the Original.
'Tis all of a Piece, all Sir, in a word; all that can be named, the fine Gentleman, the Courtier, the Something beyond all, the Modern expressive word of Beau.
Let me expire, if your Ladyship has not the best Judgment. is not my Sword-knot extreamly fine and just?
O, of a most ravishing length -- What is Fashion, for well bred People, If, as Mr.says, we don't top our parts?
Your Ladyship's unacquainted with one Sir ofExcellencies; he Dances to a Miracle, and carried it from all the Quality at the last Court Ball.
A Corant or Minuet, Madam, I am no higher Dancer: Will your Ladyship do me the Honour of a Minuet?
Sir, I must beg your Pardon, if I share the Dance, I shall lose the entire Prospect of your Person;, if she pleases shall oblige us.
Nay, be-gad Madam, you shan't go till Sirhas done with you.
Eternal Impertinence, they are both missing, and undoubtedlytogether. Sir, I'm not in Humour, and shall make but an ill Figure,will do much better.
Let my be nothing, Madam, if she has not ten times more Chagrin in her Looks than your Ladyship. I must not be refused.
SirDances in Perfection.
I told your Ladyship his Talent, I was sure you wou'd not find me in a mistake.
So slighting, she has Debauch'd him from me. O I can't hold my Muse! Muse go Lament the Misfortune.
O your Ladyship flatters me, or let me dye! But to say what has bin said before, Blows from hands so soft, who wou'd not bear!
Sir, you are a Judge of Decorum and Decency; what say you to walking in, and seeing the Bridall Bed?
I'll follow your Ladyship through the World; but I shall expire in seeing the place where my Happiness is to be Sacrificed.
O Jesu! 'Tis a thousand pities so pretty a young Gentleman shou'd have an uneasie Moment.
Grant, I dispense with that one Form of our Sex, disbelieving a Lover; when he first tells us he is such; how can you avoid my Mother, or delay her expectations?, whose reasons I could not comprehend before; will do all that's necessary to ruine our intelligence.
If nothing else can secure me, your Denial must.
Twelve Thousand Pounds is a Forfeiture too great to oblige an Enemy with. I hearvoice, she must not see us together.
But why do you follow me?
But why do you fly me?
shot that way. I seeat the bottom of the Walk, I have business with him; oblige me, and leave us together.
You Command me.
Here so late?
I come in search of you, the Bride expects you.
To Night! It must not be.
The same thing as to Morrow, the sooner 'tis over the better; for in these cases our fears are the worst part of our punishment. Was notwith you? she is wanted. Sirhas drank himself into a Matrimonial Temper, and Mr.Swears twelve at Night, is as Canonical as that of Noon.
, have you Loved me!
Has not my Ruin told you?
Then do you Love me?
Yes, to see you happy -- But the Mask is off, and thou canst Cheat no more, and I no more believe.
You never Loved, but now abhor me.
You reproach me with what I wou'd be; do not, do not rouze the Woman in me, I wou'd be Calm to Night and see you Married.
Rather see me Buried.
Perhaps so -- Cou'd the remembrance of my Wrongs but sleep with thee, I wou'd not Envy thee a quiet Grave.
Farewel, we part for ever, I'll leave the Town this Minute.
At least, Sir, if you will not Marry your self, but unkindly leave your Bride thus in the longing Moment; do your Father the honour to grace his Marriage.
What have I done, that you shou'd wish to make me Wretch'd?
What hast thou left undone to make me such?
Your Reputation yet stands fair, and unlessyour own Indiscretion betrays you the Secret shall be such, with me for ever.
But thy heart, Traytor, thy perjur'd Heart; tell me, how shall I get it back?
Never this way, I assure you.
'Tis given for gone then -- Go -- Live as Wretch'd as I can make you, I'll think no more upon you.
Where, Madam, are you going?
To a Wedding, Sir,Wedding; you say we must not Dance at yours.
Rather of the two, but why to Night?
All Bridgrooms are not as backward as your self; your Father has the start of you, in desire as well as years, he is impatient of his Happiness.
You are Peevish; does you Love make you Jealous?
I have none, thehas taught me better; no longer doubting, away at once with Love and Jealousie.
Then 'tis Spite disturbs you: In what have I deserved it?
Look in thy false perfidious Heart, and take my Answer thence.
That speaks of nothing you can quarrel with.
Then I will stay and argue with thee, how often hast thou told, thou coud'st for ever Love me?
I told you that I cou'd, not that I wou'd.
Poor Caviller, those who can jest with Oaths, can play with Words -- You'l come after and wish the Bride Joy.
We must not part thus, you were not used to fly my Arms.
By all that's good, he has got the sorry cunning of our Sex; just so does a Wife when her Husband has caught her false, the gilting Creature cries, Do you believe it Spouse? you do not use to be so unkind -- Ha, ha, ha, -- Let me Laugh, tho' 'tis maliciously; go on, I'm in the Vein of Audience; let me hear some disagreeable Truths, and how well thou canst turn Woman;is at stake before you, do it handsomely; I wou'd be fortified in my Aversion, and have my hate implacable.
'Tis Barbarous to insult, where you shou'd rather pity.
I do, let all the World be judge else; nay, do more than Pity, I wou'd prevent your Ruin, and stop the Passage up to your undoing, wou'd save you from the Ills, nay, Scorns of Poverty, keep your Friends such, and put it in your Power to be one by still Preserving you: The Worlds opinion, who judge of Merit but by Fortunes Favours.
We know the Extent of your Generosity: But serve me as I wou'd be serv'd,.
I thought this was your way: I mistook you for him that was to Marry my Lady-- But I'll go look for certainties within.
Come back, 'tis my last Call: I wou'd satisfie thy Womanish Revenge, and let thee see me Curst by any other way than Fatal Marriage -- Take my Sword -- Thy Malice can supply thy want of use, despight can furnish strength, and too often thou hast found the way to my unhappy Heart to miss it now.
Ha, ha, ha, in Love to dying! By all that's good, turn'd: Your Mistress, Sir, is much obliged -- Keep your Sword, it may be a Fortune better worth than all your Fathers Lands; there's Wars abroad, you may employ it in, 'twill keep your Wife from wanting here at Home.
Am I indeed your Scorn, Proud, Fantastick Woman; thy liking was foul Lust; not Love: That gentle Name brings Happiness, but thou -- Let me not think upon thee, for fear it force my Tongue to something worse, than shou'd be said of Ladies; I've served it seems, as long as you cou'd like, and now you chuse another.
Wou'd it were come to that, I wou'd exchange thee, forthe last of Men, and think the Bargain Cheap, wou'd part with all that goodly Form, for honest Ugliness, and think it fairer; thy Youth for Age, and Doat upon his Doatage -- So in return I found but Truth, mark well that word, that word has Charms thou never knewest, and which out-weighs thine.
, thou hast power to read my Soul; thy Magick Spells are irresistable. How hast thou found this Failing in my Vertue, which I not knowing of, my Wants cou'd never miss till now?
Thank my Wit, Natures best Gift -- I've seen your shuffling poor designing Arts, to wave this Marriage and promote another. Your care too, ofFortune falsly guilded with the weak pretence of Generosity; 'twas not doubled thick enough for me: But because Doubts never shou'd condemn the Man I Loved, I wou'd not seem to doubt till I was certain; therefore no more dissembling, 'tis vain,never shall be yours; and if you cou'd not think it an unhappiness, I fain wou'd keep you mine.
Give me this Night to think in, I'll promise nothing, but this: I'm Grateful where I am obliged.
To shew your Power, I will; my Ladythrough my persuasion designed this the Marriage Night; I'll excuse you to her, but not one word or thought of, for in that Moment she shall be bestowed upon another; I wou'd divide the World, rather than you shou'd meet; I hope to Morrow, we may give you joy; this Night I find but little.
Less thou hast left behind, O the Curse of Lewdness! What Woman's Fair after we find her Faulty? What Lady Innocent, when no longer Chaste? Or who so vain to hope for Honour, or for Pity from that Soul who wants it for her self?
What I hear 'tis deferrd, there's no hopes of Posset.has dissmiss'd me till to Morrow, she's gone to your Bride; by this time Sirhas supplanted you, he is shut up with her, and has impudence enough to bid fair for it.
They talk of Eating against ones Stomach, but no Surfeit is so nauseous, as what I'm in danger of,catch'd me in the Action; and Faith, a sinner must have more impudence than I, who can deny matter of Fact.
Be gad, I have Pimpt to a fair end: What to let a Woman out-wit thee? How cou'd you once think of being sincere to one, whose Interest runs counter to yours? I would have dissembled as much Love as I had Aversion; nay Counterfeited my first desires, and suffered her, to believe she had preserved the Conquest of me now, that I might have Triumphed over her all my life after.
Very well, I am railed at on all sides.
Thou hast this Moment in thy Face, all the Mortification of poor Lenten Penitents, and lookst more akin to the Spirit than the Flesh. I believe thou art not in the condition of Wedlock. Confess your Misfortune to my Lady, I know no reason, why a Man shou'd pretend false Courage, when by it he runs himself into an inconveniency, he might have otherways avoided.
Faith, if lying, dissembling and flattering, can deserve her, I have done it. After we parted, I underwent the Mortification of an Arrest, which has the better fitted me for that of Matrimony; 'twas necessary for me, to have just got out of the Baliffs hands, to be able to go through with her, or else let me expire, if I cou'd have done it.
But what's the Consequence, Sir?
No more, than deferring the Marriage. The Duce take me if I don't think it Exceeds allLabours, to be able to perswade a Widow to lye alone, when she is resolved to have a Bed-fellow.
The next Affair shall be resolv'd in your Chamber, where I'll wait Sirand you in a Minute.
Nay if you wou'd be private, I'm discreet.
Let me be nothing, if he has not some melting Billet, I know it by his very Air. Good Fortune to thee.
Hum! to Morrow Morning like a Phisician., where had you this Letter?
Mrs.brought it to your Lodgings. She says her Master has bin at the Fortune-tellers, to Enquire, whether your Honour had made him a Cuckold.
I am sorry, the Devil cou'd not answer him in the Affirmative: She writes me word thatsick with his fright, and that I may pass upon him for a Physician; however, I believe my skill lyes mostway., go and knock up my Apothecary; borrow his Velvet Coat with the great Gold Buttons. A few hard words, of Plebotomy, Purgative, Laxative, and I shall be set up in my Profession,and look like any Collegiate Doctor of them all -- Why then, the Devil take me if I don't go -- Now the matter's brought to Perfection, I'll not fall asleep over the Brazen Head, when it shou'd answer me. Yes.<|endoftext|>You have extreamly delighted us this morning, by your House, Gardens, your Accomodation, and your way of Living; you put me in mind of the renownedAdmirable description of.
Sir you Complement me too much.
Methinks you represent to us the Golden 'days of Queen, such sure were our Gentry then; now they are grown Servile Apes to Forreign customes, they leave off Hospitality, for which we were famous all over, and turn Servants to Board-wages.
For my part, I love to have my Servants part of my Family, the other were to hire day Labourers to wait on me; I had rather my Friends, Kindred, Tennants and Servants should live well out of me, than Coach-makers, Taylors, Embroiderers, and Lacemen should: To be pointed at in the Streets, and have Fools stare at my Equipage, is a vanity I have always scorn'd.
You speak like one descended from those Noble Ancestors that madetremble, and all the rest ofHonour 'em.
I reverence the Memory of 'em: But our New-fashion'd Gentry love thetoo well to fight against 'em; they are bred abroad without knowing any thing of our Constitution, and come home tainted with Foppery, slavish Principles, and Popish Religion.
They bring home Arts of Building from hot Countries to serve for our cold one; and Frugality from those places where they have little Meat and small Stomacks, to suffice us who have great plenty and lusty Appetites.
They build Houses with Halls in 'em, not so big as former Porches; Beggers were better entertained by their Ancestors, than their Tennants by them.
For my part, I think 'twas never good days, but when great Tables were kept in large Halls; the Buttery-hatch always open, Black Jacks, and a good smell of Meat and March-beer, with Dogs-turds and Mary-bones as Ornaments in the Hall: These were signs of good House keeping, I hate to seefine Buildings with no Meat or Drink in 'em.
I like not their little Plates, methinks there's Vertue in an English Sur-loyn.
Our Sparks bring nothing but Forreign Vices and Follies home; 'tis rediculous to be bred in one Country to learn to live in another.
While we lived thus (to borrow a Coxcombly word) we made a better Figure in the World.
You have a mind that suits your Fortune, and can make your own happiness.
The greatest is the Enjoyment of my Friends, and such Worthy Gentlemenas your Selves, and when I cannot have enough of that; I have a Library, good Horses and good Musick.
Princes may envy such an English Gentleman.
You are too kind,.
Spoken like a Noble Patriot.
Pardon me, you talk like English-men, and you have warm'd me; I hope to see the Prince and People flourish yet; old as I am, in spite of Jesuits, I am sure our Constitution is the Noblest in the World.
Would there were enough such English Gentlemen.
'Twere to be wisht; but our Gentry are so much poysoned with Forreign Vanities, that methinks the Genius ofseems sunk into the Yeomanry.
We have indeed too many rotten Members. You speak like Gentlemen, Worthy of such Noble Fathers, as you both had; but Gentlemen I spoke of Musick, I see two of my Artists, come into the Garden, they shall entertain you with a Song this Morning.
Sir You oblige us every way.
Finely compos'd, and excellently perform'd.
I see Sir you are well serv'd in every thing.
My sweet Cousin good Morrow to thee, I hope to call thee shortly by another Name, my dear Child, Heaven's bless thee.
Ladies your most humble Servant; you are early up to take the pleasure of the Morning in these Gardens.
'Tis a Paradice you are in; every object within this place is ravishing.
This place affords variety of Pleasures; nothing here is wanting.
Where such fine Ladies are.
A Gentleman, To speak with you.
With me! Daughter pray shew those Gentlemen the Statues, Grottoes and the Water-works, I'lewait on you immediately.
This is an opportunity beyond our hopes.
Would you speak with me?
Arrah, and please ty Oorship, I am come here to dis plaash to maake a wisitt unto thee, dest dou not know me Joy?
Oh! You live at Mr.my Catholick Neighbours.
Ah by my Shoul, I.
How came you to venture hither? you are a Popish-Priest.
Ay, but 'tis no matter for all daat Joy: by my Shoul, but I vill taak deOades, and I think I vill be excus'd, but hark vid you a while, by my trott I shall be a Paapist too for all daat, indeed, yes.
Excellent Principles.
I do come for de nonest to see dee, and yet I do not come one purpose gra: But it is no matter, I will talk vid you aboot daat, I do come upon occaasion and Mr.did shend me unto dee.
For What?
What will I say unto dee now, but Mr.did shend me, and yet I did come off my self too for all daat upon occaasion, daat I did heare, concerning of dee, dat dy House and de Plaash is all over-run with Witches and Spirits, do you see now?
I had best let this Fool stay to laugh at him, he may be out of the damn'd Plot, if any Priest was? Sure they would never trust this Fool.
What shaall you shay unto me upon all dis, I will exorcize doze Vitches, and I will plague dose Devils now by my Shoul, vid Holy-water, and vid Reliques, and I will freet 'em out of this Plaash, God shaave the King.
I have forgot your Name.
They do put the Name ofupon me, Joy, but by my fait I am call'd by my own right Name,.
Yes, a very oold Naam inby my Shalvaation, well gra, I havebrought upon my Cloke-bagg shome Holy-water, and I will put it upon the Devils and de Vitches Faashes, and I will make you shome more Holy-water, and you will vaash all de Roomes vid it and bee --
Well, Father, You're welcom; but how dare you venture publickly in these times?
Why, I have great consideraation upon dy Prudence; for if dou wouldst betray me, now phare will be de soleedity of dat Joy.
I speak not for my self, but others.
The Devil taak me now, I do think, I will suffer for my Religion, I am affraid I will be slain at lasht at the plaash they call Saint, but I do not caare by my Shalvaation; for if I will be hang'd, I will be a Saint presently, and all my Country shall pray unto Saint, besides, shome great people will be naamless too, I tell you I shay noe more, but I will be prayed unto Joy.
Prayed too! Very well.
Yes by my Shoule will I, and I will have Reliques maade of me too.
Sirand my Lady have some business with you, and desire your company within.
Come Father, come along with me, do you hear, find the Gentlemen that are walking with my Daughter and her Couzen, and tell 'em I will wait on 'em presently.
I will. They are here, Gentlemen, my Master is called away upon businesshe begs your excuse, and will wait on you presently.
Heaven gives us yet a longer Opportunity, and certainly intends we should make use of it; I have my own Parson that comes to hunt with me at, Madam, an excellent School Divine, that will end all differences betwixt us.
He is like to begin 'em betwixt us, the Name of a Parson is a dreadful Name upon these occasions, he'lbring us into a Condition we can never get out of, but by Death.
If the absolute command of me and my Fortune can please you, you shall never desire to get out of it.
I should at more distance and with more reverence approach you, Madam, did not the shortness of the time, and the great danger of losing you, force me to be free; Throw not away this pretious time, a Minute now is Inestimable.
Yet I must consider on that Minute on which the happiness or Misery of all my Life may depend.
How can I imagine that you who have rambled up and down the Southern World, should at last fix on a Home-bred Mistress in the North? how can you be in earnest?
Consult your Understanding and your Looking-Glass, one will tell you how Witty, Wise, and Good you are, the other, how Beautiful, how Sweet, how Charming.
Men before they are Married turn the great end of their Perspective; but the little end after it.
They are Men of ill Eyes, and worse Understanding; but for your Perfections there needs no Perspective.
If I were inclin'd to Marriage, methinks we are not well enough acquainted yet to think of that.
To my Reputation I suppose you are no Stranger, nor to my Estate, which lies all in the next County; and for my Love, I will convince you of it, by setling what ever you please, or all that Estate upon you before I expect any Favour from you.
You are so Generous beyond my Deserts, that I know not how to Credit you.
Your Modesty is too great, and your Faith too little.
Death, Who are these whith my Mistress and my Sister? Oh! they are the silly Fellows that we saw at the Spaw, that came hither last night, do you know Sir, that this is my Mistress Sir.
I know Sir that no man is worthy of that Honour.
Yes Sir, I will make you know that I am Sir, and She has the Honour to be my Mistress.
Very well Sir.
Very well Sir, No 'tis very ill Sir, that you should have the boldness to take my Mistress by the Hand Sir, and if you do Sir, I must tell you Sir -- What do you Smile Sir?
A man may do what he will with his own Face. I may Smile Sir --
If you do Sir, I will fight Sir, I tell you that Sir. hah,
Sir, you are a Bloody-minded man.
'Tis for my Honour, my Honour, he is plaguely afraid; look you Sir, if you Smile Sir, at me Sir, I will Kick Sir, that'smore Sir.
If you do, you will be the fifteenth man I have run through the Body Sir.
Hah! What does he say, through the Body, oh.
Yonders my Brother, we must not be so perticular, let'sjoyn.
How, the Body Sir.
Yes Sir, and my custom is (if it be a great affront, I kill them, for) I rip out their Hearts, dry 'em to Powder, and make Snuff on 'em.
Oh Lord! Snuff!
I have a box full in my pocket Sir, will you please to take some.
No Sir, I thank you Sir: Snuff quoth a, I will have nothing to do with such a cruel man, I say no more Sir.
Your Servant Sir --
Your Servant Sir: does he take such Snuff too?
The same -- do you hear Sir, if you value your own life, which I will save for the Families sakes, not a word of this to any man.
No Sir, Not I Sir? Your humble servant.
I ask your pardon Gentlemen, I was stay'd by what, if you please to walk in, will divert you well enough.
Wee will wait on you Sir.
Daughter, Sirand myhave made complaints of you for abusing Sir; let me hear no more on't, we have resolv'd the Marriage shall be to Morrow, it will become you to be upon a little better Tearms to day.
Do you here that Gentlewoman --
Gentlemen, I have sent tofor all your Servants, and Horses, and Doggs, you Must do me the honour to Make some stay with me.
We cannot enough acknowledg your great Civility.
No Complements, I obliege my self, Sirand I have just now agreed, that to morrow shall be the Day of Marriage between our Sons and Daughters.
Very short warning.
Hee'lnot delay it longer.
I'le in and see what the reason of this sudden resolution.
Sir we wait on you.
Stay you there a while with Sir.
Dear Cousin, prethee be kinder to me, I protest and vow, as I am a Christian, I love the better then both my Eyes, for all this.
Why how now Dogs face, hast thou the Impudence to make love again,with that hideous Countenance? that very insipid sillyof thine? with that most piteous mein? why, thou lookst like anfor Teeth.
This is all sham, I wont beleive it; I can see my self in the great glass, and to my mind no man looks more like a Gentleman than my self.
A Gentleman! with that silly wadling shuffling gate? thou hast not mien good enough for a chief Constable, every change of thy Countenance, and every motion of thy Body proclaims thee an Ass.
Ay, Ay, come Madam, I shall please you better when I am Marry'd, with a trick that I have; I tell yee.
Out of my sight, thou makest me sick to see thee.
I shall be more Familiar with you to Morrow-night, oh my dear rogue -- well I say no more, faith I shall, well, no more to be said.
Be gone thou Basilisk, here, I vow if thou wert the only man on Earth, the Kinde should cease rather than I would Marry thee.
You'l be in a better humour to Morrow-night, though you are such a vixen now.
This place, where some Materials are to mend the Wall, will furnish me with some Ammunition: be gone I say.
I shant do't, I know when I am in good Company, come prethee Cousin, do not let us Fool any longer, to Morrow we shall be one flesh -- de ye see:
I had rather be inoculated into a Tree, than be made one Flesh with thee; can thathide of thine ever become one Flesh with me? when, I can become one Ass with thee it may, you shall never change my mind.
Well, well, I shall have your Body to Morrow-night, and I warrant you your mind shall soon follow it.
Be gone, thou infinite Coxcomb, I'leset thee farther.
What, what, what a pox! hold, what a Devil, are you mad? Flesh, heart, hold, what a plague, uds bud, I could find in my heart to turn again.
Do filthy Face, do if thou darst.
Oh help, murder, murder.
I have no patience with this Fool, no Racks, or Tortures shall force me to marry him.
I am very indifferent about this Matrimony, and for ought I see, you are so too.
I must confess you are as fine a Gentlewoman as ever I saw, and I am not worthy of you; but my Father says he will disinherit me, if I will not marry you to Morrow; therefore I desire you would please to think on't.
I will think on't.
You shall command all my Estate, and do what you will; for my part, I resolve all my Life, to give up my self wholly to my Sports, and my Horses, andmy Dogs, and to drink now and then a cup of Ale with my Neighbours, I hate Wine.
You will do very well.
He says we must be Married to Morrow at Ten, I can be going a Hawking by six and come home time enough, I would be loath to neglect my Hawking at Powts in the height of the Season.
By no means, you'd do very ill if you should.
Ay so I should, but shall I tell my Father that you will have me to Morrow? you know the Writings are Sealed, and Wedding-Cloaths bought of all sides.
Well, I shall do as becomes me.
Well, Cousin there's no more to be said betwixt you and I then,, a word to the Wise, I say, is enough, so I rest your humble Servant to command; I'le tell my Father what you say presently, your Servant to, tell you truly I had never so much mind to be Married as now; for I have been so woundedly frightned with Witches, that I am affraid to lye alone, dee see; well, I am glad this business is over: a pox upon all making of Love for me.
I thought I saw my Cousin in yon Walk, 'tis time for us to consult what to do, my Father and Mother are resolved upon to Morrow for the fatal day.
Susan,.
Demdike.
Rome.
Smithfield,.
T.
,.
, a Company of Tantivy Fools.
England, and abominate the Religion that contriv'd it.
dis is my dear Friend.
Mary,.
Your Servant Gentlemen.
Your most humble Servant.
Your most humble Servant.
Is not myman a pleasant fellow?
A great Father of the Church.
And perhaps may come to be hang'd for't.
Siris going to take some informations about Witches, perhaps that may divert you not ill, 'Tis against my opinion, but I give him way.
I hope you are pleas'd to pardon my incivillity, in rushing unawares into your Chamber last night; but I know you are so much a Gentleman, so well-bred, and so accomplisht, I know you do --
Madam.
And for that reason I will make you my Confident in a business, that perhaps, I do not know, but I think it may not be to your disadvantage, I will communicate it to you in private. Now, Sirand I are to take some Examinations. I assist him very much in his business, or he could never do it.
Call in these Fellows, let's hear what they'l say about these Witches; come on, Did you serve my Warrant on Mother?
Sir, I went to her House (and please your Worship) and lookt in at her Window, and she was feeding three great Toads, and they daunc'd and leapt about her, and she suckled a great black Cat well nigh as big as a Spaniel; I went into the House, and she vanisht, and there was nothing but the Cat in the middle, who spit and star'd at me, and I was frighted away.
An arch Witch I warrant her.
I went out at the back-dore, and by the Threshold sat a great Hare, I struck at it, and it run away, and ever since I have had a great pain in my back, and cannot make Water, saving your presence.
A fit of the Gravel.
No, by my shoule, she is a great Witch, and I vil cure you upon daat.
No: I tell you, Sir, I am sure she is a Witch, and between you and I, last night, when I would have been kind to my Wife, she bewitcht me, I found it so.
Those things will happen about five and fifty.
I will tell you now, Joy, I will cure you too. * Taak one of de Tooths of a dead man, and bee, and burn it, and taak dee smoke into both your Noses, as you taak Snush, and anoint your self vid dee Gaall of a Crow, taak Quicksilver, as dey do call it, and put upon a Quill, and plaash it under de shoft Pillow you do shit upon, den maake shome waater through de Ring of a Wedding, by St., and I will shay shomefor dee, and dou wilt be sound agen: gra.
Who is this pretends to skill in Witchcraft?
A very learned man in these matters, that comes hither on purpose.
I shall be glad of your better acquaintance.
I vil be very vel pleash'd to beafter being acquainted vid dee Joy.
Have you any more to say? Fellow speak to me.
Why, an't please your Worship forsooth, Mothersaid she would be reveng'don me for not giving her some Butturmilk; and the next night coming from, I saw a great Black Hog, and my Horse threw me, and I lost a Hog that night, he dy'd, that was as well when he went to bed, as ever he was since he was born.
'Tis enough, a plain, a manifest Witch, make a Warrant for her.
Ay, do.
Take some of the Thatch of her House, and burn it at your House, and you shall see she will come streight.
Or to morrow about dawn, piss in a Pot, and cover it with your right, neither Stocking, and the Witch will be tormented in her Bladder, and come to you roaring before night.
A most profound Science.
And poor old Ignorant wretches must be hang'd for this.
A Cow of mine is bewitcht too, and runs about the Close as if she were mad; and that, I believe, Motherbewitcht, because I deny'd her some.
Put her into the Warrent too: 'Tis enough, a little thing will serve for evidence against a Witch.
A very little one.
* Put a pair of Breeches orTrowsers upon your Cows head, Fellow, upon aMorning, and wid a great Stick maak beat upon her, till she do depart out of de Close, and she vill repair unto de Witches dore, and she vill knock upon it vid her Horns indeed.
Thank you good Sir.
Sir, I see you are a Learned man in this business, and I honour you.
Your Servant Sir, I will put shome holy waater into your Cows mout, and I vill maak Cure upon her for all daat indeed.
Come, has any one else any thing to inform?
Yes an't please your Worship, here is a Neighbour,.
Why, an't please your Worships, I was atHouse where shewons i'th' Lone, and whoo had a meeghty great Cat, a black one by'r Lady, and whoo kist and whoo clipt Cat, and ay set me dawn a bit (meet a bit) and believe Cat went under her Coats, Quo ay what don yeo doo with that fow Cat? why, says Whoo, who soukes me. Soukes tee! Marry that's whaint quo ay, by'r Lady what can Cat do besides? Why, says whoo, whoost carry me tobelieve. Whaw, quo ay, that's protty! Why, says whoo, yeost ha one an yeow win to carry yeow; by'r Lady, quo ay, with aw my heart, and thank ow too, marry 'twill save my Tit a pow'r of labour; so whoo cawd a Cat to me, a huge Cat, and we ridden both tostrieght along.
Well said, this was home; I love a Fellow that will go through stitch.
This is a Witch, indeed, put her name in.
This is naw thing by my Shoule, I will tell you now it is naw thing for all daat, a Vich, if she be a good Vitch, will ride upon a Graashopper, I tell you, very well,and yet a Graashopper is but a weak beast neither; you do maak wonder upon dis, but by my Shoule it is naw thing.
Where did you take Cat, say you, together?
Why, we took Cat ith' Lone meer a mile off.
So you rid eight mile upon Cats: are there any more informations?
No more an't please your Worship, but when I have once taken 'em, enough will come in.
Go then about taking 'em, and bring 'em before Sir, and my self, I'le warrant you wee'l order 'em.
I will tell you now Fellow, taak de shoe of a Horse, and nayle it upon your Threshold, de plaash dou dosht goe into dy dore upon.
And put a Clove of Garlick into the Roof of thy House.
is very good in your House against Spirits and Witches, and, and the Herb, and, andtoo is very good.
* Burne shome Brimstone, and maak a sweet fume of de Gall of a Black Dogg, Joy, and besmeare dy Pots, and dy Walls, and bee, and Cross dy Self, and I will touch dee vid Reliques, and dee to gra.
Thank you good Sir.
Thank a.
Is not this an excellent Art?
'Tis so extravagant, that a man would think they were all in Dreams that ever writ of it.
I see no manner of Evidences against these poor Creatures.
I could laugh at these Fools sufficiently, but that all the while our Mistresses are in danger.
Our time is very short, prethee let's consider what is to be done.
Well, my Dear, I must open my heart to thee; I am so much in Love with this, that I shall dye if I lose him.
Poor, dying is something an inconvenient business; and yet I should live very uncomfortable without my Spark.
Our time's very short, therefore preethee let's play the fool no longer, but come to the point when we meet 'em.
Agreed: But when shall we meet 'em?
I warrant thee before Midnight.
Come, let us take one turn in the Garden, and by that time my Dinner will be ready.
Madam, For Heaven's sake consider on what a short time my Happiness or Ruin depends.
Have a care, Sirand his Lady will be Jealous.
This is a good sign.
Not a word, we shall be suspected, at night we will design a conferrence.
Why so unkind? You frown and wonnot kiss me.
No marry, I'lebe none of thy Imp, I wott.
What dost thou mean my Love? prethee kiss me.
Stand off by'r Lady an I lift kibbo once, Ist raddle thy bones: thou art a fow Queen, I tell o that, thou art a fow Witch.
I a Witch! a poor Innocent young Lass, that's whaint, I am not awd enough for that Mon.
And I believe my Eyne, by the Mass I saw you in SirCellar last neeght with your Haggs, thou art a rank Witch, uds flesh I'le not come nere thee.
Did you see me? Why, if I be a Witch, I am the better Fortune for you, you may fare of the best and be rich.
Fare, marry I'le fare none with thee, I'le not be hang'd, nor go to the Deel for thee, not I by th' mass, but I will hang thee on I con by'r Lady.
Say you so Rogue, I'le plague you for that.
What is whoo gone? 'Tis for no good marry, I ha scap'd a fine waife, a fow Carrion by'r Lady, I'le hang the Whean and there be no more Witches in. Flesh whats 'tiss?
Within this Shattered Abby Walls, This Pit oregrown with Brakes and Briers, Is fit for our dark Works, and here Our Master dear, will soon appear, And make thee Mothera Witch, Make thee be Happy, long-liv'd, Rich, Thou wilt be Powerful and Wise, And be reveng'd of thy Enemies.
'Tis that I'd have, I thank you Dame.
Here take this Imp, and let him suck, He'l do what e're thou bidst him, call Him Puck-Hairy,
Come hither Puck-Hairy.
Where is thy Contract written in Blood?
'Tis here.
So t'is firm and good. Where's my Mamilion? come my Rogue,And take thy Dinner.
Where's my Puggy? Come to me and take thy Duggy.
Come my?
Come Sirrah, I have switcht you well I'le tye you up now to the Rack.
Well met Sisters, where's my Pucklin? Come away my pretty Sucklin.
Waunds and Flesh, what con Ay do naw, I am turn'd into a Horse, a Capo, a meer Titt; Flesh Ayst ne're be a Mon agen, I marle I con speak, I conno pray, I wot a pox o'th' Deel Mun, Ay live of Oates, and Beans, and Hay aw my life, instead of Beef and Pudding: uds Flesh I neigh too,
Oh who has switcht and spurd me plaguely, I am raw all over me, whoo has ridden a wounded way about too.
Peace, here's our Master him Salute, And kiss the Toe of his Cloven Foot.
Now our new Sister we present, The Contract too, sign it with Blood.
First, Heaven you must renounce.
I do.
Your Baptism, thus I wash out too. The new Nameyou must take, And all your Gossips must forsake, And I these new ones for you make.
A piece of your Garment now present
Here, take it Master, I'm content.
Within this Circle I make here, Truth to our Master you must swear.
I do.
You must each month some murdered Children pay, Besides your yearly tribute at your day.
I will.
Some Secret part I with my mark must sign, A lasting token, that you are wholly mine.
Oh!
Now do your Homage.
Who's here? who's here?
Waunds what'shere? The Witches By'r Lady, I'le shoot amongst 'em: have at ye.
Hey, Dive-dappers, Dive-dappers: What a Devils here!tied by a Bridle and a Neighing! What a Pox ail'st thou? Const a tell?
Uds flesh, I am a Mon agen naw! Why, I was a Horse, a meer Tit, I had lost aw My speech, and cou'd do naught but neigh; Flesh I am a Mon agen.
What a dickens is the fellee wood?
Ise ta the Bridle with me, fly from the Deel, and the Witches, and I'le tell you aw at the Ale-house.
What a murrain ails the Hobbell? I mun follow, and see what's the matter.
I Am sorry I am forced to complain of my Cosin.
Sorry, marry so am not I; I am sorry she is so pert and ill-bred, truly Sir'tis unsufferable for my Son, a man of his Quality and Title, Born of such a Family, and so Educated, to be so abused, to have Stones thrown at him like a Dog.
We must e'en break off the Match, Sir.
Sir, I am ashamed of it, I blush and grieve to hear it; Daughter, I never thought to see this day.
Sir, I am so amazed I know not what to say, I abuse my Cosin! Sure, he is bewitched.
I think I am, to Love you after it, I am sure my Arm's black and blew, that it is.
He jested with me, as I thought, and would have ruffled me, and kissed me, and I run from him, and in foolish play, I quoited a little Stone or two at him.
And why did you call me Filthy-face, and ugly Fellow, hah, Gentlewoman?
He ugly! Nay, then I have no Eyes, though I say't, that should not say't, I have not seen his Fellow --
Nor I neither: 'twas a jest, a jest, he told me he was handsomer for a Man, than I for a Woman.
Why, look you there, you Blockhead, you Clown, you Puppy, why do you trouble us with this impertinent lye?
Good words, Sir, 'twas not so much amiss; hah, I'le tell you that.
Sure this is some mistake, you told me you were willing to marry.
I did not think I should be put to acknowledg it before this Company: But Heaven knows, I am not more willing to live; the time is now so short, I may confess it.
You would not use him, you intend to marry, ill.
I Love him I am to marry more than Light or Liberty. I have thus long dissembled it through Modesty; but, now I am provoked, I beseech you Sir, think not that I'd dishonour you so.
Look you, you have made her weep; I never found her false or disobedient.
Nay, good dear Cousin, don't cry, you'l make me cry too; I can't forbear, I ask your pardon with all my heart, I vow I do, I was to blame, I must confess.
Go too, Sir, I never could believe one of your parts would play the Fool so.
And you will marry to morrow.
I never wisht for any thing so much, you make me blush to say this.
Sweet Cousin forgive me, and Sir, and Sir.
Can I be angry at any thing. when I am to be married to morrow? And I am sure I will be, to him I love more than I hate this Fool.
I could find in my heart to break your head, Sir, you are a Puppy.
Come let'sleave 'em together, to understand one another better.
Cousin, Daughter I should say, I beg your pardon, your Servant.
Servant, Sweet Daughter.
Dear Cosin be in good humour, I could wish my self well beaten for mistaking one that loves me so, I would I might ne're stir, if I did not think you had been in earnest: well, but I vow and swear I am mightily beholden to you, that you think me so fine a person, and love me so dearly; Oh how happy am I that I shall have thee to morrow in these Arms! by these ten bones, I love you more than all the Ladies input them together. Prethee Speak to me, O that Smile Kills me, oh I will so Hug thee and Kiss thee, and Love thee to morrow night -- I'd give forty pound to morrow night were to night, I hope we shall have twins before the year comes about.
Do you so Puppy?
Help, Help, Murder, Murder.
Help, Help, Murder, Murder.
What a Devils to do now? hah, she Counterfeits a Sound.
How now, my Dear, what's the matter?
What's the Matter?
I feel the matter, She gave me a Cuff, and lug'd me by the Ears, and I think she is in a Sound.
Oh the Witch! the Witch came just now into the Room, and struck Sir, and Lug'd him, and beat me down.
Oh Lord, a Witch! Ay, 'twas a two legg'd Witch.
And, assoon as she had done, she run out of that Door.
'Tis very true, I met her and was frighted, and left her muttering in the next Room.
Oh Impudence!
You Puppy, you Coxcomb, will you never leave these lyes, is the fellow bewitched?
Go Fool, I am ashamed of you.
Let's see if we can take this Witch.
Quickly, before she flies away.
Well, I have done, I'le ne're tell tale more.
Begone, Fool, go.
Well, I will endure this, but I am resolved to marry her to morrow and be revenged on her; if she serves me so then, I will tickle her Toby for her, faith I will.
Well, I'le be gone, and get out of the way of 'em.
Come on.
Madam! Cozen hold a little, I desire a word with you.
I must stay.
Adieu then.
I am drunken well neegh, and now I am not so hala, (since we must marry to morrow) I pray you now let us be a little better acquainted to neeght, I'lemake bold to Salute you in a Civil way.
The Fool's drunk.
By the Mass she kisses rarely, uds lud she has a Breath as sweet as a Cow, I have been a Hawking, and have brought you home a power of Powts in my bag here; we have had the rarest sport, we had been at it still, but that 'tis neeght.
You have been at some other sport I see.
What, because I am merry? nay, and I list, I can be as merry as the best on 'em all.
I see you can be merry indeed.
Ay that I can, Fa, la, la, fa, la.
I was at it helter Skelter in excellent Ale, with Londoners that went a Hawking, brave Roysters, honest fellows that did not beleive the Plot.
Why don't you beleive the Plot?
No, the Chaplain has told me all; there's noPlot, but there's aone, he says, none but Phanaticks believe it.
An Excellent Chaplain to make love to his Patrons Daughter, and Corrupt the Son.
Why all the Eminent men of our Church beleive it; this fellow is none of the Church, but crept into it for a livelyhood, and as soon as they find him they'l turn him out of it.
Nay, Cousin I should not have told it, he Charged me to say nothing of it; but you and I are all one, you are to be bone of my bone to morrow: And I will Salute you once more upon that d'e see.
Hold, Hold, not so fast, 'tis not come to that yet.
'Twill come to that and more to morrow, fa, la, la, but I'le out at four a Hawking, though for all that, d'e understand me?
Here's, I must get rid of this fool.
Cousin, I hear your Father coming; if he sees you in this Condition hee'l be very Angry.
Thank you Kindly, no more to be said, I'le go and Sleep a little: I see she loves me, fa, la, la, la.
Dear Madam, this is a happy minuite thrown upon me unexpectedly, and I must use it: To morrow is the fatal day to ruin me.
It shall not ruin me; the Inquisition should not force me to a Marriage with this fool.
This is a step to my Comfort; but when your Father shall to morrow hear your refusal, you know not what his passion may produce; restraint of Liberty is the least.
He shall not restrain my Liberty of Choice.
Put your self into those hands that may defend you from his Power: the hands of him, who loves you more than the most Pious value Heaven, than Misers Gold, than Clergy men love Power, than Lawyers strife, than Jesuits Blood and Treachery.
If I could find such a man.
Then look no farther Madam, I am he; speak but one word, and make me the happiest man on Earth.
It comes a little to quick upon me; are you sure you are the man you speak of?
By Heaven; and by your Self I am, or may I be the scorn of all Mankind; and the most Miserable too, without you.
Then you shall be the man.
Heaven; on my Knees I must receive this Blessing; there's not another I would ask, my Joy's too big for me.
No Raptures for Heavens sake, here comes my Mother, adieu.
I must Compose my self.
Sir your most humble Servant.
Your Ladiships most humble Servant.
It is not fit I should lose this opportunity, to tell you that (which perhaps may not be unacceptable to a person of our Complexion) who is so much a Gentleman, that I'le swear I have not seen your equal.
Dear Madam, you confound me with your Praises.
I vow 'tis true; indeed I have strugled with my self before I thought fit to reveal this: but the consideration of your great accomplishments, do indeed, as it were, ravish, or extort it from me, as I may so say.
I beseech you Madam.
There is Friend of mine, a Lady (whom the world has acknowledged to be well bread, and of Parts too, that I must say, and almost confess) not in the Bud indeed, but in the Flower of her Age, whom time has not yet invaded with his injuries; in fine, envy cannot say that she is less than a full ripe Beauty.
That this Creature should bring forth such a Daughter.
Fair of Complexion, Tall, Streight, and shaped much above the ordinary; in short, this Lady (whom many have Languished, and Sigh'd in vain for) does of her self, so much admire your Person, and your Parts, that she extreamly desires to contract a Friendship with you, intire to all intents and purposes.
'Tis impossible she should be in earnest, Madam, but were she, I cannot Marry ever.
Why she is Married already, Lord how dull he is! she is the best Friend I have, Married to an old man, far above her sprightly years.
What a Mother-in-Law am I like to have!
Can you not Guess who this is all this while?
Too well.
Not I truly Madam.
Ha, ha, ha: No! that's strange, ha, ha, ha.
I cannot possibly.
Ha, ha, ha, I'le swear! ha, ha, ha.
No, I'leswear.
'Tis very much, you are an ill guesser, I'le vow, ha, ha, ha! Oh Lord! not yet?
Not yet, nor ever can.
Here's Company, retire.
I am all on fire, what is it that Inspires me! I thought her ugly once, but this morning thought her ugly: And thus to burn in love already! Sure I was blind, she is a beauty greater than my fancy e're could form; a minutes absence is death to me.
Phaat Joy, dou art in Meditaation and Consideraation upon something? if it be a Scruple upon thy Conscience, I believe I vill make it out unto dee.
No Sir, I am only ruminating a while; I am inflamed with her affection, O! Ah me! Ah me!
Phaat dost dou not mind me? nor put dy thought upon me? I do desire to know of dy Faathers Child, what he does differ from de Caatholick Church in, by my fait it is a braave Church, and a gaallant Church (de Devil taake mee) I vill tell you now, phare is dere such a one? vill you speak unto me now Joy, hoh?
'Tis a fine Church, a Church of Splender, and riches, and power, but there are some things in it --
Shome things! Phaat dosht dou taalk of shome things? By my shoule I vill not see a better Church in a Shommers day, indeed, dan de Caatholick Church. I tell you there is braave dignities, and promotions too; what vill I shay unto you? by St., but I do beleeve I vill be a Cardinal before I vill have death. Dey have had not oneCardinal a great while indeed.
What power is this that urges me so fast, oh Love! Love!
Phaat dosht dou shay, dosht dou love promotions and dignities? den I predee now be a Caatholick. What vill I say unto you more? but I vill tell you, You do shay dat de Caatholicks may be shaved, and de Caatholicks do shay, dat you vill be after being damn'd, and phare is de solidity now of daat, daat dou vill not turn a good Caatholick?
I cannot beleive there is a Purgatory.
No! Phy I vill tell you what I vill shay unto you, I have sheen many Shoules of Purgatory dat did appear unto me; And by my trot, I do know a Shoule when I do shee it, and de Shoules did speak unto me, and did deshire of me dat I vould pray dem out of that plaashe: And dere Paarents, and Friends did give me shome money, and I did pray 'em out. Without money indeed, we cannot pray dem out, no fait.
That may not be so hard; but for Transubstantiation, I can never beleive it.
Phaat dosht not beleive de Cooncel of Trent Joy? dou vilt be damn'd indeed, and de Devil take me, if dou dosht not beleive it. I vill tell you phaat vill I say to you a Cooncel is infalible; and I tell you, de Cardinals are infalible too, upon occaasion, and dey are damn'd Heretick Dogs, by my shoulvaation, dat do not beleive every oord dey vill speak indeed.
I feel a flame within me, oh Love, Love, wether wilt thou carry me?
Art thou in love Joy? by my shoule dou dosht Comitt fornicaation, I vill tell you it is a veniall Sinn, and I vill after be absolveing you for it: but if dou dosh Comitt Marrage, it is mortall, and dou vilt be damn'd and bee fait and trot. I predee now vill dou fornicate and not Marry: for my shaake now vilt dou fornicate.
Sure I am bewitch'd.
Bewitch'd in love, Aboo! boo! I'le tell you now, you must taake de Womans * Shoe dat dou dosht Love sho, and dou must maak a Jaakes of it, dat is to shay, dou must lay a Sirreverence, and be in it, and it will maake cure upon dee.
Oh the Witch! the Witch!, I am struck in my Bowels, takeher away, there, oh! I have a Thousand Needles in me, take her away,.
Phaare is shee,.
Oh, I have a Million of Needles Pricking my Bowels.
I vill, set up a hubub for dee, help! help! who is dere? help, Aboo, boo, boo.
Oh Needles! Needles! Take away, take her away.
He is bewitch'd, some Witch has gotten his Image, and is tormenting it.
Hold him, and I vill taak some course vid him, he is possess'd, or obsess'd, I vill touch him vid some Relicks.
Oh, good Sir, help him, what shall I do for him?
Get some Lead melted (and holding over his body) power it into a Poringer full of Water, and if there appear any image upon the Lead, then he is bewitch'd.
Peash, I shay, here is shome of St.own Whisker, and some of the Snuff he did use to taak, dat did hang upon his Beard; here is a Tooth of St., indeed, here is a Corn from de Toe of St., and here is de paring of his Nails too.
Oh worse, worse, take her away.
By my shoule it is a very strong Devil, I vill try some more, here is St.de Virgins Wedding-Ring, here is one of St.Nipples of her Tuggs, by my shoule, here is some of de sweat of St., and here is a piece of St.Gridiron, dese vill make Cure upon any shickness, if it be not ones lasht shickness.
What will become of me, I have poyson'd him, I shall lose my Lover, and be hang'd into the bargain.
Oh! I dye, I dye, oh, oh.
By my shoule it is a very strong Devil, a very aable Devil, I vill run and fetch shome Holy-vater.
Look up, dear Sir, speak to me, ah woes me, Mr., Mr..
Thisis a Gallant man about Witches, he out-does me.
But I do not know what to think of his Popish way, his Words, his Charms, and Holy Water, and Relicks, methinks he is guilty of Witchcraft too, and you should send him to Goal for it.
Oh! oh!<|endoftext|>I never thought,Madam
that Ihave been so unhappy as not to subscribe to ev'ryOpinion of your Ladyship's, till this unlucky Moment: But, Madam
I am yet more unfortunately mistaken, if you don't think this Air more agreeable to the Sweetness of your Complexions, than the Smoaky Climat of, tho', Sanctify'd Place. And I fear, Madam
that your apprehensions of such a retreat from the Gay World, threw you into a Melancholly, which might have been no less fatal to me, and all the admiring World, than to your Ladyship; had not Heaven preserv'd, to be ador'd by all Mankind -- My Lord
I did really Arm my self against all, e're I came abroad,, indeed, to receive such Volleys of your Wit and Gallantry.
My most Honour'd Lady!
and my Divine Mistress! How happy I am to see your Ladyship so well recover'd in your Health and Beauty, as to adorn this Walk with what it so long has wanted in your absence? -- Madam
Mr.wrongs the Court-Ladies; some of which are really Great Beauties, who frequently do bless this Park. But, pardon me, Madam I beseech you, if I thinkhave done 'em the greater injury; in appearing here so much to their disadvantage. -- 'Sdeath! -- what Spark's this?
Sir, the Lady is out o'danger of being Flatter'd; and you may go on at the same rate, if you please. But
you may assure your self (my Lord) it will not altogether please: And I cou'd wish, the Gentleman would spare himself the trouble of a second thought.
but, in the name of Wonder, (Mr.) how came you to find us here? Madam
hearing that my Divine Mistress was taken Sick upon her return to Town, I thought it my indispensible Duty to pay my Respects to her, in enquiring of her Health, if I might not have been permitted the Honour and Happiness of seeing her; and this Afternoon I had the good Fortune to learn from Sir, then at home, that your Ladyships were gone towards the Park; whereupon, as I was going to call a Coach, this worthy Gentleman, my Honour'd Friend prevented me, by taking me into his own Coach; he designing for a Walk in this place.
Indeed (Madam,
he makes a very Graceful Figure, and speaks well; -- Pray Heav'n and you, Madam, it prove not to my disadvantage: No; no (my Lord,
your Lordship does not conquer by halves. -- I fear I have said too much
but make the best and kindest use on't you can for both our Interests. Ah Madam
you have almost taken away from me the power to thank you for this mighty Blessing,and to assure you, that I can have no Interest but what I must Centre in yours. -- But I don't like this same Dancing-Master; I fancy he helps to play the Game against me. No matter my Lord
since I deal, you are safe. -- But, come let us joyn Company; for the Lady your Sister is at loss for us. Alas, my Memory!
I had forgot till now to tell you, (Madam) that she came with me hither particularly to Kiss your hands, e're she goes to a Relation of ours who is a Lady Abbess in; with whom she designs to stay near a Twelvemonth; beginning her journey about three days hence:
Madam
I have had so great a desire of seeing some part ofthese manyYears; that I cou'd no longer defer giving my self that satisfaction: Especially, since my Ladyis now so pressing in her Invitation: And, unless your Ladyship will lay your absolute Commands on me to the contrary; I must leavewithin these few days: Ah Madam!
I can pretend to no such influence in your Ladyships Actions: Besides, if I might, with, you may assure your self, that, I wou'd rather wholly disquiet my self, than give the leastto your Ladyships pleasure. That were too great a Condenscension in you, Madam, to me;
since you may be confident, that you have an Arbitrary and Dispensing power in every thing relating to my Brother.
-- Well, Sir
what have you observ'd about me to my Advantage? I fear, nothing at all,
but what makes wholly for yours. So much on the contrary;
that I assure your Lordship, I wou'd not have you for a Rival of all Mankind: And I cou'd wish, with your Lordships Pardon, that you were not onlythat Beautiful Lady
in outward Figure alone, but ev'n in her very Sex. I must avow to you, myLord, 'twou'd give me a great deal of ease. Methinks, Sir
you look on meas one that is a Disturber of your joys. If I do, my Lord,
you are too secure in your own Merits to fear any attempt from me.
Art not well, my Dear?
yes, Madam
pretty well now; I humbly thank your Ladiship. 'Twas only a stitch that took me on the suddain; and as quickly has left me. Ha!
I can tell your Distemper better than Mr.himself: For I have the occasion of it here in my Pocket, which I will so improve, that you shall either marry me, or dye of the Pip, and so lead Apes in Hell. I'm now going to your Father, and consequently every step I make is towards her Bad.
,
greatestSlouch.
!,
,
Humanity,Heaven,
.
.
.
.
--,
.
Stepwell
Philandra.
Beetleheads,.,
.,
,
.
know,I maymaywill?
.
desire him to walk in;
Sirrah, desire him to walk into the outward Parlour, I will but dispatch a bit or two, and then I'll come to him.
Well, Mr.
what is his Name? His Name I beseech you, and where lies the rest of his Estate?
his Name, Sir, is, of the Ancient Family of the, Originally of; tho' the Family has spread it self into most of the Counties of, and;
Besides, Sir,
I beseech your Worship to take notice, that he is no Swearer, Whore Master, Drunkard, nor Gamester. Pish, pish,
'tis not a pin matter to you, or me, whether he be or no; yet (perhaps) I cou'd wish he were all these: But since you say he is so fine a Gentleman, I pray you good Mr.how comes he to have such an urgent occasion for this Sum, or be obliged toa Mortgage? Why, Sir,
he is unwilling to expose his necessity to any of his Acquaintance, because (possibly) he designs to marry one of their Daughters, wherefore he entreated me to assist him in this matter, since I have no knowledge of any of his Relations, or Country Acquaintance, more than your Worship has. Ay, but Mr.
you must give me leave Mr., you must give me leave to be better acquainted with him, and his Concerns, before I part with such a Sum of mony to him; for it is my custom so to do, it is indeed, Mr.Tho' I suppose
this mony is to carry on his Design on the Lady. It is so, Sir,
and he desires by all means, that you wou'd give your self the satisfaction of enquiring into the Circumstances of his Estate, but at a distance, and with all possible caution, lest his Reputation shou'd any way suffer. You may have a sufficient Character of him, and certain Information of the posture of hisAffairs in, and, from any of the Worthy Gentlemen of those Counties. No, Mr.
I shall not need I believe to give my self any great trouble in this matter, if this be the Richof. The very same, Sir,
That's enough
but tell me, Mr., is he already engag'd to this Lady? Is she a? Is she a? Or, what is chiefly to be consider'd, is she a Fortune? Sir, she's worth some 15 or 16000
That's but a small Portion for so great an Estate as this
and, if he be not already, I believe I can recommend him to a young handsome Lass, worth at least Thirty Thousand Pounds. On my word, Sir,
that wou'd be an extraordinary favour indeed, and I fancy he has not made his approach so close to her, but he can make an honourable retreat when he pleases. When may I see him then?
To morrow morning, if you please
in the mean time, I will prepare him to receive your kindness with the greater readiness, for (possibly) he will do something this Night, in order to his disengagement from the Lady he is now in pursuit of. Do so
and let me see you both here to morrow at Eleven precisely. I shall, Sir,
Sir,
your Present is of muchgreater value than the Gold or Stone cou'd make it, forc'd from embracing your finger to adorn mine; which shall be no longer part of my hand, than it is able to serve you.
You shall be as good as your word to my Lord,
for I will present it to her my self, tho' never so much to my disadvantage. I mean, if I have the happiness to see her to morrow. You will not, I hope
be so far far accessary to your own ruine there, as toattempt it. Pardon me, my Friend,
but I will. I beseech you then
read it first, Sir. Not for the purchase of my happiness in
I cou'd then never hope it, because I'm sure I shou'd notit. No,
inviolate as it is, and teeming with all the most Beautiful and Charming Ideas, and Expressions of his passion that it may be; she shall receive it from my hand the very first opportunity have to offer it to her.
Forgive me, Sir, I beseech you, if I think this the oddest method of making Love for a Mans own self, that I ever yet have heard of. Call itif thou wilt
but I have my satisfaction in it. -- Enough of this -- To morrow by Ten in the morning, I expect you here. I shall then pay my duty to you, Sir,
For
I have enquir'd of him of several Worthy Gentlemen, and Eminent Citizens, who all give me a most extraordinary Character of his Person, and Humour; and which is, of his Estate, being worth near Six Thousand pounds. And now (my dear Girl) I prithee do not stand in thine own light: No force, (
and I will stretch my Inclinations as far as may be, to embrace one of your choice, that I may recommend my duty to you.
Nor can I have reason, Sir,
to think otherwise, since I am yet absolutely a stranger to you. I confess, Sir,
you was ato me 'till now; but your Circumstances, I am, and have been before so well satisfied with, that I shall think both my self, and Daughter most happy, if you will accept her for your Wife. But it is not fair to oblige you to a promise of that, before you have seen her; wherefore you shall each of you havethe satisfaction at the same time. We'll wait on you presently
Now, Sir,
will you take my word another time? Did not I say 'twas his Daughter, my Divine Mistress, whom he wou'd propose to you? Ay,the Charm;
his Daughter, and Thirty Thousand Pounds were otherwise but dull musick, but indifferent sounds to me:! Thatwhom I first saw at the Boarding-School, whom I love! -- No matter whose Daughter, or what Fortune she is, so she may be my Wife. 'Tis the very same, Sir, I dare assure you
Then for my Lord's Letter
O! I have it with me, I find.
Here, Sir,
Look you, this is my Daughter, as my Lady-Wife tells me,
tell me how you like her, (pray?) Hah! you stand as if you were frighted at thesight of her. I am amaz'd, Sir,
at so much Beauty; and I beg the Lady will pardon the astonishment, of which she is the Cause. I protest that was spoken like your self, Mr.
like a fine Gentleman, and a Courtier: Nay, nay, I love to hear these Complements in an honest way -- Perhaps 'tis not the Court fashion to kiss, or (it may be) you are asham'd to do it before my face, therefore I'll be gone, and leave my Lady-Wife, and Daughter. No (Sir,
I dare do it in the face of, of Heaven it self, since my thoughts are Just and Honourable. And I am sorry, Sir, I gave you the occasion of instructing my duty.
'Uds precious
this puts me in mind of my wooing my Lady-Wife there; which I cannot remember without tears of joy:
But
I'll leave you together, and shall expect to find you and Mr.at dinner with me here to day. I have a little business -- a little business, your Servant, Sir -- Daughter
this is the man for my money.
I hope, Sir
you'll pardon the infirmities of Old Age. And the defects of an Old Citizen's Education
It looks hearty and kind, Madam
and I cou'd wish, Madam, you wou'd receive me with as true a wellcome. Assure your self, Sir,
a Person of your merits can't want a due reception. We plead no merits from Heaven
but (Madam) if self-denyal, and other the greatest mortifications be any way grateful, I am in hopes that this Present from me may give you a testimony of some of my weak Endeavours that way.
At last,
I perswade my self I shall not fail of a welcome for his sake that sent it.
this I guess is some new piece of Gallantry from the Lord; which, howsoever, shall not rob me of the honour and satisfaction of your Conversation, Gentlemen. Nay, Madam
we are but two to two, and, for my part, I decline any sort of dispute with your Ladyship. I beseech you, Madam
rob not your self of the pleasure that Paper may afford you, for my sake. For assure your self, I had rather suffer all the anguish of despair and jealousie, that you shou'd want the least satisfaction. Pardon me, Sir
this will serve to entertain me, when I want the advantage of better Company. Then, Madam
you must arm your self to receive a discourse of much the same nature, I fancy, with what that happy papercontains; which will (undoubtedly) be more troublesome to you, coming from me -- I love you, Madam
with such a passionate sincerity, that I fear I cou'dpart with you to my Rival; if it might advance your happiness -- say, Madam, have youthat I shall eternally be miserable in your indifference; and have youthat I must quit my pretensions to my happy Rival? Blast, Madam, blast all my hopes with one cruel and irrevocable word, and let me dye by your Thunder. If, Sir, on me depends your happiness, or misery, be confident I wish you the: And in a greater measure, than I can possibly create it to you. This indeed, Madam
is an obliging manner ofme to the, since you exclude me Paradise, and leave me all theWorld to range in -- But be assur'd, Madam,if all the Beauties of the Universe were divinely put together into, by their Great Creator;cou'd not bless me, were it not, as it is,; whowill not receive me into those joys you have entirely reserv'd to the Lord. Certainly, Sir,
this Tempest cannot be of long continuance. This is such aLove as Ibefore received. Ah! Madam,
youandwith my earnest passion -- Forgive me, if I say this is a little inhumane -- But 'tis the effect of your Divinity that sports it self with my misfortunes. Doubtless
such another storm o' t'other side from my Lord, wou'd give me such another surfeit, that I shou'd swoon at the veryofever after.
-- Well, my new, but worthy acquaintance
what progress have you made in your Amours with my Daughter? Why, Sir,
D'you think the Gentleman is us'd to boast of a Lady's favours? Ah! Madam
you have taken care that I shall have no such occasion from you -- But I can suffer. 'Uds precious, Noble Mr.,
suffer me no suffers, I'll ha' no suffering here, unless it be, that I suffer you to make much of my Daughter, and that she do the same by you -- Come
Dinner wait's us in t'other room, and there we'll make much of our selves.
No
good Sir, you are better acquainted here than I am, therefore pray take upon you for once the trouble of my Guide, and Leader.
'Uds precious
Sir, we have wanted you all this while to compleat our mirth, but you are now very wellcome -- Ha, what fine Gentleman have you brought to my poor habitation?
An humble Servant of yours, and those fair Ladies
Mr.
we are happy to meet here. Ay, my Lord
we are so, in the sight of these fair Ladies. 'Uds precious, my Lord,
your Lordship is wellcome, if you don't bring a Pope in your Belly. No, Sir
but I brought an Angel in my heart, I mean your Daughter, Sir, who fills it with all the Ideas of Beauty that Humanity is capable of conceiving, and much more than it can express. 'Uds precious,
you are a fine Gentleman, my Lord, a fine Gentleman indeed; thereforepray sit down, or you'll tire me with standing. I do so, Sir
To make you easie, and to make my self happy, I'll place me just opposite, and most remote to what I most love in this World, and to what you hate I shou'd make any nearer approaches to. Come, Sir
tho' you have been blest in the enjoyment of the pretty; yet you are almost in the Circumstances with me, as to the Beauteous.
My Lord
I fear your Lordship forgets that his Worship has been already so happy in his first Love, that he need not doubt his success against another, especially, when Aided, Abetted, Comforted and Assisted by a Father's Good, Pious, and kind Instructions and Intentions; which yet he could not have wanted, but for your Lordship's and this Honourable Gentleman's Address,and more plentiful Estates. But he may thank his Stars that there is one obstacle remov'd, for it seems your Lordship is a Roman Catholick. And for my part, Sir
I am so far from having receiv'd any particular favour from this our ador'd Lady, that I must utterly despair, unless her unparallel'd and matchless Duty prevail against her inclinations, and his Lordship's Merits. Sir,
you have always the goodand(it seems) to make me Debtor to your kind Opinion of me -- wou'd to Heavens yourwere as much to my advantage. But, Sir
How does the poor Titt? Has she yet taken her Degree in, or? It must be in the first; for certainly none but a mad thing wou'd ha' laid a miscarriage upon an Alderman's Fellow: It looks as if you had not been wicked, or able enough to get a Bastard; when (no doubt) yourmight ha' done you that piece of service, had you been Marry'd. Butsince your Worship is a Batchelor, I suppose she has been(as they call it) for putting the Saddle on the wrong Horse's back -- Ay, my Lord
the Wench did afterwards confess it was my Apprentice; for which (as your Lordship says) she wasin good faith.
And
this is as happy and full discovery as any Criminal cou'd make of himself. You're in the right, my Lady-Wife,
'twas a silly Wench, a silly Wench -- But no more of that, if you please. No,
I must remind my self of my Friend's business, about which I now come to sollicit you. There is a Friend of mine
that wants five thousand Guineas, now I can't spare him above two thousand; wherefore, if you will oblige him, Sir, with that Sum, I will, orsome port of my Estate for his payment of it. Why, look you my Lord
thismust be, and I don't likeany of your Church-Lands. Hark you Sir
I fancy that among all your Mortgages, you have one or more of our Church-Lands; that is, of Papists Church-Lands, as you stile 'em; and yet I find there is no great danger of their infecting you with Popery. But I mean some of those Lands that my Lawful Father and Mother left to me (for perhaps she was an Heiress) those will I dip unto thee. This requires farther thought, my Lord
and you shall have your answer to morrow this time. Nay,
if my my business, or my Friend's be not done by Six in the Morning, we shall have no further occassion of yours, or any other assistance. Six a Clock is early
but I'll see what may be done, my Lord, after I have discours'd this Honourable Gentleman: So, my Lord, I beg your Pardon
Ah, Madam,
'tis now high time for me to despair, since here I found my happy Rival; seated next to you, and feasting on your Eyes; happy he is in every Circumstance, in his Person, in his Sence, in his Estate, and, no doubt, happy in your Love. By your Father's approbation encourag'd, receiv'd by you with a just opinion of his extraordinary Qualifications; how long,knows, I'm sure I know not --
Nay, my Lord,
I find you are hot, we must walk. I thank you, Madam,
that you seem at least to take as much care of me, as my Grooms do of my Beasts; tho' they never ran such hot Courses, as I do in pursuit of you. You flye me, Madam, now,
you have shunn'd methese fourteen or fifteen unaccountable days; for so they have been to me; since in all that time I have not once been blest with the sight of you, 'till this hour. O Heavens! Madam,
where are all your vows? where are all your tender expressions of Love to me? Some indeed I wear about me, under your Hand and Seal; and all of 'em where you have fix'd 'em in my heart. Whence not you your self can remove 'em, unless you bid me despair, and dye -- This is all wondrous fine, indeed my Lord,
and since I find you love me, even to Jealousie, I'm resolv'd to give your Lordship farther occasions of that passion -- And look you, my Lord,
I suppose I wear about me some of your Lordships tender expressions of Love in this Paper; which I receiv'd from your happy Rival, as you think him: This he deliver'd to me, un-open'd I dare believe -- Unopen'd as it is!
now, by all my hopes on Earth, which terminate in you, Madam; my Love is not more sacredlyinviolate, than is this Paper; I know the Seal, and find 'tis not abus'd -- Oh! this is more dreadful to me, than his pretensions to you, Madam. And did he give it thus, without a scoff? Just as you see it, my Lord, and with respect
Ah, wou'd h'had soften'd the hard faithful wax, and ravish'd wide the innocent Contents! I then might justly have return'd the wrong, and from his breast have torn aheart, teeming with Sacriledge against you -- But now, now it appears so Gloriously adorn'd, with your Bright Form in ev'ry corner of it, that I must fear to touch it. Oh, that Love shou'd rob me of so generous a Friend -- I mean, whom I cou'd wish mine -- Make him so,
I shall not hinder such a happy union. Nothing but you on Earth cou'd do it, Madam,
Assure your self I will not,
-- Here, my Lord, take your Letter, I beseech you, and own the obligation he design'd you -- 'twill be a good beginning of your Friendship --
-- No, Madam
I will not rob you of whatpresented to you: Besides, if ever you had any regard of my Passion; I cou'd wish, you wou'd keep it: For, I fear, it is the last you will ever be troubled with from me., Madam, when you read it; to think how faithful and how Passionate a Lover you have thrown away. It seems my Lord
you are at length grownof feigning a Passion; and wou'd now perswade me, that I am displeas'd with your pretended services: But, assure your self, my Lord, Be it real or counterfeit; it has already given me a very pretty entertainment. You will e're long I doubt not, Madam, be judge of its truth or falshood. -- In the mean time, Madam; enjoy your self, with theof your new Lover! perhaps they will prove your only satisfaction.
Madam
if this worthy Gentleman's Fate be so Rigorous; what severity has your Ladyship reserv'd for me! How often, I mean, how seldom may I be permitted to pay my Devotion to you in an Age? The seldomer the better
once more will satisfie for your whole Life. So,
this comes ofinquiring into a Man's own destiny.
Your Lordship
shall Command me in any thing. But one;
Mr.your Servant
you had best make use of my Coach to your own House. Adieu, Mr.
-- How strangely does Fortune now at last begin to treat me! I mean, how severely! since, 'tis the first most sensibleAffliction that ever touch'd me, to havefor my Rival. You,
whom, above all Men my Soul wou'd chuse for its dearest Companion in all things; but in a Mistress. I know the greatness of your mind; have seen a little of the sweetness of your Temper; have receiv'd an obligation from you this day, in delivering my Letter to, seal'd as I sent it, by that, from whom you had it. And, after all this, is it not hard, that I must own to you, I cannot be happy if you live? At least in your pretensions to! This, my Lord
is certainly the greatest of my Misfortunes, since, (give me leave to own this sacred truth to you!) your Lordship is the only Person among all Mankind, with whom I cou'd have contracted a most Religious Friendship: As, on the other side, That Charming Creature, created to our Misery, is she alone in whom Ibe happy, as in a Wife. O! Pardon me!
you must not; while I live:You must therefore force your happiness through me; as I will attempt mine from you. Tho' Heaven knows with what regret! To morrow, Sir,
I shall expect you on the backside ofHouse. The Field is near your Lodging, and not far from mine. Bring with you, two of your best Friends, as I will of mine; whom I beseech you to engage to be no farther Active, than to endeavour the escape of the survivor. For, (haply) we may not both fall. Nor either of us, I cou'd wish
but (ah, my Lord!) these are but wishes. No more
but thus I have contriv'd it, if you please: -- our Chairs shall wait us at convenient distance; and our Friends shall prevent the unseasonable kindness of our Servants. And now, in the mean time we'll pray for one another. And, if it be my Fate to fall by you; Heaven forgive you, in its sweetest Mercy! And, if from you () I meet my Death; Heav'n grant you happy life, here and hereafter;
What hour, my Lord? 'Tis light enough at four
be that the hour: If 'tis befitting your convenience, Sir. I shall most punctually observe your Lordships Commands, said, Till then, let us embrace, and, andas Friends,
ah! wou'd to Heav'n, my Lord, I might for ever thus clasp you, as my Soul's Heart!
Good morrow to your Lordship,
A happy one to my Dear and Honour'd Friend,
E're we begin this unfriendly dispute
let me endeavour to make an acknowledgement and return of theObligation you laid on me yesterday. -- I here declare, before these Gentlemen, our worthy Friends, that I am the Aggressour: That I provok'd you to seek my Life, to defend your own. I know your Circumstances with his Majesty are not so advantageous for you, as I cou'd wish: I am sensible, you refus'd to serve him with your interest, for taking off the Penal Laws and Test. Mine are quite otherwise: This Letter therefore,
is superscrib'd, whom Heav'n bless!
this of my Death will give a just account; as well as of the manner how I sought it. -- O! this, my Lord,
isGenerous: since 'tis Rival'd Love that makes us both contend for the most glorious prize. No more thy Friend but Rival think me then!
as I will look on thee; our Swords will else want points. Noas Friend my Lord?
No more,
is the word:
I was going, Mr.,
to ask you concerning his health. His Health, Madam!
pray Heaven, he has his life! What means this?
I'll say Amen to that Prayer always. But satisfie me, I beseech you, why is there a more particular necessity of it?
Avert it Heaven!
However,
'tis some comfort yet, that he first dispatch'd that Papist Bully; who else wou'd ha' Cut his Throat, with Pistols, Fuzees, Musquet, Blunderbusses, and all sorts of Fire-Arms.
No, no, Madam,
all the World knew my Lord too Generous to do any thing below the Character of the bravest. But, why, Mr.,
since you had but too just a suspicion of their intention; why did you not endeavour to prevent 'em in it? Alas, Madam,
nothing but Heaven or the King's Commands cou'd have hinder'd it. Nor cou'd the last haveobstructedtheir fatal Resolutions. O, most unfortunate of Womankind!
Who will endure to hear my hated name? Since, forsake two such brave Men are lost. My dear Daughter, and only Child
do not grieve so
immoderately! Siris yet alive, who
will make a better Husband forthan either of 'em; and him, I resolve
thou shalt marry to morrow; or I
profess, thou sha't not inherit one
hundred pence of my Estate.<|endoftext|>Holla, ho, ho, ho,,
But oho, oho,, Wife,, Wife, where are you?
for
my Friends and Neighbours will so Jeer and Scoff at me, telling me I am but justly serv'd for my Jealousie, that I had rather be a Slave, and tug at an Oar, than endure the Reproaches I am sure to meet with.
'tis a Place where no one has lain in since a Parson of, who us'd to Study there;
'Twas in this Place,
that he made his Prognostication of the Three Blazing Stars, and foretold their Effect some Years after they were past.
Oh! Sir, just so would my treacherous false Wife flatter me, so would she Speak, and Act, as tho' she were all Obedience; but dear Friend (for so I am resolv'd hereafter to call you) have a care and be warn'd by me, they are Saints in their Looks, but Devils in their Hearts. Who would not think but this Lady of yours was all Goodness and Honesty? When at the same time, perhaps, her Heart is employ'd in thinking of her Lover.
Sir,
I have taken a Course to prevent my Wifes loving, for (although I doubt not her Virtue) I have always so strict an Eye over her, that since she was mine, she has never been in the Company of any, but I have been by. O happy Conduct!
Would I had taken that Course, I had never been brought to the Misery you see me in. But Sir,
Heaven forbid that I should harbour the least ill Thought of your Lady, or raise in you a jealous Fear of your Honour, for I believe if any Woman can be Virtuous she is, all I alledge, is that you cannot be too circumspect; and that when once they have their Liberty of going abroad, they know not how to stay at home; therefore as a Friend I advise you, beware how you take her out with you, lest sometime or other, tho' she speak not by Words, she may make shrewd Signs with her Eyes, and they are such Bablers they'll soon discover the Heart.
No Wonder indeed
that your Head is so full of Chimera's and Jealousies, when you bring Men into your House on purpose to teach you: A fine Lesson indeed you have heard, and no doubt but you'll put it in Practice, that is to say, go you abroad where you will and junket and take your Pleasure, but let your poor Wife be still kept at home: But I have been ever Obedient unto you, I will not begin now to withstand your Commands, be they what they will, you are my kind and loving Husband, and so I'll Esteem you; but let that Rake-hell, that Fire-brand of the Devil, that Wind-mill pated jealous Fool, who as he says, has lost his Wife by his Folly, and I am apt to believe it a Truth, let him I say,be turn'd out of my Doors, and made a laughing-stock to the World; or at least so confin'd to his Lodge, that I may never see him abroad, for I have Vow'd him Revenge for what I have heard.
Oh! That I had but a Heart, 'tis all I would wish, you shall never know how I'de use it.
No Husband
he has some further Design than what he pretends, and Heaven grant it be not to make us both Miserable: I wish it be not my Honour he seeks to ensnare, and under the Cloak of becoming your Friend, would be your greatest Enemy: I pray God he do not do something to raise your Suspicion, and make you grow jealous of me: I fear you have harbour'd a Viper in your warm Bosom, who as soon as he shall recover Strength will sting you to the Heart.
there is no such hazzard,
you need only pretend you are troubled with your old Distemper the Gout, and cause a Bed to be made for you in another Chamber, seeming so kind to your Wife, as that you would not disturb her Quiet. My better Angel
Alas!,
what Comfort can accrue unto me of all this? How shall I accomplish my Designs, when the old Man is lying in the very Room through which I must pass, and who every Night locks you up in your Chamber, and takes the Key with him? No matter
we will do well enough for that; do you pretend to be Ill, and go to your Bed, and when he has taken his good Night of you, slip on my Night-gown and come down to the Garden, and stand behind the great Barbary-bush, where I will appoint him to meet me, so shall he carry you in in my stead: Now that he may have no Suspicion I will be just behind the Door, so that as you come in, slip out of his Hands, and I will be ready to supply your Place: I need not tell you then how easy 'twill be for you to get to your Lover.
for,
there is a Friend of mine who lies above Stairs, that I would not for all I am worth should knowof our meeting;
the Devil, the Devil,
For nothing now,
but I was dreaming that your Friend, as you call him, knowing that I lay this Night alone, had cunningly Stole into the House, and was offering me Violence. No, no, poor Man
he is in a most lamentable Condition, for he has made such an Out-cry of a Devil, that I am raising my Servants to see what is the matter.
ah dear Devil, forgive me this Fault, and I will never commit the like again.
No,
nor did you see nothing about a quarter of an Hour ago? Not any thing,
for I was so wearied and harrass'd with watching all the last Night, and my Troubles had made me so heavy, that had a Cannon been fir'd in my Chamber,I believe it would hardly have wak'd me.
Nay Husband
I have as much cause to be thankful as you, for it has quite taken away the Pain in my Head.
now Sir, see that my Words the other Day are come to pass, and this(as you call him) has rais'd such Whimsies in your Head, that I must never expect one quiet Nights Rest so long as he stays in the Lodge. Heaven knows
I have not been out of the Chamber since I came last to Bed;
Why truly
not knowing you lay your self below here, I heard a whispering, and something else I need not Name, which gave me the Curiosity to come downand see who it was, little suspecting it was my Friend, for I both thought you and your Wife lay in the upper House. 'Tis very true
tho' to Night it seems, we lay both in this Lodge; therefore Sir take it as you please, I must search your Chamber;
are you not asham'd
to make my Disgrace and your own so Publick? For certainly this Man will bruit it over all the Country, your Wife is safe enough, fear not, and 'tis only your Jealousy which creates these false Imaginations.
she would not let me rest till I had got out of Bed; for says she, the Man who so much you Esteem, and think so Honest and Virtuous, has only made his Excuse to get to this Lodge, where no doubt he has his Concubine; forgive dear Friend
for I Name but her Words, and Women you know when once they harbour an ill Thought of a Man, are as hard to be broke of it, as when they love a Man, to be debarr'd of Enjoyment.
but
they will have their Fagaries and Fancies let usMen do or say what we will: You are in the right indeed, dear Friend,
therefore I hope you'll the sooner pardon this Fault: What you have said and done, I forgive with all my Heart,
but she I can never pardon, till she ask it her self, or that she shews a through Reconcilementby accepting my Bed, which is easier and fitter for her than that where she is.
come my dear Wife, since my Friend will be no otherwise satisfied for the Affront we have done him, let us for an Hour or Two exchange Beds.
I wonder not now
that you pretended so much Kindness to, 'twas that he might be the Pander to your loose Desires.
No
shall still keep the Place she has with me, who, I know, had she not been overperswaded with your alluring Tongue, and more powerful Gold, wouldnever have wrong'd so good a Mistress. No, I'll be Sworn would I not
and Heaven knows this is the first, and shall be the last time, therefore dear Madam, if I may find Favour in your Eyes, forgive us this Fault, and my diligent Service and Fidelity hereafter shall demonstrate, how sensible I am of my Offence, and how careful I will be for the future, of giving you the least Umbrage of Suspicion. It is not but that I look upon you
equally Guilty with that ungrateful Man; but I will keep you in my Service, that you may be a perpetual Memento to him of his Transgression: So rise both, I do forgive you;<|endoftext|>Honest Man. Is this the Way to London?
No, Sir. You are out of your way.
How much?
Half a Mile.
Must I then go back again?
'Tis your best way. And, when you come to such a Place, turn on your Right Hand. Go on that way, and you can't go amiss.
Must I turn neither to the right Hand, nor the left?
Not at all. Go strait forwards.
I thank you heartily. I am much obliged to you. But, pray, how many miles do you reckon it thither?
Five Miles.
No more?
Half a Mile hence you will be in sight of the Town.
So much the better. It joys me already to think on't.
Boy. Take my Horse. Put him in the Stable. Take care of him. Rub him well. Give him some Oats. A whole Peck.
Sir, I shall take a special care of your Horse. Do not trouble your self about it.
Where is the Landlady?
What d' ye want, Sir?
Have you any thing to eat?
Yes, Sir.
What have ye?
Are you for Fowls, or for Butchers Meat?
What Fowls have ye? Let me see.
Look ye, Sir. Here's a good Pheasant. Those are very fat Partridges. If you want a Dish of Larks, here is Larks. If you had rather young Pigeons, there be choice ones.
No. I had rather have one of those Partridges. How much must I pay for't?
You must pay half a Crown for it, when 'tis dressed.
'Tis too much. You must take two shillings.
It cost me near upon what you bid me for it. Partridges are scarce at this time of the Year. 'Tis hard to get any at all.
Then let it be presently laid on the Spit. Make a good Sauce to it. And, pray, let it be done with all speed, for I am ready to starve.
Sir, you shall have it presently.
Are you alone, or have youCompany with ye?
I am alone.
Have you got a Room?
Not yet. I am but just come in. Pray, give orders that I may have a good Chamber.
Sir, you shall have a very neat Room, a good Bed, and clean Sheets.
Very well. But when the Maid has made the Bed, she must warm it well with a Pan full of Coals.
Sir, the Sheets are very dry, and it is now sweltry Weather.
'Tis no matter. I do it for my Health. Your Beds are Hackney Beds, and apt to be infected. Now the Heat draws out all the Malignancy of them.
Well, Sir, you shall have every thing done to your satisfaction.
Is my Supper ready?
'Twill be ready presently.
Then let the Cloth be laid. Bring me a Penny-roll. A Quart of Ale, and a Pint of Wine.
What Wine will ye please to have? White, or Claret?
Which is best?
They are both very good.
Draw me then a Pint of Claret, the best you have.
So I will.
This Wine is not natural. This is sophisticated Wine. I cannot drink it. It makes me sick already. Have you none better?
Sir, that Wine go's for the best in Town. You are the first that ever found fault with it. There's no mixture in the least, I assure you.
You are a pretty Man, to make me believe I have no skill in Wine. Bring me a bit of Cheese. And some Fruit, if you have any.
Sir, you shall have it presently.
Take away. Take care of my Things. Awake me to morrow by five a clock. Now I think on't, where is the Landlord?
He is at home.
Do's he understand French?
Very well, Sir.
Pray, tell him, I desire his company.
I shall be sure to tell him, Sir.
Stay a little.See if there be a Chamber-pot under the Bed. There is one. That's well. Remember to awake me to morrow by break of day.
Sir.
Who's there?
Tis I, Sir. Tis five a clock. It struck five just now. I am going to rise. Bid the Hostler to saddle my Horse. Bid him get it ready. Bring me some Water in a Bason, and a Towel withal.
Will ye be pleased to eat any thing before you go?
Yes, I could eat a couple of boiled Eggs. When you bring them, bring the Reckoning too. What's to pay?
There is so much. For the Partridge, half a Crown. A peny Roll. Two pence for Ale. A Pint of Wine, six Pence. The Fruit, three Pence. The Bed six Pence. In all, four Shillings.
And for my Horse?
That's a thing by it self. The Hostler will tell you.
Here, there's your Reckoning. And six Pence for you.
Sir, I humbly thank ye. I wish you a happy Journey.
Tell the Hostler, that I am ready, and bid him get my Horse out of the Stable. Well, honest Man, what must I pay for my Horse?
Sixteen pence, Sir.
Here's eighteen Pence, keep the Two-pence for your self.
I thank ye, Sir.
Have you, Madam, any Rooms to let?
Sir, I have one, two pair of Stairs.
Forwards, or backwards?
Backwards.
Will you be pleased to let me see it?
Yes, Sir, if you please to give your self the trouble to come up. This is a good Stair-case.
It is pretty lightsom.
Will you be pleased to step in, Sir. This is the Room. Tis a very fine Chamber, well furnished, and very convenient,There is a little Closet to put Things out of the way. Here is another larger, with a good light, and very fit for a Schollar. The Feather-bed is very good, and the Furniture very neat. Here you have a Table, a couple of Stands, and a Looking-glass. The Maid shall make clean your Shoos. Every Morning she shall bring you a Bason of Water, and give you from time to time such attendance, as you can reasonably expect.
So far, Madam, all is very well. But the Room is two Stories high. That's an Inconveniency.
'Tis according as People fancy. In my Judgment, the Air ought to be better and clearer, than in the first Story. I am sure of one thing, that here is a far better Prospect. Do but take a View, Sir, of that large extent of Country which is seen from hence.
I cannot say, Madam, but that the Room is convenient enough. The Rate is the thing we must now go upon. Therefore, pray, tell me the lowest.
How would you take it, Sir, By the Quarter, by the Month, or by the Week?
By the Week.
Then you must pay five Shillings a Week.
Indeed 'tis too much. But I won't be much out of the way, I offer you fairly four Shillings.
Tis too little. I have had six Shillings a Week for this Room. And I cannot part with it under five.
I'le tell you, Madam, what we shall do, if you please. We shall part the odd shilling.
Truly, Sir, you are too hard. D' ye intend to lie here to night?
If you please to get the Room ready.
That I will.
Then I'le go fetch my Things, and I shall be back again within an hour at farthest. But first I must know the Name of the Street.
The Street is called...
And what Sign is this that hangs here?
The Paradise.
A good Omen, I hope. I please my self with this lucky hit.
Sir, I come to fetch my Things away. I took a Chamber in. Let's see what I ow here.
Tis but a small matter. There's but ten Pence to pay.
Here, give me the rest. Do so much as call a Coach.
There's one over the way.
Coachman.
Sir.
Turn your Coach. Take in this Portmantle. Open the Door. Carry me to Paradise.
To Paradise, Sir. There is no Coach-way thither. And, to tell you the truth on't, I am not at all acquainted with that Road.
I believe ye.
But I know the way to Hell very well.
I don't question it.
If you please to go thither, 'tis at. I shall carry you thither with a full gallop. As we go along you may take a view of the Devil in, near.
God forbid, thou wretched Charon.Carry me to.
Tell me then the Name of the Street.
Go strait to the Garden. There I'le shew you what Place we must go to.
'Tis well enough. Sir, we are at the Garden. Which way must I go now?
Go into the Street which is just over against us. And, when I bid you stop, be sure to stop. Hold, hold, this is the Place. How much must thou have?
One Shilling.
Shillings run faster than Coaches in this Town.
Sir, you are very welcome.
Madam, I am your most humble Servant. Well! is all ready now?
The Maid is above imployed about your Room. I'le go and bid her make haste.
By no means, Madam. Don't give your self that trouble. I am in no haste. I can stay a little. Provided you will be troubled with my Company.
Pray, Sir, step then into this Parlour. Will you be pleased to sit down? Let us sit down, if you please. How long, Sir, have you been come to London?
I came last night about twelve a clock.
'Tis likely then that you came by Water.
From Dover I came Post as far as Gravesend, and from Gravesend by Water.
The Thames is very pleasant at this time of the Year.
So it is. The truth on't is, 'tis a very fine River. And I admired, as I came along, that infinite Number of Ships that rid upon the River as far as London-Bridge. You would take it, at a distance, for a great Forest.
'Tis an undoubted Argument of the great Trading of this Place.
'Tis a Gulf of Commerce. Every where you see scarce any thing but Store-houses, Shops, and Commodities.
, is the Gentleman's Chamber ready?
Yes, Madam, all is ready.
Carry up that Portmantle.
Madam, I wish you good night.
Sir, I wish you good rest.
What's your Name?
My Name is.
Then,, you must give your self the trouble to warm my Bed very well. Reach me those Slippers. Take my Shoos, and make 'em clean to night. For I intend to go out to morrow morning early. Be sure to bring me a Bason of Water, and a Towel.
The Towel hangs in that Corner.
That's very well. What time do you rise?
By break of day.
And your Mistress, what time do's she commonly rise?
At seven a clock.
Is she married, or no?
She is a Widow.
How long has she been so?
These two years.
What was her Husband?
A Sword-man.
Has he left any Estate?
He has left his Wife this House ready furnished, and a competent Estate in the Countrey, which she lives handsomly upon.
Has she any Children?
She had some.But they are all dead.
She seems to be a well-born Gentlewoman. And I look upon her as an ingenious Woman.
She is so, I assure ye; but her good Nature and Breeding go's beyond all.
I do not doubt it in the least, and I think my self happy to be under her Roof. But, hark ye,, is the House full of Lodgers?
There is now but one Room empty.
What Lodgers are they?
Very civil People.
How long have you been a Servant here?
Near upon five years.
'Tis a great while. But I forget my self. Pray, go fetch the Warming-pan. I'le go to bed e're it be long. For I did not sleep a wink all last night.
Sir, your Bed is warm enough. Have you any thing else to command me?
No, Sweet-heart. Do but tell me whereabouts is your convenient House.
You will find it in a back Yard.
That's enough. Good night t' ye.Remember, as soon as you are up to morrow morning, to bring me what I want.
I won't fail.
.
Sir.
Do you know an honest and good Washer-woman?
Sir, I know one that washes very well, and at a reasonable rate.
Pray, send for her. For my Linnen is almost all foul.
I'le step to her my self. She lives here hard by.
Bring her then along with you, if you can.
Sir, here is the Washer-woman.
Bid her come in. Good Woman, I have here a stock of foul Linnen. What shall I give you to wash it? You must be very reasonable. Otherwise I shall pitch upon another.
Sir, we must see the Pieces.And I shall tell you my Rates. A night-Shirt, is Two pence. A fine Shirt, six Pence. A Lace-Cravat, with Ruffles, four Pence. A plain Cravat, with Ruffles, Two-pence. The Socks, a Penny a Pair. And a Handkerchief, Half-peny. That is my lowest Rate.
Well, I am willing to give you what you ask. But I expect to have my Linnen very well washed. Pray, do it with great care, for I am a little nice in that particular.
Sir, you will have no cause to complain.
Tell the Pieces, and I shall set them down. See now whether I have the right Number. Whilst I read, do you tell.
'Tis all right.
Pray, see you tear nothing. But above all, take care you don't change my Linnen. You see how 'tis all marked.
Sir, trouble not your self in the least about it. All will be well on my side.
Very good, we shall quickly see what you mean by it.But, pray, when shall I expect my Linnen?
You shall have it Saturday-night at furthest.
Don't fail me then. I shall stay for it.
, has the Washer-woman brought my Linnen home?
Oh! dear Sir, I am loth to tell you of the Misfortune which is befaln you.
What d' ye mean?
That base Jade, your Washer-woman, has given us all the slip. She has carried away with her all the Linnen she could take and scrape. Yours is amongst all the rest.
Very well, now I am finely brought to bed. I am curiously put to it. Now I may go to bed without a Shift, and blow my Nose with my Fingers. I am undone, if I must buy a new stock of Linnen.
Sir, you sport your self ingeniously with your Loss. And I am much mistaken, if I don't take it more to heart than your own self.
Oh! the unlucky Jade, she knew what she meant, whenshe told me all would be well on her side. That Expression bred presently some Suspicion within me. But I deceived my self, when I went about to undeceive my self. However, I must take patience. Provided my Linnen be neither changed, nor torn, I am contented. Those two Things I strictly charged her with. When all comes to all, I save the Washing however. A Peny saved, is a Peny got.
Sir, I admire how cunningly you turn off the Point of your Misfortune. And you put me in mind of a great Artist; who, to save Candle, would never work in the Night.
When all is done,, I must think of providing my self with Linnen. Therefore you must direct me to some place or other.
Sir, you will find Seamstresse's Shops enough. Your business is only to cheapen as well as you can.
What d' ye want, Sir?
Lace-Cravats.
Here, Sir, take your choice, there you have several fashions.
But where be the Ruffles?
Here they are.
If you will be but reasonable, I shall take a couple of Cravats, with the Ruffles to 'em.
Sir, you shall find me as reasonable as any Seamstress in Town.
Shew me then a Cravat of another fashion, and yet fashionable too.
Here is a delicate one, and I think very fit for your turn.
Tell me your last word for these two Cravats, with the Ruffles.
Sir, you must give me three Pounds. The Lace is extraordinary fine. I cannot sell them under.
You exact upon me, Madam. What? thirty Shillings a Cravat and Ruffles. 'Tis an unreasonable Rate.
Sir, you don't know what they stand me in.
I dare say you would be lothI should know. Have you any good Night-shirts?
Sir, I have Shirts of several Prices.
Shew me some of the best, and the finest you have.
What d' ye think, Sir, of these? They are special ones, and of a fine length and breadth.
Are they long enough for me?
Long enough, I warrant you. And almost too wide.
Methinks the Cloth is not very fine.
Fine enough, Sir, for Night-shirts.
Tell me then your Price.
They are eight Shillings a Piece.
Indeed you are too dear. You exact. You ask too much for your Commodities.
Sir, you are under a Mistake. I ask you within compass. Sure you will allow one some Profit to live by.
'Tis but reasonable.
I want besides, Sleeves, Socks, Handkerchiefs, Night-Caps. Shew me some, if you please
Here, Sir, delicate Sleevesof pure Cloth.
But of a mad Price without doubt.
Eight Shillings a pair, and no more.
Really I was afraid you would have said twelve. Let me see those Socks. I fear they are too little for me. Have you none bigger?
These, Sir, will fit you to a hair's breadth.
What's the Price?
Six pence a Pair.
And these Handkerchiefs?
Two Shillings a Piece.
Lay 'em aside. These Caps, Madam, how much do you sell 'em?
Half a Crown is the Price.
Very good. Now let us see what the whole will amount to, by my Reckoning. For the two Lace-Cravats and Ruffles I'le give you fifty Shillings. Not a Sous more, Mistress. For four Night-shirts, at six Shillings a piece at the most, four and twenty Shillings. Fifty and twenty four, is three-score and fourteen Shillings, which is (I think) three Pounds fourteen Shillings.
Right. But all this while, Sir, you reckon without your Host.
'Tis no matter. Let us proceed. So the two Cravats, Ruffles, and Night-shirts come to three Pounds fourteen Shillings. Let us put by the three Pounds, and take up the Shillings.
Now I must reckon for the Socks, Handkerchiefs, and Night-caps.
Six pair of Socks, at Six-pence a pair, come to three Shillings. Six Handkerchiefs, at Twenty-pence a piece, make up ten Shillings. And three Night-caps, at two Shillings a piece, amount to six Shillings. Fourteen and three is seventeen, seventeen and ten is seven and twenty, seven and twenty and six is three and thirty. Three and thirty Shillings is one Pound thirteen Shillings. To which add the three Pounds, and the whole amounts just to four Pounds thirteen Shillings. Is not it right, Madam?
Sir, 'tis right at your own Rates, but that won't do my business. You must give me, in a word, five Pounds. It is a compleat Sum.
No, Madam.But, to let you see how reasonable I am, I am willing to give you four Pounds fifteen Shillings.
Upon my word, 'tis too little. And yet I must yield to it against the grain, that I may get your Custom. Take 'em, Sir, and remember that you have 'em Dog-cheap.
Tell that Mony, Madam, and remember that you have almost ruined me.
God forbid. I should be very sorry for't. Sir, shall I send these Things to your Lodgings?
I am going strait home. If you please to send any body with them, we shall go together.
Here's my Apprentice, that shall wait upon ye.
Very well. Follow me, Sweet-heart.
Honest Man, I have occasion for a new Sute of Clothes. But I must have it very neat, and fashionable.
Will you have it of Cloth, or Stuff?
I am willing to have it of Cloth. The Winter draws near, and English Cloth is much in the vogue.
Sir, shall I shew you some Patterns?
Have you any about you?
Yes, Sir. Pray, see which you like best. If you be for a fine Cloth, and a good Colour, this will do your Business.
What's the Price of this Cloth?
Eighteen Shillings a Yard.
What d' ye call a Yard?
A Measure three foot long, which is the common Measure in England. 'Tis less than the French Ell by one part in five. That is, there must be a Yard and a quarter, to make up a French Ell.
At this rate, how many Yards must I have for a Sute?
Sir, for a person of your Pitch, there must be no less than three Yards.
Eighteen and eighteen is thirty six, and eighteen to that, is just four and fifty. So the Cloth alone will stand me in four and fifty Shillings.'Tis a great deal of Money. But why must I have three Yards? In France I never took above two Ells of Cloth for a Sute.
Sir, they wear now their Coats very wide at the Pockets, and that takes up a great deal of Cloth.
Then we must take up three Yards. Where lives your Draper?
Here hard by, in.
Stay a little, and I shall go along with you.
Very well, Sir.
Master ... shew us some Cloth.
Will you have it fine?
The Gentleman likes this Pattern. Let's see the Piece.
This Cloth is very fine indeed, and lasting. Here's the Piece.
The Cloth is well enough. Do but tell us the Price.
Sir, 'tis very well worth twenty Shillings a Yard. But, to be short with ye, I will have but eighteen. That's the Price on't, I will not bate a Farthing.
You must give it for sixteen.
Sir, I should lose by it at that Rate.That is not the way to live. I assure you, at the rate I offer it for, I get but one Shilling a Yard. That's little enough.
I wonder how Tradesmen get Estates. By their Discourse, they are most an end Losers. If they get, 'tis so small a matter, that it is scarce worth their while to keep Shop.
Alas! Sir, Trading is come to nothing. It is not now as it has been formerly.
Well, well. We understand pretty well your meaning. Measure me three Yards of this Cloth. And be sure to give good Measure, though it were but for the Taylor's Profit. Tell that Money. I take it to be right.
It is so. Sir, I thank ye. I hope you will come hither another time.
Sure enough I shall come, either with Thanks, or Reproaches. Tis according as the Cloth shall prove.
Sir, I am so well satisfied with the goodness of the Cloth, that I have no cause in the least to fear your Complaints.
I wish it be so.
Honest Man you must come back along with me, to take my Measure.
What Lining, Sir, will you have?
I must have the Coat lined with a good Silk.
Must I find it for ye.
You shall find the Lining, and all the rest. I leave all to your Discretion. Do as you shall think fit. When you bring home my Sute, you shall have your Money. But you must be reasonable.
Sir, I shall make it my business to please you upon all accounts. But, to be the more sure of it, I should be glad to know first what sort of Button you would have.
Plain Silk-buttons.
You are not for a Vest.
No. I never wear any.
When must you have your Sute, Sir?
As soon as possible. You see what case I am in. I have but this travelling-Sute.
Sir, you shall have it two days hence.
Take three days rather than fail.
Sir, I dare undertake to finish it in two days.
Do then, and be as good as your word.
This is not all to have a Coat and Breeches. I must, besides, have a Hat, a Perwig, Gloves, Shoos, and Stockings. Thus I shall quickly see my Money at an end.
Sir, I want a Hat. Be so kind as to shew me the best you have in your Shop.
What sort, Sir? Will you have a French, or an English Hat?
Let me see a good English Beaver.
Sir, I have as good as any is in Town.
Let's see. This is too big for me. That is not fine enough.
Here is one, Sir, that I dare say will fit ye. Pray, try it.
Do's it become me well? Methinks the Brims are a little too narrow. The Crown is handsom enough. But I don't find it well wrought.
Believe me, Sir, 'tis a very good Hat, it fits you very well, and will do you a deal of service.
What d' ye ask for't?
Sir, that Hat is worth three Pounds. But you shall have it for five and fifty Shillings.
I will not make many words with ye. I offer you fifty Shillings. See, if you can afford it at that rate For my part, I'le give no more.
Truly, Sir, 'tis too little. Take it for four and fifty.
What I said is said. I neither go backwards nor forwards.
Then you must ow me four Shillings.
To pay, when I shall think fit.
Have you any Perwigs to sell?
Yes, Sir, here is a pretty Stock of Perwigs.
Shew me a light one, well made, and of a good strong Hair.
Will you have it, Sir, very long?
Of a middle Size.
Sir, I think this Perwig will go near to please ye.
Tis something too long, methinks. The Curl is not good. Neither do I find it thick enough of Hair. And, pray, would you make me believe this to be a good Hair?
Tis as good Hair as any is in England. Upon my word, I pay dear for it. Do but handle 'em a little, 'tis a strong Hair. As for the Curl, there is no better Curl. If you find the Perwig too thin of Hair, that may be easily helped.
But don't you find it your self somewhat too long?
Far from that, Sir, for a person of your presence, I should rather think it too short.
Well. What's the Price of it?
Sir, you shall have it for three Pounds.
I hope, my Friend, to have it cheaper than so.
Sir, I can bate no great matter of it. The Perwig is a good and genteel Perwig, and the Price very reasonable.
If I should give ye fifty Shillings for it, I should think it very well paid. Perwigs are not now so dear as they have been.
Sir, here is one of fifty Shillings. Do but see the difference.
This is a Perwig worth about five and thirty. I should be loth to give any more for it. To make no more words, shall I tell you fifty Shillings for the other?
If you please, Sir, to tell me eight and fifty Shillings, you shall have it.
I find you and I are not like to clap up a Bargain. We keep too great a distance.
Take it then for five and fifty. I can bate nothing on't.
If it be so, I take my leave of you. I shall try somewhere else.
Sir, Sir. Consider well the goodness of this Perwig. Assure your self, that you will find none better of that Price any where else. Take it for half a Crown more.
Not a Farthing more. I am fully resolved upon it.
Upon my word, you have it too cheap.
Sir, have you very good Gloves?
What Gloves, Sir, will you please to have?
Shew me some Doe-skin Gloves trimmed, if you have any.
Sir, here be choice ones. Try these on. I think they will fit ye.
No, they are too little. Shew me that pair. They are somewhat too big.
What d' ye think of these?
I fancy these will fit me. But are they well sowed?
Very well, Sir.
What must you have for 'em?
Six Shillings.
I'le give ye five.
Six-pence more, if you please.
No, 'tis enough.
Take 'em.
I Lack a pair of Silk-Stockings. Shew me a good pair.
Will you have 'em knit, or woven?
I would have a good pair of knit Stockings.
What Colour, Sir?
Take this Pattern, and match it as well as you can.
Sir, I found what you look for. There's your Cloth mighty well matched. And you never saw better Stockings than these are. They are of very good Silk, and well knit.
How much must you have for 'em?
The lowest Price is eighteen Shillings.
Pray, shew me a good pair of Thread Stirrup-stockins.
Sir, here are several pair, take your choice.
How much a pair?
Three Shillings.I must then give you twenty Shillings for both pair. Tis a Shilling too cheap.
Have you any Shoos fit for me?
Sir, we shall see, if you please to sit down but a minute.
I want a pair of good strong Shoos. For 'tis extream dirty.
Sir, here is a pair, that I think will fit ye.
Let's try it. Fy upon't, they are a great deal too little, they pinch me horribly.
Then I must look for another pair. What d' ye think of these, Sir?
Fy, fy, this is a clownish Shoo. See what a Heel that is. I must have a Heel well made, and a Shoo with a double Sole well beaten.
Sir, if you please to stay but till to morrow about this time, I shall get you a good pair of Shoos, that you will be pleased with.
How much must I pay for 'em?
If you will have a good, strong, and lasting pair of Shoos, 'twill cost you five Shillings.
Well. Take my measure. If I like 'em, we shan't disagree.
Where is your Dwelling, Sir?
Give me some Paper, with a Pen, and Ink, and I shall leave you my Direction. To morrow I shall expect you in the Evening. Do not fail me.
Sir, I shall wait on you without fail.
Madam, I come to beg your Advice. I can't imagine how I shall live in this Town. I don't love to eat alone. And how can I possibly avoid it, unless I board somewhere? Will you be so kind, Madam, as to admit me at your Table? I shall content you very well.
Sir, I have two Boarders already that lodge here, a Gentleman and his Wife. If you please to come in for one, you will be very welcome.
'Twill be a great Satisfaction to me.Make, if you please, your Proposals.
Sir, I'le ask you but ten Shillings a Week.
Then, Madam, I must have my Linnen washed into the Bargain.
Washing is a thing by it self. We do not wash at home.
Then I hope you will furnish me with Candles.
That I will. I shall allow you every Week a Pound of Candles. But you must know, that in this Town we commonly make but one good Meal a Day. I don't know how you will like that way of living.
If that be the way, I must use my self to it.
If you be for a Breakfast, you may have new Butter, and sometimes a Porrenger of Broth, if you like it. At Dinner we commonly have a Dish or two of good Meat. As for Supper, here we make but very light Suppers. And it agrees best with us in point of Health.
I am, Madam, no great Eater, nor a Man very hard to please. Tis true, that Supper in France is a regular Meal. But, 'tis possible, I shall make shift without it in this Country.I must try, I must run the Hazard of it. And, if you please, to morrow we shall begin.
What Dish is that, Madam?
This is an English Pudding. Will you be pleased to tast on't?
By all means, Madam. Truly, 'tis not unpleasant. But I fear it is heavy to the Stomach.
Sir, I confess this is a Dish that do's not so presently agree with French Palates. But the generality of them do in time grow in love with it.
For my part, I am a great Admirer of this Beef. Tis so good, so very juicy.
Come, Sir, you don't eat.
Madam, I eat with a very good Stomach. See what a Breach I made to this piece of Beef.
Much good may it d' ye. I love to see people eat, when they are at Table. That provokes my Appetite, and makes me have a good opinion of the Meat.
, give me some Drink.My service t' ye, Madam.
Your Servant, Sir. How d' ye like our small Beer?
Tis small indeed, but palatable enough.
, bring the Capon.
This Capon looks very well. It seems to me to be fat.
I take it too to be very tender. Shall I help you, Sir, to a Wing, or a Leg?
Give me leave, Madam, to help my self, rather than put you to that trouble.
What d' ye think now of the Capon, Sir? Do you like it?
Indeed, 'tis admirable good.
Pray, Sir, do not spare it. Remember our light Suppers. You must eat, not only to satisfy, but also to prevent Hunger.
Madam, I am already become an Englishman. I declare my self against Suppers from this very time. And I have eaten so plentifully, that I don't think Hunger will come upon me in 24 hours
, bring the Fruit.
Here it is, Madam.
Take away this Dish, and change Plates. Lay the Fruit upon the Table. Sir, I don't know whether you love Cheese, or no.
Nothing, Madam, comes amiss to me.
Here's such Fruits as the Season affords. Tast some of these Pippins. They are pretty good in this Countrey. If you like Walnuts better, there is some.
Truly, I am weary of eating. However I will tast a little of this Fruit.
Is Master ... at home?
Yes, Sir, he is at home. No, Sir, he is not within.
How long has he been gone out?
He is but just gone out. He went out this Morning. He has been gone out this hour.
Did he leave word when he should come home?
He said nothing when he went out.He left word, that he should be back again within an hour. If you will give your self the Trouble to come again, 'tis likely you will find him at home.
Pray, tell him, that I was here to wait upon him. Tell him, that I shall call upon him another time. Desire him, from me, to be so kind, as to call at my Lodging. I have something of consequence to tell him. If I can possibly, I shall call here again an hour hence. If he come before me, desire him to stay within doors.
Shall I crave your Name, Sir?
My Name is ...
Sir, I won't fail to tell him.
Well, Sweet-heart, is the Gentleman come home?
Yes, Sir, he is in his Chamber.
The first, or second pair of Stairs?
The second.
Forwards, or backwards?
Backwards.
Is he alone? Has he Company with him?
He is alone.
So much the better. I am glad of it.
Oh! my dear Friend, Iam very much obliged to you for this Favour. I am overjoy'd to see you.
And I am no less joyful, that I met you. Do you know that I was here about an hour since?
The Maid of the House told me on't. Therefore I waited for your Return with great Impatiency. Well! our dear Friend, what shall we do? Will you be pleased to sit down, and I shall call for something?
Nay, let us rather go and take a Walk. It is fine Weather now. And, if you please, after our Walk, we shall go somewhere, and drink a Glass of Wine.
It shall be as you please.
is a strange Country. See what a Fog there is abroad. It puts me in mind of the Egyptian Darkness. One is like to be lost in it. Let's have a Saw, and we will saw it.
The Truth on't is, 'tis a dismal Fog.And it is so very thick, that I don't remember I ever saw the like in England.
Ay. But you cannot deny me, that ever since the beginning of Winter few Days went over our Heads without some Mist or other, Morning or Evening.
Tis true. And I confess, the Sun is pretty rare here in Winter-time.
'Tis at least ten Days since the last time I saw it. Do's it appear? 'tis but a transient Appearance for a moment.
He imitates those Monarchs of the East, who, to make themselves to be the more respected by their People, appear but seldom abroad. Don't you know the Story that go's about, of a Spanish Embassadour, who was sent to KingI. at his first coming to the Crown of England? Tis said, he was here a whole Month, and went away, not having had so much as once a sight of the Sun all that while. At his departure he desired such Courtiers as waited on him to Ship-board, to remember his most humble Service to the King their Master, and to the Sun when they should chance to see it.
That was a pretty Joke indeed.
Nay, in the very Summer 'tis no common Thing here to see a clear and serene Sky.
What should be the reason of that?
The Sea is the Cause of it, from whence the Sun draws thick Vapours, which condensing themselves into Clouds, keep us so often from the sight of that glorious Body.
Thus from the Premises we may draw this general Conclusion, that the Air of England is gross and thick; that the Weather here is commonly over-cast, gloomy, and melancholy; subject to Rain, and Fogs, in Winter especially. So that, when it is cold Weather in England, it is not (as in Continents) a hard Frost, but for the most part a raw kind of Cold, not wholesom to be sure.
This is not all. There is another Inconveniency in the Weather here, I mean its Changeableness.
I'le tell you thereupon an Observation, which I lately made. In the space of 24 hours, there hapned to be four sorts of Weather, which had very well suted the four Seasons of the Year. The Morning-weather had been proper for a Spring-day. Towards Noon it was hot enough for an England Summer. About Evening the Sky was over-cast, as it uses to be in Autumn. And in the Night there fell a very cold Rain.
I confess, I made sometimes that Observation my self, but this is such a Thing as happens but seldom.
But don't you find however, that one is very apt to catch Cold here, especially in Winter. This doubtless does proceed from the Changeableness of the Weather.
'Tis true, Colds are very rife in this Country. Nay, the Consequences of it prove sometimes fatal to tender Constitutions.
Don't you believe the Consumption do's often proceed from thence?
The Thing is likely enough. And to prevent that mortal Disease, 'tis good to keep his Breast chiefly, the Head, and the Feet warm.
Methinks Feavers are not altogether so common here, as in France.
No more they are not. And therefore hard Drinking is the less dangerous here.
Ay. But 'tis said on the other side, that there is more danger in the secret Commerce with Woman-kind.
Therefore look to your hits.
Hitherto I must confess we have made the worst of England.It behoves us to speak within bounds, and for me to tell you that, though this Country be something troubled with Rain, and cloudy Weather, yet those Disadvantages are highly countervailed by the Sweetness and Comforts of it. Whilst the Sun scorches the Plants, and the Inhabitants of the Southern Country's, by the reflexion of its Beams, it do's but warm England by a moderate Heat, which makes it the more plentiful in Corn and Pasturage. The Noise of Thunder is but seldom heard here, and the Heavens darting of Thunder-bolts is a Thing unfrequent in this Country. Hail is not fatal here to Plants, as elsewhere. And, instead of those impetuous Showrs of Rain, which often drown the fairest Hopes of the Husbandman in hot Climes, here is commonly nothing but small Rain to be seen. Admirable is besides the Sweetness of this Country, in that it is not subject to Hurricanes, nor Earthquakes; that it do's not breed many venomous Beasts; and that the Cattel feed Day and Night in the open Field, free from any fear of the Wolf.
Is it really true, that there are no Wolves in England?
Tis true, Historians tell us there is none. Nay, there are those who attribute it to a peculiar Vertue of the English Air, as if it were mortal to that Creature. Others tell us more probably, that England was unpeopled of Wolves by the Care of one of its Kings; who by a happy Contrivance exchanged the Tribute paid him in Gold and Silver by the Welsh for a yearly Tribute of 300 Wolves Skins. Which made that People (as History tells us) so extream industrious and active in Wolf-hunting, that they cleared the Country from those noxious Beasts, and thereby eased themselves of their burdensom Tribute. For my part, I am apt to think, that the Race of English Wolves might be in a manner extinct by this means. However they were not so totally routed, but that there are some now and then to be seen. The Sight is rare, I confess, and England being an open Country, is the more unfit to shelter such a Creature. And so let us resume the thread of our Discourse.
What think ye, Friend, of the last Winter?
It was pretty mild. The Frost do's not last long here.
And yet England lies North of France, London being nearer the Pole than Paris, by four Degrees. However 'tis certain, that Winters are milder here.
How comes that to pass?
It happens so by reason of the warm Vapours that arise from the Sea, whereby the Rigour of the Season is allay'd.
The truth is, England is a very temperate Country.
It is so very temperate, that whilst the Winter mortifies the vegetable and sensitive Creatures in the Northern Regions, here we see frequently the Fields cloathed with green Grass, as in the Spring. You cannot but remember so many fine Days we have had in the Winter, amidst the gloomy Days, the Fogs, and Rain of that Season.
I confess, 'tis an happy Result of the Uncertainty of English Weather.
And yet there happens too sometimes Extremities both of Heat and Cold. But they are look'd upon here as Irregularities.
Pray, tell me, whether or no the Winter was very severe here two Years ago?
It was so very sharp and bitter, that the Thames, notwithstanding the Tide coming in and going out, was for a long time buried under its Flakes of Ice. So that both Carts and Coaches went over it. Nay, there was kept for some time a Fair, where one could hardly go through for the Crowd. And, which is more wonderful, a little before the Thaw, there was a whole Ox rosted towards.
I fancy, the Cold went then (if ever) through the thin Walls of London Houses.
You speak of a Winter that was a Prodigy all over Europe, both as to the Sharpness and Length thereof. But you may assure your self, that the English came off as well at least as any Nation. He that is rich is warm enough, you know.
I Admire at their Buildings in England. Here they raise Houses three Stories high, and two Rooms of a Floor, besides the Cellarage, upon Walls of the thickness only of a Brick and a half.
That's enough for Houses which are to stand but forty or fifty years at the most; and for a Country which does not require thick Walls, to keep off either Heat or Cold.
Ay. But, in case of an excessive Heat or Cold, how can those Walls withstand it?
I must confess, that when those Extremities are of long continuance, and either the Cold or the Heat has pierced the Walls, it proves very troublesom and uneasy. But we talk here of an extraordinary Case. You know, that in every Country they build according to the Temperature of the Air of that Country.
I grant it.
For my part, I admire the Genius of the English in their modern Buildings. And it is really a Thing worthy your Admiration at London, to see Houses built upon a little spot of Ground, so neat, and so convenient.
The Truth is, they found out here the right way of Building. But nothing humours me so much as the Convenience of Closets, which they have in their Rooms.
However I cannot be reconciled with their common Fewel, the Sea-coals. So noisom it is by the gross Vapours it casts forth, which stick not only to Houshold-goods and Clothes, but to the very Hands and Face.
Great are the Conveniencies of this very Fewel which you blame. First, it makes a Fire much hotter than Wood do's. Secondly, a Sea-coal Fire is much more lasting, because those Coals are a great deal more compact than Wood is. Thirdly, there is moreover this Advantage in Sea-coals, especially in a great City, that it is to be had at a cheap rate. Insomuch that for a small matter one may keep at London a constant Fire. And I make notthe least doubt, but that when it is nipping cold, the common sort of People atwould be glad, could they compass it, to change Fewel with the Londoners.
Is not there, besides those Sea-coals, another sort of Coals, which is used amongst the Nobility and Gentry of the Land?
You mean Scotch-Coals, which is altogether massive, and makes as clear a Fire as Wood it self. You cannot but know, that they burn here likewise a good deal of Wood. Nay, there are some Countries in England, where they scarce burn any Thing else.
You have hinted to me before, that England was a plentiful Country of Corn and Grass.
So it is.
I confess there is good Bread, and good Meat, and both of them even at London, at very reasonable Rates.
This is the Wonder of it, that Provisions should be commonly so cheap in so vast, so populous, and so rich a place as this City is.I leave you to think how cheap they live in the Country, but especially in Places remote from this Gulf. But, to insist upon Particulars, where is there better Beef to be had, than is in England?
It is admirable indeed. Tis the Partridge of England. And I could wish that Mutton were as good in its kind.
You must know, Friend, how to distinguish in this case. The great Mutton is commonly course, and is not for a sweet Tooth. But the small Mutton (or rather the middle size) such as feeds in dry Pastures, is very palatable. Veal and Lamb are likewise very good. And, as for Venison, England has an infinite Number of Parks and Warrens; those peopled with Deer, these swarming with Rabbets. There is also abundance of Fowls, which are not generally so delicious to the Taste, as those in France. But some sort there is very good.
Are not Fruits waterish here?
When the Season proves rainy.
What Fish do they eat here?
Here they have all sorts of Fish that the Sea, Ponds, and Rivers can afford. But perhaps you will say 'tis waterish.
You are a Wag.
As for Drink, shew me a Country in Europe, that has more Variety.
You make me mad, when you talk of English Drink. 'Tis nothing but boiled Water. Tell me of Wine, that admirable Liquor which cheers up the Heart of Man.
I see I must first shake off from your Mind those Prejudices you have against Beer. And so you will so much the more easily be weaned from that conceited opinion you have of Wine. In order to which, you must know, that in England they make all sorts of Beer, both small and strong.
Is there any that hath the quick taste and strength of Wine?
Pray, let me go on. The small Beer is commonly drunk at Meals, because it is cooling, and apt to quench ones Thirst. Nay, it is very proper Drink for French People. 'Tis good sometimes to mix Water with Wine.
I understand ye.
The strong is either Beer, or Ale. Beer is made with Hops. It has a strong and pungent Taste, and will keep several Years. Whereas Ale, being made without Hops, is sweet, and do's not keep. Therefore 'tis usually mingled with the other. And that is the common sort of Drink in England.
I would fain know, whether this Drink can be so strong as to make one drunk.
You may see Instances of it daily amongst the common sort of People.
What? Wou'd you make me believe that they make themselves drunk with Beer? It must be with Wine, or Brandy.
Tis an easy thing to convince ye of what I say to you. But let us lay aside those common sorts of Drink, and let me tell you that in England they make Beer even stronger than Wine. There is in your Country a Person of good quality, who knows it by Experience. Nay, there is Beer to be had, which burns like Brandy, and flies up as quick into the Head.
You tell me here many Things that I was ignorant of. Meanwhile you put me in mind of an Account I had not long since in France. That here is a sort of bottled Beer, which makes sometimes a sportfult Splutter. I was told, that it blows up now and then the Cork into the Air with a great noise, and then gets out of its Prison with so much Impetuousness, that the Spectatours are at the same time amazed at, and diverted with it.
Nay, sometimes it do's more than so. For, when it is in the height of Fermentation, if it wants Air, 'twill break the Bottle, and make way through the same. And you know what strong Bottles they have in this Country.
Then sure the Beer must needs be very strong.
Ordinary Ale will do that in Summer-time, when it is bottled, before it has done working.
Well, I conceive, that Beer and Ale, good or bad, is the common Drink in England. Pray, tell me, what other Liquours they have here.
Here they make great plenty of Cider, but chiefly in the Country.The best comes from, which is very much esteemed, and bears at London the same Price as French Wines, to wit, twelve Pence a Bottle. But I forgot to tell you, that as you have in France a hundred ways to dress your Victuals, so we are, near upon the matter, as full of Variety in our Drinks. It were a hard matter for me to name you but half on't. Only I shall tell you, that, as they have not the same degree of Strength, so they differ likewise in their Taste, according to the several Ingredients they consist of. Nay, there is some made Physical, and good for several Diseases. But, besides Beer and Cider, you must know this Country affords a great deal of Mead; and that in private Families they make Currans and Gooseberry-wine, two sorts of Fruit this Country is very plentiful of.
As for Wines, 'tis true the Sun is not hot enough in England, to supply it with that sort of Liquor. Not, but that there grow sometimes very good Grapes. But, this Country being so conveniently surrounded with the Sea, here is brought not only anincredible Quantity of your French Wines, but also the most delicious Wines of Italy, Spain, Portugal, and Madera Islands. More than that, the English go as far as the Canary Islands, to make Provision of Canary-Wines, whereof there is more drunk in England than in all Europe besides. Wines they have, even from Greece and Smyrna, for Varieties-sake. And, as for German Wines, what more common than Rhenish, or Mosella? So you may see, that England do's not fare the worse for bearing no Wine of its own. On the contrary, 'tis more to be feared, that an excessive drinking of that Liquor will do it a Prejudice.
You must grant me however, that Wine is best at the Spring. There it is natural, and cheaper to be sure.
Tis true, in France you drink it at the first hand. But, set aside French Wines, England and France are upon the same terms. Outlandish Wines are as great Strangers to France as to England.
In France they drink but little of outlandish Wine.They have Wine enough of their own.
Say what you will, Men are pleased with Variety; but here lies the matter, it is chargeable. Whereas the English Nation, being rich, spare for nothing, when they mean to enjoy themselves. You think it a great Advantage to drink Wine upon the Place where it grows. But you must undeceive your self, as to strong-bodied Wine. For 'tis a certain Truth, that such Wines drink far better in England than where they grow. The Sea refines 'em, and makes 'em more palatable.
I hear the English Vintners refines 'em too most ingeniously, and that they have a great Gift that way.
There is doubtless too much
of that true, and it is a grievous
thing.
 However, this Abuse is not so
universal, but that one may have
plenty of good natural Wine.
 I could tell you moreover of an
infinite Number of Cordial Drinks
which are made in England, but
that it is time to put a Period to
this present Discourse.
 Another time we shall speak of
the Use of Brandy, Coffee, Tee,
Chocolate, and Tobacco, which
are so commonly used in England.<|endoftext|>Has my Bell rung? I believe yes.
-- What's a clock?
 Madam, it is e'en eleven a
clock.
 Is it so late?
 Give me my smock.
 It is not warm; I am going to
warm it.
 Is there a good fire in my
closet?
 Yes, Madam.
 Give me my wastcoat again.
 Where is my Night-gown?
 Here it is.Give me my slippers, my
stockings, and my Garters.
 I cannot find the garters.
 What's become of them?
 I cannot tell.
 You leave all things in a 
confusion.
 You should put all things in
order before you go to bed.
 Spread the Toilet.
 The glass of that looking-glass
is all dirty, wipe it a little.
 Give me a chair.
 Are my Combs clean?
 Yes, Madam, they are so.
 Comb my head.
 Softly, how you go to it?
 You have taken the skin off of
my head.
 Give me my head-dress.
 Where is the Pin-cushion?
 Where is the Patch-box?
 Give me a pin.
 Has the Sempstress brought the
Tippet and the Ingageants which
I bespoke the day before yesterday?
 No, Madam.
 She shall have my custom no
longer.
 She neglects her customers too
much.
 Give me my stays.
 Lace me very tite, or very
close.
 Give me my silver-fringed
petticoat, and my yellow gown.Where are my gloves, my muff,
and my handerchief?
 Here they be, Madam.
 Put some sweet-water to that
Handkerchief.
 Fill up this bottle with
Hungary water.
 Where is my watch?
 There it is.
 Does it go?
 No, Madam, it is down.
 Give it me, that I may wind
it up.
 But go first, and see what a
clock it is by the Dining-rooms
Clock.
 Madam, it is half an hour
past eleven.
 Go and bid the Coachman put
the Horses in the Coach.
 In the Chariot.
 Madame, the Coach is ready,
it is at the door.
 Madam, here come your 
Ladyship's Sons to ask your
blessing.
 God bless my dear boys.
 Be good and mind your book.
 But where is my girl?
 Here she is.
 Kiss me dear honey, my dear
child, my little darling. I am hungry, I am very
hungry.
 And I am dry.
 I am almost starved,
methinks I have eat nothing these
three days.
 For my part I am almost
choak'd.
 I am mighty thirsty.
 I could eat a bit of something.
 Eat then, who hinders you?
 I could drink a glass of wine.
 Drink then, without more ado.
 I have a good stomach.
 I have no more stomach.
 I am satisfied, I have my
belly full.
 I have no stomach at all.
 I am no more dry.
 My thirst is quench'd. Let's go to walk.
 Let us go to take the air.
 Will you go along with me?
 I will.
 Will you go and take a turn.
 I consent to it.
 I consent to it.
 Where shall we go?
 Let us go into the Park.
 Let's go into the Fields.
 Shall we go in a Coach.
 Or on foot.
 As you please.
 As you will.
 Let's go on foot.
 'Tis good for ones health.
 You are in the right.
 Come on, lets walk.
 Which way do you go?
 This way. That way.
 On the right hand.
 On the left hand.
 Let's rest a little.
 It is not worth the while.
 Are you weary.
 I am mighty weary,, tired.
 You are a sorry walker.
 Lets go back again.
 It grows late.The Sun goes down.
 Don't go so fast.
 Stay for me.
 I cannot keep pace with you.
 Come, come, you will unweary
your self at supper. Where is thy Master?
 Is he asleep still?
 No, Sir, he is awake.
 Is he up?
 Is he stirring? Is he up?
 No, Sir, he is a bed still.
 How now! are you a bed still?
 I went to bed so late yesterday
that I could not get up betimes.
 What did you then after
Supper?
 As soon as you was gone out
they spoke of playing.
 Did you play?
 Yes, Sir, I did play.
 At what game?
 We played at Picket, Sir --
and I.
 And the others?
 Some play'd at Omber.Others at Basset.
 And others at Chess.
 Who won? who lost?
 My Lady Dutchess ofwon
twenty guineas.
 The Earl oflost fifteen.
 Sir --won Ten Crowns
of me.
 As far as I see the loss or gain
were not of great moment.
 We never play but for diversion
sake.
 But methinks that gaming is
a very dangerous diversion.
 Especially when one plays deep.
 What, do you never play?
 Excuse me; but when I play,
I do not play high.
 We play for a small matter,
and we make it a point of Honour
to play fair.
 But now I think on't, till what
time did you play?
 Till twelve a Clock at night.
 What time did you go to bed?
 At one a Clock at Night.
 I don't wonder that you rise so 
late.
 What a Clock is it?
 What a Clock do you take it to 
be?I don't believe it is eight a
Clock.
 How, eight a Clock! it has
struck ten.
 I must rise then as fast as I 
can. Who is there? who waits?
 What do you want, Sir?
 Come quickly, make a fire.
 Dress me.
 There is a fire, Sir.
 Give me my Shirt.
 There it is, Sir.
 It is not warm.
 It is quite cold still.
 I shall warm it if you please.
 No, no, where is my
Night-gown?
 Where are my slippers?
 Bring me my silk Stockings.
 There are holes in them.
 Can you not stitch them?
 Give me then a pair of woosted
Stockings.Comb my head.
 Take another comb.
 Combmy wigg.
 Put some essence to it.
 Give me my handkerchief.
 There is a clean one.
 Give me that which is in my
my Coat's pocket.
 I gave it to the washer-woman
it was foul.
 You have done well.
 Has she brought my linnen.
 Yes, Sir, there wants nothing.
 Give me my breeches.
 What Suit of cloaths do you
put on to day?
 That as I had on yesterday.
 How, Sir, don't you remember
that to day is the Duke ofBirth-day, and that the
Tailor is to bring your new Suit
presently.
 I am in the wrong.
 You are in the right.
 'Tis well you put me in mind
of it.
 But some body knocks, see who
it is.
 Who is it?
 'Tis the Tailor.
 Call him up.
 Let him come in. Do you bring my Suit of
Cloaths?
 Yes, Sir, here it is.
 I stood for you; try it me on.
 Will you be pleas'd to try the
close-coat on.
 Let's see whether it be well
made.
 I hope it will please you.
 It is very long methinks.
 They wear them long now.
 They don't wear them now so
short as they did before.
 Button me.
 It is too close.
 To be well made, it ought to
be close.
 Are not the sleeves too wide?
 No, Sir, they sit very well.
 The breeches are very narrow.
 That's the fashion.
 They wear them very narrow.
 The rolls are not big enough.
 I beg your pardon.
 That Suit becomes you mighty
well.But my Stockings do not match
it.
 No matter, such things is not 
so nicely observed.
 What do you say to my hat?
 'Tis a very fine beaver.
 You are mistaken, 'tis but a
Castor.
 What hat-band will you put to
it?
 A gold-galoon with a diamond
buckle.
 Did you not buy me a cravat
string.
 Pardon me, here it is.
 What is the yard of this
ribbon?
 They don't sell by the yard, they
sell it by the ell.
 How much?
 A Shilling and Sixpence.
 'Tis not too much. 'Tis not
dear.
 'Tis cheap.
 Have you made your Bill?
 I had not the time.
 Bring it to morrow, I shall pay
you. Is the Shoomaker come?
 No, Sir, he is not come.Run then to him, and bid him
bring my shooes.
 Sir, here he is, Imet him by
the way,
 Are these my shooes?
 Yes, Sir.
 Put them on.
 They pinch me a little.
 They'll grow wider, by wearing
 But they will hurt me in the
mean while.
 My Corns will suffer for't.
 My feet are in the Stocks.
 Make me some others.
 You are hard to be pleased.
 Will you be pleased to try
another pair, which I brought by
chance.
 I will.
 They will fit you, I believe.
 I have my foot more at ease.
 What are these shooes worth?
 Five shillings.
 That's too much.
 'Tis a set price.
 'Tis a shooe well made, and
well stitcht.
 Make me another pair like
these.
 Take my measure.
 There is your money. Have you brought any thing 
to break fast?
 Yes, Sir, there are sausages
and petty-patees.
 Shall I bring the Gammon of
Bacon.
 Yes, bring it, we shall cut a
slice of it.
 Lay a napkin on that table, and
give us plates, knives and forks.
 Rinse the glasses.
 Reach the Gentleman a seat.
 Sit down, Sir, sit by the fire.
 I am not cold, I will be very
well here.
 Let's see whether the wine be
good.
 Pull the cork of that bottle.
 Taste that wine, pray.
 How do you like it?
 What do you say to it?
 It is not bad, it is good.
 Take that dish away.
 Eat sausages.
 There is an Orange.
 Squeese it upon your Sausages.
 Give me some drink.
 Sir, my Service to you.
 Sir, to your health.I thank you, Sir.
 Give the Gentleman some drink.
 I drunk but just now.
 The petty-pattees were very
good.
 They were baked a little too
much,
 You do not eat.
 I have eat so much, that I
shall not be able to eat my dinner.
 You only jest, you have eat
nothing.
 Let's say grace. Do you speak French?
 Are you very Learned in
the French Tongue?
 Not much, I know nothing almost.
 'Tis said however, that you
speak very well.
 I would it were true.
 I should know, what I do not.
 It will be true, if you please, 
and I shall teach you the way to
learn French quickly.
 You shall do me a very great
favour.
 The easiest Method to Learn
French, is to speak it often.
 But to speak, a body must know
something.You know enough already.
 I know but four or five words
which I have got by heart.
 That's enough to begin to
speak.
 Were it so, I should become a
great Scholar in a little time.
 Don't you understand what I
say to you?
 I both understand it, and
apprehend it very well.
 But I have not a fluent
expression.
 I can hardly speak.
 The facility of speaking will
come in time.
 I am too hasty.
 Tell me a little, how do you
call that?
 I believe, it is called.
 Very well, and this.
 Do I pronounce well?
 Pretty well. Indifferent.
 You want but a little
Practice.
 How long is it since you
learn?
 'Tis not above eight days.
 It is not a Month since.
 What is your Master of
Languages's name?
 His name is Master --
 How many times does he come
to teach you?
 He comes three times a week.
 How much do you give him a
month.
 I give him -- so much.Does he come three days one
after another?
 No, he comes every other day,
 To wit, On Mundays, Wenesday,
and Frydays.
 In the forenoon, or in the 
afternoon?
 In the forenoon.
 Where does he live?
 In.
 At whose house?
 He lodges at a Taylor's, at the
sign of the Blue-ball.
 Does he not tell you, that you
should always speak French?
 Yes, Sir, he tells me so
often.
 Why don't you speak then?
 Who will you have me speak
with?
 With those as shall speak to
you.
 I'd fain speak, but I dare
not.
 Believe me, be confident, and
speak without minding whether
you say right or no.
 If I speak so every body will
laugh at me.
 Don't you know that tolearn
to speak well, a body begins by
speaking ill.
 I shall then follow your
advice. What news is there
abroad?
 Do you know any news?
 I have heard no news.
 What do they say abroad?
 There is no talk of any thing.
 Did you hear any thing of the
War?
 I heard nothing of it.
 There is a talk of a Siege.
 They said so; but that
report has proved false.
 On the contrary, they talk of
a battel.
 I have it of good hands.
 Do you believe we shall have
a Peace?
 I believe yes.
 For my part I believe not.
 What grounds have you for't?
 Because I see the minds of
both Partys are little inclin'd
that way.
 Mean while, it cannot be
deny'd but that Peace would be a
great advantage to Trade.
 What do they say at Court?They talk of a journey.
 When is it believed the King 
will go?
 It is not known. They say
nothing of it.
 Where do they say he will go?
 Some say into, others
upon the Fleet.
 And what says the Gazette?
 I have not read it.
 And to speak freely with you,
the designs of the Court are kept
so secret, that I think
Newsmongers know nothing of them.
 The Commanders themselves,
whom the King chuses to execute
his designs, do not know what
the preparations that are a
making in the Tower and in the 
Seaports are intended for.
 After all this can a body speak 
possitively of our affairs.
 Men of sence never speak of
those matters, but with great
wariness and discretion.
 For my part, I cannot excuse
the foolishness of some people,
who talk of Government without
being acquainted with it.
 They make peace and war,
according to their freaks, or
interests, and take upon themselves
to settle the Nation, when at the
same time they leave their
Families in a ruinous disorder.
 Let us speak of private news.It is true, what is reported
of Master --
 What of him?
 They say he is wounded to
death.
 I would be sorry for't, he is
an honest man.
 Who has given him the wound?
 Two Knaves.
 Two Villains that set upon
him.
 Do they know upon what
account?
 'Tis reported because he spoke
ill of them, and gave a box in
the ear to one of them.
 I don't believe it.
 Nor I neither.
 Whatever it be, 'twill be
quickly known. Who is that Gentleman
who spoke to you just
now?
 He is an Englishman.
 I took him to be a German.
 He speaks very good French.
 Tho' he be an Englishman, he
speaks so well French, Italian,
German and Spanish, thatamong the French they believe
him to be a French-man.
 He speaksas thethemselves.
 He goes for awith
the, and for aamong the.
 'Tis a hard matter to be
Master of so many different
Languages.
 He has been a long while in
those Countrys.
 Is it long since you know him?
 'Tis about two years since I
know him.
 I got acquainted with him at.
 He is very genteel.
 He has a fine Presence.
 He is of a fine proper size.
 He is neither too tall nor too
little.
 He is handsom, and his shape
is easy and free.
 He has a noble gate.
 He has nothing unpleasant in
his ways.
 He is civil, courteous, and
complaisant with every body.
 He has a great deal of Wit
and is very jovial and agreeable
in Conversation.
 He Rides the great Horse
very well; He is quick and handy
to Fence, and Dances very neatly,
(or handsomly).He plays on the lute, the
guittar, and several other
instruments.
 But what renders him the
more commendable, is that he
has found the way to get the
Prince's favour. who often
bestows favours upon him.
 And who without question
will not fail to prefer him.
 I should be glad to get
acquainted with him.
 I shall get you acquainted
with him.
 Do you know where he lives.
 He lives hard by.
 When shall you and I go and
wait on him.
 When you please, for he is
my intimate Friend.
 'Twill be when you can spare
time.
 When it is convenient for you.
 At your leisure. Gentlemen, good morrow
to you.
 Sir, I wish it to you.
 Have you been up a long
while?It is about an hour since.
 Have you well slept last
night?
 Have you had a good nights
rest?
 My little brother has slept
very well.
 For my part, I spent part
of the night in sleeping, the 
other in slumbering, and the
other in waking.
 Have you breakfasted?
 Yes Sir.
 Have you askt your Papa's,
your Mama's and
Grand-Mama's blessing?
 Papa went out before we
got up.
 Mama is not awake.
 But we have been at 
Grand-Mama's.
 Bring your Books.
 What Books must I bring?
 What day of the Week is
it?
 To day is Tuesday.
 Bring then the Latin
Grammar and the Familiar
Phrases.
 And for my Brother?
 The history of the Bible and
the French Grammar.
 Decline a Noun, Conjugate
a verb.
 And you, Masterget this Lesson by heart.Mastermind what
you are about.
 I tell you twenty times of
a thing, and you never
mend.
 You are always wandring.
Or, you never mind.
 You are not capable of
committing those oversights, if
you minded never so little.
 You do not improve.
 Masteryou do not
study.
 You do nothing but play.
 You do but play the wag.
 Say your Lesson, 
 You stammer at every
word.
 Masterput, (or 
explain) into French ten Latin
phrases.
 Construe them.
 Write them fairly in your
paper-book, with the French
translation against it.
 And get afterwards all that
by heart.
 I give you a small task that
you may get it by heart the
sooner, and keep it the longer.
 Do you know your Lesson
already?
 Yes, Sir, I know it.
 Well, let's see. Rehearse
it.
 Speak loud that one may
hear you.
 You speak too low.
 Be quiet; your hands are
always in action.Very well, Mastervery well.
 You please me very much.
 Were you always as good
and as diligent, I would
never be cross, or
ill-humoured
 As for Masterhe is so lively, that he can't
forbear playing the fool,
making a noise, and twittle twattle
to disturb us,
 Since we have done our
exercises. Let us go take a 
walk
 Callto dress you. Let us go to the Park.
 Shall wego on foot, or in
a coach.
 We may go there on foot.
 The streets are not dirty,
 There is no dirt
 Give me your hand.
 You have been like to fall.
 You stumble at every
step.
 Sir, which way shall we go
into the Park.By St.house.
 Well, Sir, how do you like
the Park.
 Tho I walk in it every 
day, I don't leave off
admiring the Walks longer thanones
eyes can reach.
 Do you take notice how
cleanly the Mail is kept.
 What do they do with those
heaps of Cockle-shels?
 They spread them over the 
Mail, and bruise them
afterwards with the Roller.
 Let's go round the Park.
 Do you see, Sir, with what
violence the water comes in
that Canal.
 Yes, Sir, how comes that
about?
 'Tis because it Ebbs and 
Flows.
 But which way does the 
tide come in?
 Under ground.
 The tide comes in.
 The tide goes out.
 What does that fine brazen
figure represent.
 A man that fights at
Fisty-Cuffs.
 Let's go to the Sun-Dial
to set our Watches by it.
 Let's go now to the 
Bird-Cage.
 What sort of birds is there?
 There are several sorts of
them.If you have any thing
that's good to Eat, do but
throw it into the Water,
and you will see how the
Ducks and Geese will fly to
us.
 'Tis a pretty Diversion.
 T'is pleasant to see how
greedily they strive to snatch
the Victuals away from one
another.
 Masterto join profit to
pleasure, tell me one ofFables inMetre.
 What Fable, Sir?
 That of the Lyon's Court.
 Tell me now the Story of
the Oysters, and of the
Litigious People.
 And you, Mastertell
me the Fable of the Raven 
and the Fox.
 That's well.
 Here is a Gentleman of
my Acquaintance coming to
us.
 I believe he has a mind
to accost us, or, to draw
near us.
 Don't fail to pull of your 
Hat to him as soon as I. Oh! the happy meeting.
 It is long since I had
not had the Honour to see you.
 I am very glad to see you
in good Health.
 Where have you been lost
all this long while?
 I have been in the
Country.
 How long have you been come?
 'Tis but two days since.
 Are those the two young
Gentlemen you bring up?
 Yes, Sir.
 They are both very 
handsom.
 How old is the eldest?
 He is but eight years and a 
half old.
 He is very tall for that 
age.
 He is very handsom.
 And He has the Gate, the 
Air, and the Manners of a 
Man of twenty.
 Does he speak goodHe comes off pretty well of
a familiar Conversation.
 Do so much as to examin
him your self. --I assure you, I wonder at it,
He has a good accent, he speaks
very well.
 You may take notice that he
makes some faults, and does not
know some words.
 That comes partly because
he speaks with no body but me,
and so he cannot learn the
variety of Expressions which
arises by speaking to several
people.
 And besides, most part of the
words he does not know in
French, are those whose
signification he does not know in
English.
 But as soon as he shall begin
to get into Companies, he will
soon get the facility of
expressing himself.
 For I may say, that he
understands Historys, Plays, and
Romances pretty well.
 Have you begun to teach 
him Latin.
 Yes, Sir, he has some
smattering of it.
 And he understands besides
a little Geography.
 He is very forward.
 He has made great
progress.
 He cannot but become a
good Scholar under so good a
Master.
 I assure you, without any
flattery to him, that his good
nature, his wit and docility do
contribute to it more than I.And his little younger
brother, how old is he?
 He is six years and a
quarter old.
 He is extreamly handsom.
 One may see in him all the
little Graces which are
ascribed to Angels, and which had
never been till now, but in
the Painters fancy.
 Does he speak French too?
 Yes, Sir, and he reads it
indifferently. But he is full of
roguery.
 That becomes his age very
well.
 Do you return home?
 Yes, Sir.
 When shall I have the
honour to see you again?
 I shall give my self the
honour to wait on you at your 
house.
 You shall be very welcome.
 Farewel, till we meet again. Is it Dinner time?
 I believe it is.
 Is the Cloth laid.
 Not yet.Put chairs round the
table.
 We shall have company to
day.
 There wants two plates.
 Boy, call for the
dinner.
 It is not ready yet.
 They have rung the bell.
 The meat is on the table.
 Let's sit down at table.
 Sir, take your place.
 I won't suffer you to sit at
the lower end of the table.
 You shall sit at the upper end,
if you please.
 Indeed, I shan't.
 Let's forbear complements, I 
pray.
 Why do you make such
ceremonies.
 Friends live freely
together.
 Who says Grace.
 Do you love French 
Potage?
 Yes, provided the broth be
well made,
 Shall I help you to some
boiled meat.
 Help your self.
 Sir, you eat nothing.
 'Tis true, we have nothing
extraordinary to incite you to
eat.
 No question, but you have a
mind to jeer me, because I don't
commend this treat, otherwise
than by eating well.You are quick at repartee.
But however, I hope the
second Course will make amends
for the first.
 But, Sir, you han't drank
yet.
 Boy, give the Gentleman
some drink.
 Madam, my humble service
to you.
 Sir, I thank you.
 I am your servant.
 How do you like that beer?
 I like it pretty well.
 Let me taste it.
 For my part I think it is
too bitter.
 I'll scold at the Brewer for
it.
 Come, Sir, eat what you
shall like best for.
 What do you say of that
Neats tongue?
 Of that minced Meat? of
that Fricassee? shall I help
you to some Capon, some
Chicken, some woodcock, or some
Partridge?
 Ev'n as you please.
 What do you love best, the
Wing or the Leg?
 'Tis all one to me.
 Eat some Radishes to
sharpen (or whet) your stomach.
 I have eat too much
already.
 Give me a glass of Wine.Sir, my service to you.
 Come, Sir. I drink the
young Prince's health to 
you.
 I shall pledge you with all
my heart.
 There is excellent Wine.
 How do you find that
Pigeon-pye?
 Extraordinary good; very
well season'd.
 What? Dainty dishes after
so magnificent a second Course.
 You give us a Kings Feast,
instead of a Friendly Meal.
 The Fruit answers to all the
rest.
 You have gathered the most
exquisite Fruitsthe Season
affords.
 This Pastry-work is very well
made.
 Sir, you make me blush to
prevent by your
commendations, the excuses I ow you,
for entertaining you so ill.
 But I think that every body
has done.
 Take away.
 Let's say Grace. How shall we spend this
afternoon,
 Let's play a Game at Chess.
 With all my heart.
 But you play better than I.
 Not at all.
 You always beat me.
 I'll no more play with you,
except you give me odds.
 Indeed I cannot: See
whether you have a mind to play
even.
 What shall we play for?
 I never play but for a small
matter.
 Lets play for half a Crown
a Set.
 But play fair.
 I never play foul.
 I take that.
 I am glad of it, for I am
going to take thatand. 
 You'l get nothing in that
business, there is a, I
take away with my.But how shall you save your.
 Byyou with
my Bishop and my Rook.
 I lost the Set, I cannot move
the King.
 You ow me then half a
Crown.
 I grant it. There is a new Play Acted
to day, shall we go and
see it?
 With all my heart.
 It is a Comedy, or a 
Tragedy?
 'Tis a Comedy?
 What's its name?Is this the first time it is
acted?
 No, Sir, this is the third
time, this is the Poets-day.
 I'll go and bid the
Coachman get the Coach ready, and
and we shall go the next
minute.
 Shall we go in a Box.I'll do what you please, but
methinks 'tis best to go in
the Pit,
 Why?
 Because we may pass the
time away in talking with
some body, before the Curtain
is drawn:
 What do you say of that
Symphony.
 Methinks 'tis very good.
 Don't you take notice of
that Hoboy that sounds so
finely among the violins and
harpsecol.
 The Boxes are full already.
 And as you see we are very
crowded in the Pit.
 I never saw the house so
full.
 There are a great many fine
People.
 I love as much as the Play
the sight of those fine Ladies,
who grace the Boxes.
 They are very finely drest,
(or in a fine Garb)
 They join the Beauty and
Charms of the Body to the
Richness of the Attire; and to
the brightness of their Jewels.
 Do you take notice of that
Lady, who sits next to the
Princess.
 Yes, I see her, she's pretty,
she's handsom.
 How pretty? You should say
that she's a perfect beauty.
 Do you know her?Yes, I know her.
 She has a fine easie shape.
 Have you took notice of her
Complexion.
 'Tis the finest Complexion
in the World.
 The whiteness of her bosom
(or neck) and the Vermilion
of her face, wrong the Lilies
and the Roses.
 She has teeth as white as 
snow.
 I think that she has a great
deal of wit.
 Beauty may be seen, but not
wit.
 Had she as much wit as
Beauty, one might say, that
she is an abridgment of all
perfections.
 But the Curtain is
drawing, let's hear.
 The Play is done.
 The Curtain is let down.
 Let's return home. What Sword is that you
have there?
 'Tis a Sword I bought just now
at the Sword-Cutlers.
 Is the Hilt of Steel or
Gilt-Copper?
 A fine Question! don't you see
it is Silver-Gilt.
 The Handle is of Silver 
without question.
 Will you truck (or Chop) your
Sword?
 With what?
 With mine.
 With all my Heart, what will
you give me to boot.
 Nothing.
 Give me ten shillings to boot.
 Truly you jeer me. What! is
not my Sword as good as yours
to the full?
 No really; far from it.
 You tell me fine Stories.
 I am not so easie to be imposed
upon.
 See whether you will make a
Gentlemans Exchange.
 What do you mean by that?
 To change even hands.
 I'll be sure not to do it.
 I am not such a Fool to do it.Look for your Cullies somewhere
else.
 Well chuse.
 I'll give you then eight
Shillings to boot.
 Done. Daughter, have you done all
your Exercises to day?
 No, Madam, my dancing
Master is not come yet.
 Is your Singing Master gone?
 Yes, Madam, he is just gone
out.
 What Song did you sing?
 A Song of the New.
 Whatdo you mean?
 The Fairy Queen.
 Tell me the words of it.
 If, &c.
 That Song is grown as
common as a Ballad.
 'Tis the common Fate of the
finest Songs which are sung at both
the Theaters.
 Sing before me.
 What Song, Madam?How blest are Shepherds, how
happy their Lasses!
 Stand upright.
 Hold up yourHead.
 That's well.
 You sing pretty well.
 You han't quite forgot that Tune,
but you trill too much.
 Did your Master of Languages
come yesterday.
 Yes, Madam.
 Does he say that you speak good
French?
 He says, I speak as well as any
of his Schollars, considering the
time I have learnt.
 He finds then that you
improve?
 I don't know whether 'tis to
flatter, or to incourage me, but
he tells me I make great progresses.
 He does well not to discourage
you.
 I wish you may go on at the
same rate.
 Do not be slack, be not negligent
 And above all, leave off your
wanton Tricks.
 Have you been about your work?
 What Work.
 The Needle work.
 The Embroidery.
 The flowering of your
Combing Cloth.
 At what Hour does your
Dancing-Master come to day?
 At four a Clock.
 What Dances does he teach you?French Dances; as the, the, &c.
 Does he not teach you
Country Dances.
 Pardon me.
 Let me see how you make a
Curtesy.
 That's well.
 But when you make a 
Courtesey, don't stare so people in the
face. Is it not to day a Post-day?
 I believe it is.
 Who do you write to?
 To MadamIs she not in Town?
 She has been in the Country
these two days.
 Give me a Sheet of guilt
Paper, a Pen, and a little
Ink.
 Step in my Closet, you'll find
upon the Table all that you
lack.
 There are no Pens.
 There are some in the
inkhorn or (standish.)
 They are good for nothing.
 There are some others.
 These are but Quills, they are
not cut.Where is your Pen-knife?
 Can you make a Pen?
 I make them my own way.
 This is not bad.
 While I make an end of this
Letter, be so kind as to make
a bundle of that Copy of
Verses and that Pamphlet.
 What Seal will you have me
put to it?
 Seal it with my Cypher, or
with my Coat of Arms.
 What Wax shall I put to it?
 Put either red or black, no
 matter which.
 Mayn't I put Wafers to it?
 'Tis all one.
 Have you put the Date?
 I believe yes: But I did not
subscribe.
 What day of the month is
this?
 The tenth, the twentieth.
 Put the Superscription.
 Where is the Dust?
 You have neither Dust nor
Sand.
 There is some in the 
Powder-Box.
 How do you convey your
Letters?
 By the Post.
 There is my man who shall
carry them there, if you will
trust him with them.
 Carry the Gentleman's Letters
to the Post, and do not forget
to pay the Postage.
 I have no mony.
 There is some. Go quickly
and make haste to come back. Madam, you have here a
Bill at your door, that
shews, you have Rooms to let.
 So I have Sir. Will you be
pleas'd to see them?
 How many do you want?
 I want a good Room and a
Closet to it, for me, and a 
Garret for my Man.
 Must your Room be furnished
or unfurnished?
 Furnished.
 Do me the favour to stay a
moment in this Parlour, and I
will go fetch the Keys.
 Will you take the pains to
come up.
 We follow you, Madam.
 Here's a Chamber to be let
in the first story.
 I pass my word (or I 
warrant you) there is a very good Bed.
 And you see, that there are all
things requisite in a furnished
Room, as Table, Hanging-Shelf,
Stands, Chairs, Looking-Glass,
and fine Tapistry.
 But where is the Closet?
 Here it is.
 This fits me well enough.I like the Room very well;
what do you ask for it a week?
 I never let my Chambers but
by the Month or by the Quarter.
 Well, I shall take it by the 
Month: What will you have for 
it?
 I never had less than six
Crowns a month for this Room.
 That's too much.
 Without so much hagling, I'll
give four for it.
 That's too little: you don't 
know what Rent I pay for this
house.
 'Tis no business of mine to 
know it. 
 But in a word as well as
in a hundred, shall we divide
the difference?
 I assure you, that I lose by it
but I shall do it upon your account.
 And for my man's Garret, how
much will you have for it a
month?
 You shall give me Ten
Shillings for it.
 I shall give you eight for it
 It is not enough; however,
rather than to put you off, I
consent to it.
 'Tis not worth the while to
cheapen for such a small matter.
 But now I think on't, may I
not board at your house?
 Excuse me.What do you take for each 
Boarder a week? 
 For the Chamber and Boarding
together, I take twelve shillings
 And for the Boarding only,
Eight.
 I have rather then give you
Twelve shillings a week for all.
 Do een as you please.
 Well, I shall begin to morrow. Master Cook, my Lord shall
have company at Dinner; 
you must shew all that you can
do, (or all your skill.)
 If I don't make good chear,
'twill be no fault of mine; But
look you, master Steward, you
clip my wings so with the Cizars
of your husbandry, that --
 Fair and softly. -- What must
you buy?How many people will there be
at Table?
 I think they'll be seven.
 Well, for the boyled meat, there
must be a Leg of Mutton, and
two Hens.
 For the first, a Fricasy of
Chickens, a Gammon of Bacon,
a Pigeon-Pye.
 For the second course,
 A Pig.
 Four Pullets.
 Four Partridges.
 And a dozen of Larks.
 As for the Fruit, the 
House-keeper shall take care of that.
 Go then quickly to the
Butchers and Poulterers, to fetch all
that you want.
 Lay out the mony, and write
down what you spend; I shall
pay it you again at the end of
the week.
 Kill this Pig immediately;
broyl his feet; put him in
boyling water, and hang him on the
Hook.
 Scowr the great Pot, fill it
with clean water, and put it
to the Pot-hanger.
 Pick (or fleece) them Pullets;
draw them, tuck them up well,
and lard them neatly.
 Shell them Peese and Beans,
and let them boyl about a
quarter of an hour.Give me the spit.
 Wind up the Jack. Sir, I come to wait on you
from Master--
 What does he send you for?
 He told me, you had a suit 
of Cloaths to make.
 Friend, you are welcome; I
expect that you will make me
a neat and modish suit of
Cloaths.
 What will you have it made of? 
Of some fine English Cloth. 
 Of what Colour?
 I shall see.
 Will you be pleased to buy the 
Cloth, or shall I buy it my
self?
 I go to buy it now, come
along with me.
 What do you want Sir?
 What do you look for?
 I want a good and fine
Cloth.
 Come in, Sir, you will see here
the finest Cloths in.Shew me the best you have.
 There is a very fine one,
and as they wear them now.
 It is good, but the Colour
does not please me.
 There is another piece lighter
than the other.
 I like that colour; but the
cloth is too thin, it is not strong
enough.
 Look upon this piece here,
you will find none so fine in
another place, nor that will do
you so much service.
 How much will you sell it 
an Ell?
 Without exacting upon you of
a penny, it is worth twenty
shillings.
 I am not used to cheapen,
tell me the last word.
 I told it you, Sir, it is worth
so much.
 That's too dear; I'll give 
you eighteen for it.
 There is not a penny to bate.
And if you consider the
goodness and fineness of the cloth,
you'll find it very cheap.
 Come, come, cut two Ells of
it.
 I swear, upon my honest word,
that I don't get half a Crown
with you.
 Shew me now a strip'd cloth
for the Breeches.
 Here is one that will match
your close coat the best in the
world.What do you ask for the Ell?
 It never went out of my Shop
under six and twenty
Shillings.
 I'll give you at the Rate of
four and twenty.
 How much must you have of
it?
 Three Quartersof an Ell.
 Here, Sir, there is your
mony; see whether I did
misreckon.
 I would not wrong you of a
farthing.
 Sir, the mony is good, and
well told.
 Come home with me to take
my measure.
 Shall I find the rest?
 That's without question.
 Line the Coat with some
good Silk, and the Breeches with
good Callico.
 You shall be contented.
 Buy me a good pair of Silk
Stockings.
 Will you have them knit or
woven?
 I will have them knit.
 For the rest, take a special
care that my suit be well made.
 It shall be so, I promise you.
 But I must have it within
two days at the furthest.
 You shall have it without fail. Let's play a Game at 
Picket.
 What will you play for?
 Let's play for a Crown to
pass away the time.
 Give us a pack of Cards and
some Counters.
 Let's see, who shall deal?
 You are to deal.
 I am to play first; I have the 
hand.
 Shuffle the Cards; all the
Figures are together.
 They are shuffled enough.
 Cut, Sir.
 Have you your Cards?
 I believe I have.
 How many do you take in?
 I take all.
 I leave one.
 I have bad Cards.
 Let's deal again.
 Not this time.
 Have you put away?
 No, Sir, my Cards puzzle
me.
 You must needs have good
Cards, since I have nothing.
 Tell how many you have.
 Fifty, Sixty, &c.
 They an't good.
 They are good.,to the
King,to the Queen.
Fourth to the Knave: Third to 
the Tenth.
 Three Aces, three Kings.
 I have as much.
 Fourteenth of Queens.
 Play on.
 Hearts, Spades, Diamonds,
Clubbs.
 The Ace, the King, the Queen,
the Knave, theTenth, the Nine, 
the Eight, the Seven.
 A Peek, a Repeek.
 I have the Cards.
 I have seven Tricks.
 I have lost.
 You have won.
 You owe me a Crown.
 You owed me.
 We are even (or quit).
 Give me my Revenge. How many miles (or leagues)
isfrom this place.
 It is eight leagues.
 We cannot go so far to day,
it is too late.It is not above twelve a
Clock at noon: you will arrive
there betimes.
 Is the way good?
 Not much, there are Woods
and Rivers to pass by.
 Is there any danger upon
the Road.
 There is no talk of it; 'tis
a Road where a body meets
with a people every moment.
 Don't they say, that there are
High-way-men in the Woods?
 There is nothing to be
feared either by day or night.
 Which way must one take?
 When you come near the hill,
you shall go to the right hand.
 We must not then go up the
hill.
 No Sir.
 Is it a difficult way through
the Wood?
 You cannot loose your way.
 When you are out of the
Wood, remember to take to the
left.
 I thank you Sir.
 Come, Gentlemen, come, let's
get on horseback.
 Farewell, Sir, farewell.
 I wish you a good Journey.
 Sir, if I don't mistake, your
horse has lost his Shoe.
 Will you be so kind as to
stay for me till I get him
shoe'd.
 With all my heart. Can we lodge here?
 Yes Sir, we have fine Rooms,
and good Beds.
 Let's alight, Gentlemen.
 Bid some body put our horses
into the Stables.
 Take the Gentlemen's horses,
take care of them.
 Now let's see, what shall you
give us for supper?
 See Sir, what you shall
like.
 Give us a fricasy of
Chickens, half a dozen Pigeons, a
Sallet, six Quails, and a dozen
of Larks.
 Will you have nothing else?
 No, that's enough; but give
us good Wine and Fruit.
 Let me alone, you shall be
contented I warrant you.
 Come, Gentlemen, let's go and
see our Chambers.
 Light the Gentlemen up.
 Let's have our supper as soon
as possible.Before your Boots are pull'd
off, will supper be got ready.
 Where are our Lackeys?
 They are gone up stairs with 
your Portmantles.
 Have you brought my
Pistols?
 Yes Sir, there they be.
 Pull of my Boots, and then
you shall go to see whether they
have given Hay to the Horses;
you shallcarry them to the
River, and shall take care to let
them have some Oats.
 I'll take care of all, don't
trouble your self.
 Call for supper.
 Gentlemen, supper is
ready, the meat is on the Table.
 Let's go to supper, 
Gentlemen, that we may go to bed
betimes.
 Let's sit down, Gentlemen;
let's sit down at Table.
 There wants a Plate.
 Eat of that Fricasy, it is very
well seasoned.
 The Pigeons are not enough.
 Give us some drink.
 My service t'ye, Gentlemen.
 Is the Wine good?
 It is not bad.
 Let's drink then.
 These Quails are very tender.
 You don't eat, Sir.
 I have no stomach; I am
weary and tired.
 You must cheer up.
 I'll certainly be better a bed
than at Table.Get your bed warm.
 Make an end of your supper;
Gentlemen, I go to take my rest.
 Do you find your self ill?
 Do you want any thing?
 I want nothing but rest.
 Farewel, Gentlemen, good night.
 I wish you a good night;
endeavour to be well.
 Bring the Fruit, and call the
Landlord (or Inn-keeper) to speak
to us.
 Here he comes with a Bottle
of Wine. Your Servant Gentlemen, how
did you like your supper?
 We are contented, but we
must content you too.
 Let's reckon Landlord, what
have we to pay, or what have 
we had?
 The Reckoning is not great.
 See what you must have for 
us, for our men, and for our
horses.
 Reckon your selves, Gentlemen,
and you will find, that there is
seven Crowns.Methinks you ask too much.
 On the contrary, I am very 
cheap.
 How much do you reckon for 
the Wine?
 I sell it to you fifteen pence
a Bottle.
 Bring another Bottle, and we
shall give you seven Crowns to
morrow morning at break fast.
 When you please.
 Give orders that we may
have clean Sheets.
 The Sheets you shall have, are
Lye-washed.
 I will not fail.
 Bid the Ostler dress our
horses well, curry them as he
should, and take care that they
don't want for hay.
 I will. Farewell, Gentlemen,
good night t'ye. What ails you?
 I am ill.
 You look as if you were.
 You don't look well.
 You look ill.
 Oh! Sir, I am dying, I am
half Dead.I linger, or I pine away.
 Where is your pain?
 My head and my heart ake, and I
have a pain in my stomach.
 Let me feel your Pulse.
 You have got a Feaver.
 I feel a heaviness in all my
Body.
 You must be let Blood.
 I was let Blood the other
day.
 No matter: To morrow you
shall take Physick.
 What Diet must I keep?
 Take new-laid Eggs, and
Jelly Broths.
 Have you a Nurse?
 Yes, Sir.
 Cheer up, don't be cast down
for such a small matter.
 Oh! Sir, you little know how
ill I am; I am almost spent.
 I have one foot already in 
the grave.
 Truly, I am very sorry for it.
But it is possible that you will
recover.
 I am gone, I decay very
sensibly
 I grow weaker every day.
 I am in a Consumption, and
I am past recovery.
 I must die, my Disease is an
old Disease.
 You make your Disease worse
than it is. You may out-live
me yet.Do you find your self better.
 Yes, thank God, I find my
self eased.
 Did your Physick work well?
 Very well.
 How many times was you at 
stool?
 Seven or eight times.
 Have you no better stomach?
 Yes, Sir, I could eat a
Chicken.
 Within two or three days you
may go abroad
 Do but endeavour to rest. Who waits?
 Did your Ladyship call
Madam.
 Bring me my Hoods and
Tippet.
 Let me see; hold the Glass.
Lord! I look wretchedly to day.
 Why don't you help me?
 How awkward you are!
 How can I help it?Is not my Head wry?
 No Madam, it fits very well.
 Give me a clean handkerchief.
 Go now to the Foot-man and
bid him get a chair with a high
roof, or a very low seat.
 I run.
 Stay Mistress, you are so
ready to go to the Footman. --
 What will you be pleased to
have, Madam.
 Go first, and see whether my
Sister be ready, and if she be
willing to go to the Princess with me.
 Well, what says she?
 She is gone out already.
 Truly that's very handsome, to
disappoint me so.
 Did she not send me word,
that she would not go out before
five a clock.
 Yes, Madam.
 What a clock is it then now?
 'Tis hardly Five.
 Bid the Footman call for a 
Chair.
 Madam, there is below. --
 Is there a Chair?
 No, Madam, there is Masterto wait upon your 
Ladyship.
 Did they tell him I was at
home?
 I believe, yes.Then I can't go out; take 
all that again.
 How do I look?
 Very well
 You may tell Masterthat I am ready to receive him. So Fortune be prais'd, for the
blessing I have to find you
at home.
 'Tis no Miracle, I think.
 It is not, I confess, very
extraordinary, to find you at home;
but hitherto, Madam, I had
never the happiness to see you
there alone.
 Sir, you puzzle me. I cannot
imagine what you may have to
say to me.
 Many things, my dear Angel!
wrapt up in a Word, I Love.
 You love!
 Yes, I love. --That is not so impossible; but,
I think, you would do much
better to entertain her with your
love, who influences it; for
besides that, she might give you some
relief; you would free me from
the trouble, which is caused by
the recital of other peoples
misfortunes, to those who are not in
a capacity of helping them.
 Oh! how ingenious you are
to dissemble! Is it possible that
my looks and actions have not
convinced you a thousand times,
that your sparkling eyes influence
the torments I endure?
 The amorous Looks and
Civilities of men, are too
uncertain proofs of a true passion;
and they seldom make use of them,
but to try our Sex's Weakness,
and laugh at our Credulity.
 Oh! do not wrong me so much
as to judge of me by others:
I was never a lover by
profession, a general Lover. I
never knew the power of Love
before the moment I saw you.
Suspect any thing in me but
dissimulation: I swear, my
charming, I love you more than
my self, and my love shall be
as lasting as my life.Every body speaks the same;
all men are alike in their
Language, and the Actions only,
make them appear different.
 Since nothing but Actions can
shew what we are, the only
favour I beg of you, is to judge
of my heart by them, and to give
me the occasion of convincing
you of the sincerity and pureness
of my flames.
 Alass! How easily we are
persuaded what we wish for!
Yes,, I believe you love
me with a true love; and I
have no other trouble than the
fear of the blame I may incur,
if I encourage it.
 Oh! my dearest, you
so transport me out of my self,
that I don't know where to find
expressions to shew you my
Gratitude. But pray, what do you
ground your fears upon?
 I cannot tell it you now: It
is time for us to part, my
mother will be here presently, and
I should be sorry, she should find
us in a private Conversation.
 Alas! what a blow you
strike in my heart, when you
speak of parting, and with how
much grief am I forced to leave
you!
 We shall find the way to
meet again; mean while befaithful, and I shall not be
ungrateful. How now, Cozen, is no body
come to visit you to day?
 No body in the world.
 Truly, I wonder we have both
been alone all this day.
 I wonder at it too, for we
are seldom so; and your house,
thank God, is the Sanctuary of
all the idle Courtiers.
 To tell truth, this afternoon has
been very long to me.
 And I found it very short.
 Great Wits Couzen Love
solitude.
 What do I care for wit?
you know wit is not what I
pretend to.
 For my part, I love Company
I confess it.I love it too, but I love
a choice one, and the great
number of nauseous Visits, one is
obliged to entertain among the
others, makes me often love to
be by my self.
 That niceness is too great,
that cannot bear with none
but chosen persons.
 And that complaisance is too
general, that bears with all
manner of persons.
 I relish those that are
reasonable, and laugh at Fops and
Impertinents.
 Truly, Fops grow soon
tedious, and most of them please no
more at the second Visit.
 Madam, there isthat
comes to wait on your Ladyship.
 Oh Lord! what a Visit!
 You was grumbling for being
alone, so heaven punishes you for it.
 Quickly, go and tell that I
am not at home.
 They have told her already,
that you were.
 Who is that block-head as told
so?
 'Tis I, Madam.
 Deuce take the little Booby,
I'll teach you to make Answers
of your own self.
 Madam, I'l go and tell her
that you have a mind to be
gone out. --Stay, beast, and let her come
up, since the Folly is done
already.
 Why do you fall a
laughing?
 I laugh at your little Lackeys
Simplicity.
 Ah Couzen! how this Visit
troubles me now?
 No matter, it must go down
with you. Where went you yesterday
in the Afternoon?
 I went to give my Attendance
to the Duke of.
 How does he do?
 He is very well.
 He always shews a great deal
of Wit and Liveliness.
 Did you play with him?
 Yes, Sir, we play'd a little,
whilst his Puppet-player was
getting his Puppets ready.How! was there a 
Puppet-Shew?
 Yes, Sir.
 Was that very diverting?
 Was his Highness well
pleased with it?
 Extreamly; he fell a
laughing now and then.
 What Country-man was the
Puppet-Player?
 He was a French-man.
 How do you know it?
 Because he spoke broken
English, and madespeak
French most commonly.
 How could then the lookers on
understand what he said?
 The Puppet-players Wife was
his Interpreter.
 Was there a great deal of
company?
 Yes, Sir.
 How long did the Shew last?
 About an hour and a half.
 At what hour did you take
your leave of the young Prince?
 At Eight a Clock.
 What had you rather to see,
Puppet Shews or Jugglers.
 I admire the dexterity of
Jugling Tricks; but I find, 
Puppet-Shews more diverting and
pleasant. Daughter, your good nature
and tractableness have
not little contributed to increase
that love I ever had for you;
and seeing you are of an age
fit to be married, I have cast
my eyes upon Sirto
be your husband.
 How! Father, a Maid of
my age marry SirWhy not? he is a sober, staid,
prudent, and wise man, not
above Fifty, and who is cry'd up
for his great Estate.
 Marriage is a business of too
great consequence, to be so
quickly resolved upon, and since the
happiness of my whole life is at
stake, I beg of you to give me
some time to think on it.I know what is good for you
better than your self, and
therefore I tell you, that you shall
marry him to morrow.
 Since you urge me so far, I
must tell you my true Sentiments,
and confess to you, that I'd
rather throw my self into a
Nunnery, than to marrysince
a Marriage cannot be happy where
there is no inclination.
 That's a thing, Daughter, which
may be, will come afterwards;
and they say, that Love is often
the fruit of Matrimony.
 But, Sir, there is a great
hazard on the womens side
and I shall never forget what
I have heard my Grandmother
say, That a Womans Vertue is
never so much in danger, as when
she is marryed to one she does
not like.
 Without so many Reasons, I am
Resolved you shall marryhe is rich, and that must
satisfy you.
 And I protest to you, with
all the Duty and Respect I owe
you, that I won't be sacrificed
to Interest, since that great
unequality of Age, Humour, and
Sentiments, cannot but render a
Marriage lyable to many dismal
accidents.Did any body ever see a
Daughter speak so to her Father?
 But did any body ever see a
Father marry his Daughter so?
 'Tis a match which nothing
can be said against, and I lay
that every body will approve of
my choice.
 And I lay that it cannot be
approved by any reasonable
person.
 Will you yield to your
Brothers Judgment?
 I'll yield to no bodys
Judgment; my heart cannot submit to
such a Tyranny, and in a word,
I'll rather marry Death than Sir, I am very glad to see
you; where do you live
now?
 We have been these two months
at a Country house.
 Are you come to Town for
good and all?
 No, Sir, I go back to
morrow morning.
 How do you enjoy your self
in the Country?
 How do you pass away the
time?
 I bestow part of it upon
Books.
 But which are your
Diversions after your serious
Occupations?
 I go sometimes a Hunting.
 What do you hunt?
 Sometimes we hunt a Deer,
and sometimes a Hare.
 Have you good Dogs?
 We have a Pack of Hounds?Two Grey-hound Dogs, two
Grey hound Bitches, four
Terriers, and three Setting-dogs.
 Do you never go a Fowling?
 Pardon me.
 What do you shoot at?
 All manner of Game, as
Partridges, Pheasants, Wood-cocks,
Wood-hens, Quails, Thrushes,Do you shoot flying, or
running?
 I do both.
 How do you catch Rabbits?
 Sometimes with Purse-Netts
and a Ferret, and sometimes
we kill them with a Gun.
 And Quails?
 Most commonly with a Net
and a Setting-Dog.
 Do you also fish sometimes?
 Very seldom.
 Why?
 Because we are a great way
from the River.
 But we have a Fish-Pond,
where we take Carps with a
Line.
 What do you do when you
neither Hunt nor Fish?
 We Bowl.Are you a good Bowler?
 I make a shift to cope with
another.
 Have you a good
Bowling-green? Is it even? Is it well
kept?
 It is pretty good. It is none
of the roughest.
 Do you sometimes play at
Billiards?
 Yes, Sir.
 Do you not play at
Nine-Pins too?
 I do not love much to play
at Nine-Pins, and I never do
it but out of Complaisance.
 As far as I see, your time is
so well employ'd, that you 
cannot be tired with being in the
Country?
 You think so, and yet 'tis
quite otherwise: I begin
already to long to be in Town; so
true it is, that men grow
weary of every thing.<|endoftext|>On my soul, thatsthe Piper that sits so gravely there: He is a notable Knave, Ile acost him, pretend acquaintance, and get something out of him; how, dost thou? I think there is no body left in the house but us two, if thou wilt I'le sit down by ye.
You are welcome, but I declare against all things that are not of English manufacture, let's have a Mug of Ale, and I'le joyn with you.
A match.
Sir, may I beg the favour of your name?
My name is.
A very good family; of the North or the West?
I'me of theof the North, where my family has flourished some hundreds of years: But lets talk now of other matters, and because I hear you to be book learned, I'le ask you what you think of the Dialogue twixtand?
I think it a very Scoffing Scurrilous pamphlet, and that the Author is within the equity of the Pillory; for he without any due regard to good manners, or truth, bespatters many of the Nobility, the most eminent Gentry, and Citizens with the basest and meanest practises of Forgery imaginable: For can any thing be more vile? Or anything more malicious? than to do, as, charged himself withal, namely to fill up Sheets with, and, &c. To amuse the Nation with numbers; as if they meant something further.
I must take upon me the defence, and therefore I believe the Authour was in the right as to the charge.
Ay, and for women to underwrite for their Husbands in thetoo.
I must and will undertake his defence, because of my alliance with him.
I thought so, for I'le be hanged if he be not of the noble house of thetoo. But heark you Captain, make good the defence of that,.
I'le say this, that there is nothing in that Paper thats either disloyal or Popish.
Not in point blank terms, but without much difficulty reducible to either of those heads.
What the Pox, you do not take the Author for a Papist or a Plotter?
He is one of thethough.
What's that?
telling the opinion of the People aboutPlot, sayes,: Which I have got turned thus into Meter.Some were such Sots they did not think, Some men so silly as to wink, Some lewder Knave believ'd it not, By which they did help on the Plot.
I must confess that's a very apposite application; but do you think then, that Author to be a Papist?
No, on my Conscience, but a Protestant Gentleman, because he somewhere sayes so, but he might as well have said Protestantish, as he scurrilously sayes in another place, but however he is in his Religion, I am sure he is a Papist in faction, as many others are.
On my Conscience you might as well have charged Mr. -- so.
None will be so impudent sure, as to fix any such imputation, upon such a Pillar of the Church, such a Steeple of Truth as he is known to be? but yet if a man consider his further discovery of the Plot dedicated to Dr., his Passion for him, if he be a Protestant, will be very sedate, for what Jesuit could lessen the Doctors testimony, or narrative of the Plot, more than he has done, by saying,, and then very wittily, according to his facetious way of scoffing, compares the whole thing to the raining of, he might have said, it would have made up the simile every whit as well; might not any dying Priest have said the same, and have salved all by equivocation though he believed not a word of the Doctors Depositions, as, I suppose, Mr. -- does not: Well, in fine Captain, had that discourse been put into Meter, it would have been the subject of many witty Ballads.
I vow. you are very rude with a Gentleman, that bears so considerable a figure in the Government, as tis known he does: I professe you deserve to be severely punished.
No, no, he did, he may say, he was some body, when he had the Superintendency of your little Books and Ballads, which brought in many a half Crown, before he came to that preferment, he may remember he was as mutinous in print as any body, because he could get nothing, then the Government lay under a male-administration, when the Advocate General which should have tryed him for his loyalty, which he can never be sufficiently commended for, came to be Chancellor of, he was about that time very pert with the King too, for giving greater gifts to a Lord, that had been of the other side, than suitable to his great mind; so to quiet him, it was allowed him to writ things like the Old, twice a week, which he did for about six years, with no small satisfaction to himself, till at last, he stuft his papers with such little things as wherelived, and how Goodmanwas choaked with eating a two peny Custard for a wager,That it was not decent to the grandieur of the Nation, to have such a publick Notary, and so the Gazet way of writing yet continued, was taken up.
This is passion, but after all, pritheetell me your opinion concerning Dr.his Depositions, for I'm sure you'r a man of observation.
I have read them, and I have read some other things, and have read him too by some small conversation, the measures I took from thence is, that I do take the Doctors Narrative to be the real truth which time will at last bring forth, though many are a little impatient about it, for he has not compass enough to inventsuch a lie, and so circumstantiated, for I assure you he is no Sophister, witness his indiscretions to the Episcopal Clergy, and his slight speaking of them, which must be imputed to his education, being bred a Phanatique, than turn'd Papist, now that's laid aside, he may be the same again, so I conclude him governed by truth then, because now governed by a thing like Conscience, but had he been a man of those intrigues, florid Parts, as the learned Author of, so well able to invent and polish a tale, with prophane swearing and other proper circumstances, as he has shewn himself all along to be in that discourse, I should have no more believ'd the Plot from the Doctors single testimony, than I believe the method of getting hands have been as he would insinuate.
Truly you must give him a grain of allowance, for he was inprison before the Kings return, and now begins to be uneasie by loss of his place, by the freedome of trade, which has been costly enough to some, and some other things in the world that are uneasie to him, which makes him very passionate at any thing like Fanaticism, which he takes every thing to be that does not absolutelywith his own. I must speak truth though I be his Cozin.
You put me in mind of a story when Bishopcame out of the, to exercise his Episcopal Office in Queentime, he behaved himself very extravagantly to some Gentlemen, that came to wait on him in his visitation, which when one of his Servants would have excused by his late coming out of Prison, a Gentleman replied, he is lately come out of the, and now he is fit to go to, but there is a Friend of mine one, that lives on, that cures all mad People, that arenot moped, as he sayes in his printed Paper, if he would repair thither, he might be accommodated, and this poor Nation at quiet, for his distemper is far from any thing like mopishness, being so mercurial a Gentlemanas he is known to be, and therefore as my Author says very curable.
There is no dealing with you, you are so bitter upon my Cozen, we'le call our old cause over again, I'm ready to do as I said, defend that Dialogue.
So you say, but heark you Captain, you may be a man of sence for all that, do you not think it a very flagitious thing for a little unknown fellow, to comprehend all the states, orders, and divisions of men, both Lords, Citizens, and Commons ofunder the opprobrious names ofand, names so reproachful, that the meanest spirit inwould make a repartee with a Cudgel in Answer to either of them.
He meant only the seditious part of them, I suppose that is them, that were for petitioning, which was pursued with great Zeal by all sort of Phanatiques.
From whence you most logically conclude it was a seditious contrivance.
Yes, marry do I.
Not so fast good Captain, there is no Law against it, and where no Law, no transgression yet that shameless Author would insinuate a disposition of rebellion from it: Otherwayes he would not treat the Petitionersat that scurrilous rate as he does all along, and truly Captain (for I do not love to swear nor talk prophanely, as that Author makes hisand, do very often,) had not his Majesty declared his dislike against it, as not suitable to his Royal will and pleasure,which modest men out of good manners would not oppose, the Petition had been subscribed, as generally as ever any was, for notwithstanding all his malicious charges against it, it was not, not ill in it self, but as it was circumstanced with the Kings will to the contrary.
But what say you, to all the Phanatiques so cordially joyning in it, may not that beget a suspicion justly, that there was something intended that might be, ill in it self?
Not at all, doth not the Scripture tell you that the Pharisees were great Sophisticatorsof the old Law, confounding it by unwritten Traditions? yet they are not blamed, neither is the doctrine of the resurrection disparaged, for their stout assertion of it.
You say well, then I see that a Phanatique may sometimes be in the right, as well as the wicked Pharisees, or the Papists.
Who doubts it?
percieve you are, though not for the defence, of Petitioning, yet for the defence of the subject matter of it, what say you to the.
believe it an unjust charge, as to the main; for though possibly some might be so indiscreet as to name that Oath, not with that due respects to his Majesty, yet I'mconfident none was ever so impudent as to demand, in terms, the bringing delinquents to Punishment, being that was so notorious a 1641 term, as must displease all men that are not of those principles, but possibly there might be something of trying the Lords in the Tower, which might give the Protestantish Author occasion of thatflourish, as if their Case was paralel to those worthy Lords and Gentlemen, then called Delinquents, than which nothing can be more vilely insinuated, but as to his last charge, that the Parliament was to sit as long as they pleased, I'm sure it is so notoriously false, as nothing but a man of a bold front could have said it, I wish he had been in, and a Subject to their Laws, when he said it.
Prithee why so?
They have a Law there, as I have been informed, called the Statute of, that if any man by prepense false suggestion or insinuation accuse a Lord, so as he may be capitally questioned, it is capital in the Accuser; if that Law was on force here, my little Fellow would be collered; for can any thing be more malitious, than to accuse a Body of Men of attempting a thing which cannot be acted without the greatest treason imaginable, as that of perpetuating a Parliament, for that's the English of sitting as long as they please, meant by the ingenious Authour?
He but tells you that a Country Justice said so somewhere upon the Bench, and so they are not his hiswords.
A Writer of Dramatique or Dialogue is to answer alwayes for what he makes the Persons speak, which might be the occasion of that Statute for the punishment of prophane Swearing by Players of interludes, which our Author is not free from, it may be that quality made him nameless, for fear some cross grain'd Cur of the Bench should have levyed the twelve pence's upon him. But this must be wholly an Artifice to blacken the Petition, for no Justice in the Country, norneither, though many of them, are far from Conjurers could ever be so fond to assert a thing, so wholly andin every parcel an untruth: but there may be strange children now, as there were intime, whose mouth speaketh vanity, from whom the Prophet prayed deliverance,144.II.
Why you are a strange man, to expect literal truths from a man that writes in my Friends mystical way?
Heark you Captain, if your Friend in his mystical way had abused me in particular, as he has almost the whole Nation in general, I would in down-right terms have broken his head, whensoever I had met him, and in the mean time have cudgelled you, noble Captain, till you had discovered his name, though I be but a Piper, call me? I would have him know, and you too, that I'm the 22th Piper of my Family, licensed by the Heirs of, now Lord, a Faculty saved to that Family by two Acts of Parliament; so we are no Rogues, like your South Country Fidlers, Captain.
You are very hot, cooler language would do as well, for hot words do no business.
Well, well; but what say you to that detracting passage, that it would be never the worse, if they,the men of Estates,.
Very well.
How can any thing be more base than this, to desire that the men of Estates should be out of favour at Court, because it would prompt them to revenge, as he very Christianly insinuates, the consequence of which must be a War, as he must hope: but I wonder he should, when he is a man of known modesty before an Enemy, if he be the man I guess; but he is a publick spirited man, and so hopes a War as the only expedientto set aside all Petitioning for the future: for to say truth, there will be nothing left upon such success as he proposes to petition for; but if there be no better conduct than his, there may be a mistake in measures: our last War was occasioned from such rascally Politiques, to press both sides to extremities, and foment all differences into the bargain too, as I have been told; but I hope to see a thousand such raskally Pickthanks hanged, before any thing of that happen.
But is not my Cosin very witty, when he says it is a blessing to have neither Friend, nor Money, and yet to design to be taken prisoner, as the way to both, and makes it out very prettily?
Yes faith he is, but why the pox doth he not pursue his own methods to preferment, take a Goal, for on my Conscience he cannot crack of either; for how he should have Friends that hath abused the whole Nation I see not, neither how he should abound in Money; for Lands he has none, I believe.
Then you thinka Goal is the fittest place for my Cosin?
Aye truly do I.
But do you not like his brave description of the benefits of a Prison, and the Rogueries of those that ply there to that purpose?
Truly like the rest, for from the converse of, he concludes all the Intrigues of the World to be managed at the same Religious Rule, and then makes hisan Officer of Address, as one may call him; but he keeps his Office no where that I can find out but in your CosinNoddle.
But what think you of the discovery of a new Plot, in case the Petition had gone on? of fivePetitions more, if the Parliament had met; one against the Lords in the, another for the sitting of the Parliament till they had gone through with what they had to do, a third for taking away Bishops Votes, a fourth for the remove of Evil Councellors, a fifth for putting theinto safe hands.
Your Cosin might do well to produce the draught of such Petitions, or at least name some-body besides histhat had seen some such thing, otherways he is to be taken for a Make-bate, and a Lyar; and truly we have reason to acquiesce under the Government of our gracious Prince, that cannot be provoked by such sycophantly Knaves to do any thing but what becomes him: But your Cosin shews himself a good man upon all occasions, by ranging all those Petitions together, as if to Petition for the Tryal of the Lords was equally criminal with the rest, can any thing more reflect upon the Honour of the King, Parliament, and whole Nation, than to insinuate, which must be a necessary consequence of so marshalling the Petitions, that a Petition against the Lords, impeached by Parliament for High-Treason, when a Court is in being that can only take Cognizance of their Affairs, is to be ranked amongst Misdemeanours of the highest nature; if this do not proceed from a design which I think is not very Protestantish of running the Plot into, I am mistaken.
But heark you, Minstrel, does not my Cosin go on bravely, when he tells us what dangerous Rogues the Citizens are, and what designs they have still on foot, to distract, if not subvert the Government, by contriving new methods of Petitioning, and telling us, that those? On my Conscience he is a notable man.
So he is, and a bold one too, I think, to asperse by intimation so considerable a body of men, as the City of, with contrivances against the Government, only to shew his Wit, without the least ground imaginable as I can see: I tell you, if it was in, as fond as he is of that Government, they would anger him, for he would without doubt be put to the question, that a discovery might be made of such grand designs in agitation; and if it proved all a Staff of his own, as I dare swear this is, then I believe he would be broke upon the Wheel, for endeavouring to bring the King into a jealousie of his good City of.
But is not my Cosin an excellent Casuist, by running his divisions upon Conscience?
Yes, in his scoffing way; but I must tell both him and you, in answer to his frequent running that expression,; though I am as far from believing that those pretenders are such, yet God hath a people that he will vindicate one day, to the confusion of faces of all them.
But has he not mauld thewith their Doctrine of Necessity?
He is too shallow for that; he hath a little droll'd upon the consequence of the Opinion: but I tell you Capt. whatheard aover a Pot of Ale say the other day, that every futurity, or thing to come, was certain in it self, whether it should happen or not, and that cannot be denied Captain.
It cannot.
If so, what room then for free Agency, when its impossible to remove a certainty: But asheard a Divine say once, no created understanding can comprehend the difference betwixt Gods certain foresightand predestinating, soleave it; andam sure he would not have medled with it, but that he could fix something of reproach upon the party, from the consequences of it, meeting with some bad practices of hypocritical men; but yet as generally as it is now decryed, it hath been otherway; for they that know any thing, know that most of the Bishops, and generally the inferiour Clergy were of that Opinion, and yet very holy and pious men in their Generations, for all his scoffs that he fixes upon that Opinion by inference, for none was ever yet so impudent to assert in terms what he makes histo do, and truly I do believe he is of theOpinion, that a thing may be sin in one which is not in another; for lying, though it be sin in most men, is not so in him as he thinks, he otherways would not have so much used it.
How came youto be such a distinguisher, I did not expect it from you?
My Mother was a Parsons Daughter, had little to her Portion but a few Books and Sermon Notes of her Fathers, which I used to read at spare times to the Neighbourhood, and so became thus skilful.
Well, what think you of his clawing the Rogues off for their old Rebellion, is't not manly and brave?
It is a thing that has been said a thousand times when it was so, but now it looks like breaking the Act of Oblivion, a thing that his Majesty, to his Immortal Honour, holds sacred; such a little Rat as he methinks should not be nibling, when the Lyon is unconcerned.
anddrunk, and why may not we within then? two Pots, and shut the door after you. But what thinkst thou, to page 26. isit not an excellent facetious discourse, displaying Villany in its proper colours?
It is rather a teaching people how to be Villains; like your fashionable Plays, teach more sins than they reprove.
My Cosin cannot I see get your good word, but I'le make you Friends.
As how?
You'l Pipe at his Wifes next Churching, and then I'm sure the half Ginney and the Frumenty will please you.
Let it alone till then; but in the mean time I'le give a short account of my sentiments of those ten Pages.
Let's have it then.
He begins with comparingand, a thing now that isand thredbare; there is a Book calledthat has done it more to the purpose, writ nigh forty years agone, but yet in his rails upon the later, he speaks ironically of the Plot, (when he calls the Jesuites the) as a man must needs conclude that reads the whole discourse, especially if that Author had any intelligence or correspondence with the Author of the further discovery dedicated to Dr.; and that flourish might have been as decently saved, besides his Pen too much resembles a Clever, cuts only one way, as a man may easily observe, by his constant pinching upon that party for the 1641. business, a thing that none of them has the face now publickly to justifie, and his passing by the Rebellion in, accompanied with the murder of nigh a million of Protestants, without the least reflection, though that Villany be yet justified, or at least not owned to be so by that Party, as it was atfirst abetted by the Pope; and then after all, as if he would make himself compleatly wicked, he scandalizes the Protestant Religion, which the late King of blessed memory own'd that he fought for, as may be seen yet by his Declarations, and the inscription upon his Coyns, stampt at the beginning of the late Rebellion; for by that is meant, as he makes his Citizen say, the Religion of the dissenters from the Church; a distinction that the late blessed Martyr would not have thankt him for.
I perceive you are very poynant upon my Friend still, but go on.
Then he goes on with teaching a method of Villany which he would call discovering, to inflame the Nation, and widen the breaches betwixt the King and his People; for why else should he, amongst other things, lay such a stress upon the Kings being one of the three Estates, and make such damn'd inferences, a thing decried by all sober men, because declared otherwise in the Preambles of several acts of Parliament, and yet the good King in a Message to the two Houses owned three Estates, when the Bishops were by Act removed, of which by consequence he must be one, but that may be lookt upon, considering the novelty of that disposition to be a lapse in the Secretary, and so no weight to be laid upon it. I refer you to the Declaration bearing date from,13. 1642. Then he falls upon the light and foolish antick gestures of the Conventiclers, with their fond metaphers not worth answering, because none so foolish as to adjust them, then he goes on, as if the Plot was onely a blind to enrage people, and that there was a real design to destroy the Hierarchy, and all the Sons of the Church, by the name of the Papists in Masquerade, and get all the places of profit to themselves.
Is not that very well hinted?
What are you a hinter, and a holder forth? so its well hinted of buzzing into the peoples ears to dispose them to Rebellion, of the Emperour oflanding upon35000 light Horse men, and a great many other Fopperies, not worth taking notice on.
To say truth, there are a great many little things in it, but there must be something to fill up, or else it would not come to account, it would not advance from the Stationer any thing considerable.
But he should have studied propriety of things to have made 'em pass the better: Is it not, think you, a well laid thing, to make hiswhom he represents, a cunning, projecting, canting Knave? to bring in a story by the head and shoulders of, and the ten Tables, and correcting himself with a thundering Oath, one that he afterward makes justifying the three Estates, and other intrigues of Politiques, it might have passed, had he laid the Scene amongst his friends in; and then saying that he had read in a Book that the Bishops inEighths time made the ten Commandments, and make foolish inferences from thence too: The whole thing is a lye, for no man ever yet read any such thing in a Book, but in his scurrilous Pamphlet; the nearest to it is, what Bishopreports of the Priests inabout that time, that they would have made the common people believe, the more to incense them against, and the Gospellers of that Age, thatand his Complices made the New Testament, or at least S.Epistles, but: I hope the ingenious Author is too wise to make reflections of that nature.
But I perceive you care not what reflections you make upon my friend.
Your friend is unknown to me, he should have set his name, and then it may be he had been safer, but I suppose his modesty would not permit it.
Well, is this all you have to say?
There needs not, I think, but one word more, at last he falls foul by hisupon, whom he calls Dog in a doublet or worse, but after all he ends in a panagyrick of his wisedome.
I do not like this eves-dropping, yet, I hope, I have said nothing, that I need care who hears: howeveris a good honest fellow, I have wasted some pence with him.
Come Gentlemen you have been in eager discourse, but I did hear the subject matter of it very well.
I was only making some passionate observations upon a Book twice or thrice printed, calledand, which he undertook wholly, and in every part to defend.
What youturn'd Advocate? mustbe reacted by you with a horse pox to your Captainship? How long is it since I releived you, and a thin starved thing yclipped your Boy, with ten penyworth of Pudding pies, when you and he had lived three dayes upon stewed fiddlestrings? I tell thee, how this fellow came by the doughty name of Captain, he was a foot Souldier intime, and upon a march stole a live Pike in an Inn, out of a Pale, and put it into his Breeches, becausehe saw his Comrade had done the like to a Barbel, but presently his manful roars made a discovery, so he was cashiered, pretended it was for his loyalty, and from that time dubb'd himself Captain: But as to the discourse, I tell thee Old Souldier, that if he, or thou, or any body that wears a head, God bless the King, should have call'd, or shall call me by the contemptible name of(though I be but free of the Porters Company) I would and will, if ever it be any mans ill luck so to do, all to be pudding-pie his Calves-head: What?
How I am now like to be worried betwixt these two learned men?andthe Pudding Wright: Well, well, but though you quarrel, my friend, for his names ofand, yet Mrspeaks very heavenly by the same Authors directions: speak against that if you dare, the best of you.
Mrspeaks truly of the Papists, but not all that a true Son of the Church might have said, he sayes in answer to the Charge, that the Papists loyalty was in their own defence, being in a manner necessitated to that side, that it was better, if so, than fighting against the King, and further that no man drew his sword in the opposite cause,, and, he might have added, if he had thought fit, that after the King was outed, not one Papist ever entered into a Plot for his Restitution, but the whole truth was not his business, whereas the Schismaticks, as he boldly enough calls some sort of men, asserted the Kings Cause in the lowest Ebb: and that so bravely both by outward force, and other less visible endeavours, that the Kings Restitution must be ascribed to them, as to the second cause, which made some amends for their former deviation, I tell thee, had the King had no better friends than the Papists,he had never seen the English shore again.
But have you read on?
Yes, and find the business about the three Estates repeated over again to no purpose, wherein the learned Author has with great reputation to himself proved the Snow white.
But what think you of his bringing inEpistle to the History of the Plot: is not that a heeler?
Like the rest, for I have not much to say about that Gentleman, eitheror, for they say he is a very pretty man at small matters, but those two Authors do most harmoniously agree in driving on, and fixing a worse Plot upon the Non-Conformists, which they both are careful to improve, which is by their favour a setting up of the worship of false Gods, to lessen, if not to destroy the worship of the true one, so whilst they would alarm the Nation with this Chymera of a Plot to be found no where, but in their learned Brains, the true Plot will weather off, or which is worse, go on.
I think you are as hard to please as, I had thought you had revered Mr.at another rate, than to speak so indifferently of him.
Indifferently do you call it? I wonder that I, or any other good Subject should do so, especially when it is considered who licensed, that Book, that deserved to be burnt by the common Hangman, as a great Lord said some bodies else did.
But did not he say then in excuse that he would license an answer to it?
It may be so but that resolves into this, that he would license any thing for the Fees of it.
I'le tell him what you say, and then i' faith he'lmaul you in a Ballad,as well as he hath done somebody else.
Pray Gentlemen not so fast, fair and softly goes far on a day.
But do you hear, how do you like Mr.description of the duty of Subjects, and Kings?
I shall tell you my mind as to that too, for I have read the Book o're; and we Pie men are old Dog at Politiques in this communicative age: Well, now as to that, by multitude of questions, he perplexes the Cause, for if he layd down for his position this truth,, there had been then no Room for a shift, but he makes hisask a knavish question,? The answer is in the negative, but a man might have shap'd another answer as pertinent.
As how?
When God gives over Kings to be wholly led by their sensual appetites, and to lay aside all manner of Justice, he often suffers the People to be so too, for the world is rather governed by example than Precept. There are many sad examples of that kind, as ofthe cruel ofstabb'd to death by his Bastard Brother.King of, once imprisoned, and when he had by miracle recovered his Estate, grew so barbarously cruel to all ranks of men, that the Citizens ofrose as one man against him, upon which news, being in the Castle, he fell into a fit of an Apoplexy, and died suddenly.the second of, who was deposed by his Unkle. And of later years Sultanthe Great Turk, whowas for his outragious lusts and other extravagancies, deposed and strangled in the. There is a living example of that kind,of, set aside and imprisoned by his Brother, who now injoys as the reward of his fact both his Brothers wife and Kingdom, and yet not so much as a Sword, or Pen manag'd in his behalf; by these examples, though it cannot be denied, but it is the Subjects duty to suffer patiently, and like theLegion, suffer themselves to be cut in pieces, rather than to resist, as Mr.well observed, yet nature in those Cases is often so strong, that there is no trusting to it.
I perceive then, that your opinion is, that it is safer for Princes to keep within due moderation, as to their administration, than to do otherwise, notwithstanding they have so much right on their sides, even as to this world; for if a Nation should lie under such unhappy circumstances, as to have the Prince and People at difference, the Divines of the Popular, as well as the other, would from Texts of Scripture, whether misapplied or no, not material offerto both Parties, as is well observed in an excellent Passage out of,44.
I perceive by this your Poets are an extraordinary sort of men, for as I have been told, that was written before the late Wars, and I see by this that there will never want upon the same unlucky occasion high Boyes on both sides, but thou hast a plaguy memory to remember all this stuffe, I wonder how thou dost it, I can hardly remember the Lords Prayer.
Nature alwayes supplies Fools and blind men with a special gift that way.
You may think there may be no harm in this Poetry, but,assure you, if my Cosin comes to know of it: he'l make you prove where you had it.
That's as easily done Captain, as to prove your ingenious Cosin to be a Pensioner to somebody, that he does not think fit to own.
You mean the Lords in the Tower I warrant you if you durst speak.
What if one did? you are ne're the better, its no Libel, neither will an Action on the Case lie for abusing CaptainCosin nameless: But faith, if you will Captain, we'l call for the other friendly pot, three double Mugs of Ale within there -- now lets talk in cooler terms.
I am for peace, but yet.
Where got you all this Latine? I did not expectit, neither with going to Sermons, nor crying.
They are the remains of my schooling.
You are then I believe a man of Intrigue, some Jesuit in disguise, pray give me your opinion, whats the best way to grow rich; for I am of the opinion of that Author, that cried,. My Masters and Friends, let us first grow rich, Then virtue'll come, or vice no matter which.
A very learned Colloquy amongst us three.
If by riches you mean preferment, I'le tell you mine opinion, and illustrate it by some Examples: first I do not like theway of Imprisonment in order it, for that meets with so many difficulties, as are not easily to be o'recome.
You tell me which is not the way, pray tell me which is, for without better directions, I'le ne're come to my Journies end.
There is a way, which has thriven well with a namesake of mine, and many others too, namely to abette the Republicaninterest, incumber the Prerogative with, the, and, so that it shall be a meer empty name, but be sure you be a parlish Pratlebasket upon that Subject, then you'l be taken off, as my Namesake is, by which he hath got to be either the third, fourth, or fifth part of a great Officer of State.
I cannot find out the interest of taking Men off, that is of hiring men to personate an honest man, for to be sure upon the first occasion they'l come to themselves, act the Knaves part again, for they are so still in their hearts.
You say well, but its often the luck of those Sophisters to be served so.
But may not an unwearied writing Books, in defence of the truth, do something considerable in the case, as it is the circumstance of my Cousin?
But little; for his way of writing is look'd upon by sober men, more to gratifie his passion upon a Party, and his itch of scribling, which is demonstrable enough by his Translations, than out of any noble end to his Prince, and so he is his own rewarder, by eating the daily dumplings it affords him.
You may run down my Cosin, in your Ale, at what rate you please here; but I say, and say again, that the Phanatiques are more dangerous Enemies than the Papists, both to the Kings Royal Person and Government.
I say, and say again in answer to you Captain, if there be one Phanatique in, that is notmad, that wishes any ill to the Kings Person, though I doubt many may be too sawcy upon the administration: and on the contrary, if there be ten Papists (I'le go toprecise number) that wishes prosperity to either, but in some equivocal meaning, I'le never pipe more, and so Captainbecause you are a man of quality pay thereckoning.
A match, and then I break up this famous Colloquy.
But I'le tell you a piece of news before we part: my Friend writes one of the weekly Books, and to be sure if he hear of our discourse, he'l claw you off in his next.
Which of them, the Popish Domestick called the true one, or the Fanatique eclyped the Protestant?
Neither, but the loyal one.
Thats like a Chimney Sweeper, when I lived inForrest, that cryed all white for the King, for its a great argument of Loyalty, to insinuate to his Majesty, that his People has some ill contrivements against him, by which he designs to put him upon his constant guard, which can be no easie posture to any Monarch; But I suppose his method is after the rate of, all the news he blesses us with is of his own happy contrivance, in which he has an extraordinary faculty.
I protest, you are a notable Fellow, I did not expect any thing of this from you.
I have a way for it, for when I exercise my Calling to please Gentlemen, we sometimes divert our selves with drinking, and then on course State matters or Religion are the subject of discourse, and I having a parlish memory bring all away; for I have a double Title to it, according to the late observation.
As how?
Faith I am like the once Mayor of,in eye-sight, andof Understanding.
I'le but ask you one question, What is the reason, that a strange Woman in Scripture-language should signifie an Harlot, and a strange Man in statutable English, to use the, should not signifie theto it?
Though it do not so fully, yet it does something of that nature by implication, for no man deservedly enjoyes that Character, that can boast ofmuch reputation to himself: But to what purpose this impertinent Sally? lets part, for we shall run from one thing to another, till we be by someto durance. Your Servant Captain.
Your Servant, Sir.
Your Servant, Gentlemen.<|endoftext|>Good morrow my dear, methinks thou lookest coy to day; what's the matter prethee.
If I had been so at first to you I had been wiser.
Why so?
Because I find you flatter me.
I scorn it, I am true to thee, in troth I am
How shall I believe that, when every one you meet, you are courting and kissing them.
Who told you these stories, truly I never kiss any one but in mirth, for I will never marry any but thee my love.
I hear of your Roguery, that I do, pray what was that you said to Peg Ramskin 'tother day, did not you kiss her, and gripe her by the hand, and tell her you lov'd her dearly? and now she brags about the Town how she hath deceived me, the Devil take such love, if this be the love you have for me.
Be not in such a passion, 'ile tell you how it was.
I shall not hear you.
Dear heart, hear me, by this kiss ile tell thee truth.
Well then.
In troth 'twas onely thus, I was going to the mill with Corn, and by the way, I met with, good morrowsaid she, her's a cold morning, a cup of Ale would do well, I think so too said I, faithile joyn my penny with thee, I was ashamed to deny her, so we went in and called for one pot, the jade was very kind and took me by the hand and shak't it,, said she, I believe you are in love you are so dumpish, O yes said I, you look so lively this morning, I thought you would fain be kist, I puld her by the arm, and in troth she e'n fell upon me, this was all and does this bold slut report that I love her? hang her impudence, ile kick her next time, ile see how she likes that kind of Love.
This is onely because I know it.
I wish you would believe me, and not be thus jealous, pray be not so cruel to torment me thus, no whore of them all shall entice me from thee, O how I cou'd kick this jade.
Well let this pass, but what was that you said to the Widdow, these storiescould not be raised of themselves.
What gossiping slut troubles thee with these fooleries, they do't to make difference.
Pray tell me truth of this also, and then I shall be satisfied.
By this kiss I will my dear; I was in a place tother day drinking, and in came the Widdow, how nowsaid she, what will you dye a Batchellour? I think I must do so said I, for Maids are so coy, ther's no dealing with them, what think you of a widdow, they are more kind, will you have me said I, Osaid she, you love to jest, I could do no less then kiss her, and so parted; when will ye come to my housesaid she, what good cheer have you for a man said I, you shall have a cup of the best said she, and a good Gammon of Bacon: now thou knowestI love Bacon well, and because I would not be seen with her alone, I tookwith me, and spent six pence a piece, and did eat up half her Bacon, and when we were merry we kissed her; well Widdow, quoth I, I find now that widows are more kind than Maids, ile come again before the Bacon be gone, with all my heart said she and welcome: This was all truly my sweet love, and does the fool reportcame a suiting to her, wanton whore, ile ne'r come within her doors more; I shall shun both Maids and widdows, unless in thy sight to make thee sport: but who tells thee these stories? pretheetell me,
You must excuse me.
I will not urge but pray believe no more suchstories, for by my faith and troth I love thee, and if my year was up once, thou would find it so.
WellI must believe you.
But dost thou forgive me.
With all my heart.
Pretty heart thou hast no gall in thee, dost thou love me too?
I do.
Sweet soul give me thy hand, and say after me these few words. I love theemost dearly.
I love thee John most dearly.
Pretty soul, and dost thou truly? methinks those words do sound so sweetly, that I must needs kiss thee for them; lets go somewhere and drink, and then we will talk.
Whether should we go?
Here's very good drink at the Kings Arms and this is Holy day, so that we need not fear Anger for staying, let's go in,
What you will.
Have you any room here?
Pray walk in Sir.
Bring hither some of your newest Cakes, and a pot of your best Ale.
You shall have the best Sir,
Come honey, prethee eat.
I thank you.
Her's to thee my dear, and a fart for all thewanton Whores, thou shalt know I love thee,
What shall be the sign thereof.
I will marry thee my dear when my year is up. if thou wilt consent, what sayest thou, speak.
I must consider of it.
But what thinkest thou, is it not the best way to end all jealousies, and to make all Rascals and Sluts to leave their talking.
I think it must be so at last, but truly you cannot blame me for believing these reports, when in a fortnight or more I have not seen you.
Poor heart I would see thee oftner, but that my Master would think I negliected his business, and besides, there is such flickering and laughing amongst the maids and children at your house when I come, as I am quite ashamed.
Ashamed.
Not of thee my Birds-ny, and sometimes I meet your Mistriss and then I sneak, & I could run into an auger hole if possible,
You being so bashful, I wonder how you came first to woe me.
Oh thy pretty charming eyes would force any man to speak.
Don't flatter me.
Thou knowestdon't, let's talk now to the purpose, and observe the old proverb.
What's that John.
Blessed is the woeing, that is not long adoing, tis half a year since we begun, I think tis time to make an end, is it not, prithee say true
If we know how to live.
How do other folks live.
They bethink them before they marry.
So will we, lets spend this day in contriving for we shall never have the like opportunity again, come lets walk a little if it be not too cold.
Better being in the house, for I think it will rain.
What thou wilt my sweet love, well dear heart how shall we live, what will thy friends give thee
O are you come to that, I thought you would have taken me for love onely, and now it is what have you?
Be not angry my dear, if thou hast not a smock to thy back I would have thee, but in knowing what each other hath, we shall know the better how to improve it, do thou the same by me.
Truly I have but ten pounds my father left me, and that is in my Uncle Hodge's hands.
Tis sure I hope.
You need not doubt that, for he cannot keep it from me, and five pound I have gathered since I came to service, besides my Mistress owes me above half a years wages.
O what a happy man shall I be, what a good housewife thou hast been, thou hast good cloathes too.
They will serve.
NowI will tell thee what I have, my Father gave me ten pounds when I came from him, and told me as I did improve that, he would give me more, and with my Masters leave, I have imployed it in his Mault-house, and have encreased it; besides my master doth owe me my wages ever since I came to him, he would not let me have it for fear I should play the ill husband, and if I please him, I know he will give me somthing when I marry, and so will thy Mistriss, will she not?
I hope so too.
Now for the best advantage, thy stock and mine together, will amount to something; and when we have concluded our marriage day, ile try if my Master will let me have a little house and ground thou knowest hard by, that will make a great house for us,
And a great Rent too, what should we do with such a house, one Room will serve our turn.
Ay to sleep in my dear.
But what trade do you intend to drive?
Give me leave and ile tell thee, and if thou wilt help me a little, it will be the better, for two heads are better than one, we must not take care only for sleeping places, but a place to get mony in.
How, that pleases me well to be getting of Money, for I love it dearly.
I have almost broke my Brains withstudying & contriving, but now I think I have hit ont.
Tis long coming out.
If my master will let me have the house we will brue good Ale, and we will have mault of our own, for we'l keep a stock going in my Master's Mault-house, with his leave, and there is pasture enough to keep two beasts, and conveniences for hogs and poultery, so thou mayest have all things about thee, and keep a maid and live like a Lady.
This will be brave indeed John, but what shall we do with our Ale.
Sell it my sweet one; let me see, there are eight rooms in the house besides the Cellar, and with a little painting and a few benches it will be very fine, & a handsome sign to draw in company.
What shall that be.
The three fair maids, I think.
Not for a hundred pound I would not have such a sign.
Why prithee.
Why man they'd think surely we kept a bawdy house.
What then shall we have, do you tell me?
The three Fidlers I think and then they will judge they may have Musick.
Thou hast pleased me mightily, but how dost like my motion and contrivance,
Very well indeed, I thought you had not had so much in you.
Oh ho, though I am but a Clown, I am no fool I think, but how dost thou like such an imployment?
Very well truly if it will not make thee an ill Husband.
Thou pretty Pig-ny thou, that word sounds so finly out of thy mouth, that I must needs kiss thee for it; be sure my dear I shall mind my business and when I have drink always by meshall not desire it, only to drink a cup with thee in the morning.
That will please me, for I love Ale very well but good lack, I shall grow as fat as a bear with drinking every day.
No matter for that, thou wilt be the better to kiss.
I like all very well, but pray be speedy, least another take it before you, and get a License, for time runs away apace.
know he will not deny me to morrow I will move it to him & bring thee word, but a pescods ont, I cant abide to be seen at your house.
Cannot you meet me in the fields when I am milking my Kine.
I will, that's well thought on.
Well now, we had as good make an end since we have begun, what shall we make a money dinner or not, that would help us well.
Marry would it: dost think thy mistriss will not let thee keep our Wedding at her house:
I doubt not but she will, for I have been a good servant to her though I say it.
If she will do so, it will be a grace and advantage to us, and then I will invite my master & his Family, wilt thou then resolve to marry with me at Easter.
It had as good be done and past, since it must be done at last.
I think so too, but how shall we do to lay out the money for all things, for if we let the stock go, I shall fear the gathering of it together again but now I think ont, my credit is good.
What shall we do for Clothes.
In trothwe will save that money, those that we have will serve very well.
I think so too.
Only I will have a hat & a Gold ring for thee
Who shall we bid to our Wedding.
All who we can think of, the more the merrier
What Musick shall we have.
We will have oldand his company.
They will make a roaring noise.
And they will sing well too, to please the young people; why dost laugh, does the thoughts of it please thee.
I laugh to think how the young men will turn the Lasses about in dancing, and how they will buss them, methinks I see them already, but good lack how shall I do to behave my self at that timeamongst so many; I shall be so ashamed I shant know what to do.
Why priethee all people will adore thee that day, and I shall be woundy proud of thee my Dear to see thee sit as a Virgin-Bride, and I shall wait upon thee too that same day, as it is my duty.
Is that the fashion.
Yes my dear, hast thou never observed it at weddings.
I shall observe my own the more, but you must not look towards me, for then I shall laugh and that will shame me quite.
No my dear a smile sometimes will do well they'l think there's the more love.
Must I dance too.
Ay pretty one, every body will strive to dance with the Bride.
Ide rather dance with thee John, than with them all.
So thou shalt my dear.
What Favours shall we give.
Red and blew I think.
They will look gloriously, but all this while who shall lead us to Church.
, andshall lead thee, andandshall lead me.
I shant be able to go along the street, the folk will so look at me.
No matter for their looking, 'ile warrant thee who ever sees thee will wish her self in the same condition, who are not married already.
Will they think you.
I faith i'l warrant you.
Who shall marry us.
M. Timson.
Oh dear he will keep such a do to have me speak out that I shant know what to do with my self
Thou must not be ashamed my dear, for it is an honour to be a bride.
Who shall be my Father to give me.
Thou mayest ask, but I know he had rather had thee himself.
Oh fie no, I will not ask him, he will take it for an affront, I will rather ask old fatherfor he us'd to call me Daughter, and he will take it kindly.
Do then.
Does it not make you ashamed to talk of these things.
No I promise thee, I am proud of it, and so art thou I believe, but that thou wilt not confess it
I would it were once over.
So would I, i'd as live as a groat.
Who shall make the Sack Posset.
The Bride-maids will take care of that.
Good lack they will keep such a do when they come in to eat it, and taking their leaves of us, and throwing the stocking, and one thing or other, that I shall wish them all far enough.
So shall I but we must lye the longer next morning.
But I forgot one thing, who shall dress me.
It is a thousand pities but thou shouldst marry, thou thinkest of every thing so, the Bride-maids my dear will dress thee
Where shall we lye the next night.
In our own house that will be the best, and therefore we must furnish it before, and lay in some Ale, that we may be able to invite all the wedding people to drink with us, and then we sholl have good handsel indeed, and we will also have a good Gammon of Bacon, and that will make the drink go down merrily.
What maid shall we have?
We will have a lusty wench, who may be able to do our work, for fourty shillings the year we may have one.
Now I think we have thought of every thing let's consider what time of the day it is.
VVill thy Mistriss chide thee thinkst thou
Ay and your Master too I believe if you do not make haste home.
VVhat's a Clock, not above six I trow.
Loves Dial goes but slow, I believe it is six at the least, and then I shall be hanged.
Alas poor thing hanged, call me and I will cut the Rope, what humors thy mistriss of, she looks frowningly.
Truly she is very good when she is pleased, but she is develish peevish, she will fret and fume sometimes for a very small matter.
Isthat the goodness, the Devil's good when pleas'd, my Master he is angry too, but faith I fit him for it, for when he begins to chide, I get me out of doors, and come no more in that night.
Youl serve me so I fear.
Ay if you chide.
In troth I shall chide you if you come home drunk, for ime sure they that love drinking love whoring.
Thou shalt see what a husband 'ile be.
I would I could once, but nowI sit upon thorns, my Mistriss will be very angry with me.
So shallif you go yet, you must learn to humour me now.
Dont hold my hand for I must be gone, you cannot tell how humorsome she is, there chanc'd to be but one hair in the pudding tother day at table, but she did maunder, I thought she would never have been quiet. Ile tell you a good jest above a week ago she sent me to the Shoomaker for her new shooes, and because she had them not, she made a hundred wry faces at me, and sate fleering in her Looking-glass an hour or more, that I could not forbear laughing.
She is horrible proud I believe, pox on her humour I am humoursome too.
Pray dont hold me I must be gone.
Come, come over boots over shooes, we'das good make up the day now, & then one chiding will serve for all, I look for a storm too, but my Master is pretty good natur'd if he ask me where I have been, ile be plain to him, and tell him I have been with thee, ay, and bid him to our wedding too, he loves mirth.
You do not think how impatient I am with staying Oh my Mistriss, my Mistriss.
You shall have a Master shortly worth ten of her, come stay a little, i'le sing thee a fine Song of my own making.
I never knew you were a Poet before, let me hear it quickly.
Love makes me very eloquent, I never had so much wit, as since I met with thee, I think it comes from thee to me.
Perhaps so too, for i'm sure I never had so little as since I met with you, I did wonder what was become of it.
Thou hast enough still methinks, and that thou hast lent me, I will improve it if I can.
What's your song then I shall judge.
Come sweet Duck, I will begin, I made it the other day as I was in the Mault-house, & when I had done turning the Mault, I sat down and repeated it, and played the tune on my Flagellet, & methought it went so sweetly, it ravisht me.
I would I could hear it.
Hum, hum, hum.
You'd best wet your whistle first, for I see thy Pipes are stopt.
I'll take thy councel, hers to thee.
I thank younow pray begin.
O braveI see you think on me when you do not see me, I did not think indeed you had been so good a Schollar pray how long did you go to School.
Not long, for I had more mind to go to plow and look after my Fathers Horses, then to learn my book, yet I was pretty apt, for by that time I was fourteen I could read the Psalter pretty well nowprethee do thou sing a song, and then we will part for this time.
What song shall I sing, I know not.
Any one will be sweet from thee.
If you will not laugh at me, I will sing as well as I can, I promise you I was counted good at singing once but now I have forgot, love hath spoiled my voice
Love mends it, prethee begin.
There's allhow do you like it.
Very well, a kind Lass, i'le warrant her, well I will not serve thee so, ile stay & live with my love
Well let's go, in troth we shall go near to spoil our wedding with this dayes work, for certainly we shall both be soundly chidden.
For my part I will begin with my master first and tell him that I am coming into the honourable estate of Matrimony, and that I hope he will grace my VVedding with his company, & if he storm at me, I will desire him to remember his own condition, & if it be an evil thing to marry. I wil ask himwhy his worship did set me such an example? for he loved his wife so well that he doth adore the very thoughts of her, and so talks of her, that he made me almost mad to know what a wife was, sure some hidden treasure is in a married life, because every one strives to be of that rank.
believe so too, or else so many would not desire it, Maids are only made much of by young men, and if they be too kind they are laught at, but married folks are accepted of in all company; and invited to Weddings, Christnings, Gossipings, Burials, & to all merry meetings, which please me well.
I hope they shall come a Gossiping to thee shortly, and by that time I shall look soberly, and bid the women welcome, what dost blush at it?
It would make one blush to hear you talk?
Well, what wilt thou say to thy Mistriss?
My best way is to let her chide so long as she pleases, and then ile confess my self in a fault & ask pardon, and then she will be pleased again.
Thou hast a great deal of patience, I commend thee for it, I hope thou wilt have some with me.
We must bear with one another, but if we displease a Master or Mistriss, some are so crabed, they will turn one out of doors, but if we be angry one with another, we must be friends again, when my Mistriss hath spoken all her mind, and is again in a good humour, then I will make her my Councellourand bid her to my Wedding, for she loves one should trust her with secrets: the mischief is, I know not how to go in first of all, had I but made a bargain I would not care, and now it is dark, I fear I shall lose my way.
Well I will go with thee now, I cannot be seen, and if she falls out foul with thee, call me and ile take thy part, for thou shalt not be a slave to her, no marry shalt thou not.
If goodyhath not milkt my kine, it will be worse, I wish she have, I would have bid her do so if I had known I should have staid so long.
Let's reckon what is to pay; let me see, we have had three Cakes and four Pots of Ale, and two Pipes of Tobacco, that's fifteen pence.
We must not use to spend so much in an Ale-house.
The best bargains are made there & I hope thee and I have made a good one.
I should be sorry else.
I would it were sealed once.
All in good time.
Host good buy to you.
You are welcome Sir,
Give me thy hand prethee.
My heart doth ake I know not what to do.
Pluck it up woman do not fear.
I would I were out of this slavery.
'Tis but four months and thou shalt, howpleasant it is to walk with thee, though in the dark.
I pitty your journey home, but I shall never trouble you again for such another, well nowgood buy to you, remember all things, order your matter wisely, and not forget to send me word, for I shall long to hear, I shall look for you every minute to morrow in the evening, and if you deceive me, you will break my heart.
Fear not, if it Rains Cats and Dogs I will come.
That's true love indeed, I shall go about my work so merrily if my Mistriss will but forgive me this one fault, that I shall not feel the ground I go on, oh what it is to be pleased, God be with you good.
God be with you sweet one, my Duck my dear, my Pig's-ny, when we do meet to morrow, we will conclude all more firmly; here, take my heart and a hundred kisses besides with it, and keep them till I see thee.
I cannot see neither.
They are only felt my dear, once more, far thee well, heavens favour me as I prove true to thee.
My poor, how loving has he been to me this day; I am heartily sorry I snapt him up so, surely he was innocent, must I be married suddenly and be called goody. I shall then hardly know my self, my dear, what a many pretty charming wordshe had for me, & what a fine song he made himself of me, surely I shall not sleep till I do hear how our business goes forward, neither do I beleive will he, for love is a terrible thing. It wounds the heart it breaks the brain, It makes one always live in pain.
what a joyful
day this hath been; If I could but recount every
days action to be so good, surely then I should,
without doubt, get to Heaven in a short space, let
me but reckon up what I have done to day; I have
seen my dear love to day, & made my peace with
her, and have gotten her consent to marry, and we
have appointed the very time, and have contrived
all things to my hearts content, that I could even
leap for joy, poor heart, she was almost jealous of
me, but now I have fully satisfied her, and shortly
all fears will vanish away from us, I will have a
special care for the future how to order things, &
surely be with her to morrow in the evening, for
fear I should anger her again, for she doth look
so pretily when she smiles, that it is a thousand
pitties that ever she should be displeased any more.
 Well my dear, I must think on my master
now, and study what to say to him for my long
absence from him, therefore my dearI must
forbear the sweet thoughts of thee for a season.
 Farewell a while, to thee my Love adieu,
 To thee, dear, I will for ay prove true.<|endoftext|>A Fine Trade this! Mr.when our own Trade declines so visibly.
What! Was it for this you Leer'd upon me so, and wink'd me up into the Bed-Chamber? I thought I should have been quit of you for 2 or 3 dissembling Kisses, and parting with my Ready Cash, now I'm going out of Town thisin the Afternoon.
Your ready Cash! I know of none you have; you're a Beggar in all Senses.
Well Madam, no matter whether I'm rich or poor, but I can tell your wealthy Ladyship, that allcan't fill a Money Bag without a Bottom.
Oh my Heart
Soh! To the Misery of approaching Poverty we must have, aiming at Wit, come in for an additional Plague.
Let it approach as it will; a Jolly Conceit, a Merry Glass, and a Ratling Noddle are proof against it, but a Wife clenches it to us; and such a Wife too as is a certain help-mate to Vexation.
And yet without this Help-mate thou had'st been as wretched a Stair-Ambler as ever carried a Role after an Oyster-woman.
And without this, Stair-Trotter, thou hadst been still in an Eighteen-penny Lodging in the noble, or a worse Place; and Butter'd Wheat and Cheese would never have plump'd up your Countenance to be the wonder of the Ward.
Was it not by my Credit with the Merchants that I set thee up?
Yes Madam, your Credit has been as remarkable as my Reputation; never was Man so set up: What between theSynagogue, the, Phanatick-Meetings, and the Ambassadors Popish-Chappel, I've had more Religious and National Clubs to the Rigging me out, than there go to the compleating a Confederate-Army.
Ungrateful Wretch as thou art! Is this Requiting thy poor Wife, and the Worthy Gentlemen that put thee into Business?
Ay Child, and they put Business into thee, found thee Employment, and me Leisure, and now at last will do my Business.
Can you blame Careful Men for looking out, when they meet an Owl with a Wig like a new-Curl'd Distaff, with his Red top'd Tripe Jocky-Buskins, girdled about the Loins like a Monkey, Gallopping to, and find his House as Empty as anMusick-House in the midst of Winter.
And perhaps the poor Pains-taking Woman in her Helmet of a Vizard-Mask, and her Fighting-Suit without Stayes, is Galloping as fast in a Hackney-Coach with an Impudent, Chattering, Wall-Ey'd Forreigner to the other End of the Town.
Infamous Scandal! Your Servants, nay your self know I constantly keep home when you are out.
Yes, by the same Token I found you once in your Chamber, when I came Home unexpectedly, with a Touz'd Head, a Breast open (for Air I suppose) a blowzing Colour, two Bottles and Dr., and then 'twas whisper'd,, (and thou hastmany, that I'll say) so the Doctor, though I gave him a good Fee, look'd like a Fool, thou like a Beast, and I like a Monster.
Thou deserv'st it for censuring me so barbarously that was at Death's Door.
No. no, thy Chief Confident, Sandy-hair'dshou'd have been at the Door. How could the Doctor, (whom the Devil Pill) relieve thee, whenthe Apothecary had not been in the House with any Medicine.
With his own Drops out of his Pocket.
And two Bottles of.
Yes Wretch, of the same that I Dog'd two Hampers full to the black-Ey'd Damsel's Lodgings in, that went for the Wife of a Custom-House Officer, who was decipher'd to me with your very Cloaths, Sneer, and Nose.
Not quite so exactly as your tall Ladyship and Orange-colour'dwere describ'd coming out of Chambers in theon aMorning, when Lord knows ever sinceAfternoon you were at AldermanCountry-House with his Lady.
Your Informer was a Villain and a Lyar; but what can I expect from one that must have his Whisk-playing Meetings, his Joaking Clubs, and Tribe of Wits about him, Trip-writers, Ballad-Scribes, and City Poets.
A better Assembly than your dear Mrs.the Midwife, MadamtheMantua-maker, theWoman, Mrs., and Col.Tricking Widdow, that is both Jacobite and, Merchandizer, Wit and Bawd,and.
Foul Mouth, you measure others by your Heathenish self, and Paganly Companions.
Prithee when thou Attack'st my Christianity, don't clap in thetoo, thou hast too much Skill in Circumcision.
Brute -- you had been low enough but for some of them; is not Wealth your Aim?
Ay, and if Pleasure is thine, prithee take a better Mark; by, it's the Devil indeed to have an Envoy Extraordinary from him in a Composition of cheating an, a Pagode: Why I'd as live be Rivall'd by the.
Well, well, you express your self Whimsically, I'll pass by your Scurrilous Malice, and give you your Saying and your Way.
Ay, and my Reward too when time serves
either the Jade has hit my blind-side, or I have really conquer'd her by my Wit. Gad, I think too, thou Ape, that thou hast Wit, tho' thou wert plaguy silent before I had thee.
You took me for my, and swore I excelled all the Colours that ever glorious Wine reflected on Mortals, and my Kisses more delicious than any Nectar the Sun ever began, or Artist finish'd from the Grape, and if you find some Wit and Sense besides, it's more than expected, and above the bargain.
Ay, 'tis more, as thecovenants with thefor Wealth, and has Damnation into the bargain.
Well express'd, but come
no more Satyr.
Well, no more Swaggering nor Uneasiness, and to satisfie thee, things are better than thou think'st; for the 2 Country Vintners, and the Widow of the Inn that I fear'd would have sunk me float aloft bravely, are able to pay me, and let me get twice as much by 'em.
Prithee how?
Whyhas an Uncle, Teacher to a private Congregation, that's dead, and left him 3000I wish he don't leave off our Trade and succeed him in his.
Never fear it, he's too much a Rake.
O Lard! fie! When a Man is Wealthy, he is always Reform'd.
And.
His Elderdead, and has left him 300He's to marry, and has already converted his Cousin the Crooked One-ey'd Quaker, and I have a Letter for thee to buy them all Necessaries for the Wedding; but the sharp Western Widow, is a Jewel.
How?!
She and her Quarter-master Capt.did the business,gets old Aforesaid the Attorney's Daughterwith Bastard, the old Rogue sends her to the, then marries, and she has clapt him into a.
Get in that Debt immediately, take care of that same Quarter-master.
No fear -- I have them both underand,and,and; I'm her Trustee, the Money is order'd, and as much more as takes off all the Trash in my Cellar.
Now, to satisfie thee, things are better than thou think'st, for lift up that Cloath, there's anCabinet worth 80 Pound sent me fromthe, in itSilks,Lace,and Muslin enough to Rig me like a Queen this 7 Years, and as manyas will twice payour Roguish Merchant.
O the ConfoundedMiser! Who could have thought it of him. But, What hast thou done for this? -- A bold Question! Ha -- Well, no Matter.
Nay Sir, What am I to do for it, for that's the Matter?
Why, that's as thou pleasest to make out.
, Don't look so surly; Why that I can Child; Look here!
Bless me! it's his own Hand too, the plainest Instructions that ever Satan's Plenipotentiaries manag'd since.
Yes, hearty ones, first to rob thee, get all the Money I cou'd, then to follow him to, and for fear of thy Loving or Violent Temper to leave this Cordial Powder in thy Guts, which in a Week wou'd have sent thee to another World, as surely as a brace of Balls thro' thy Head; he was his Crafts-Master, and had learnt it of his Country Men, when at their, thither we were to go, and from thence to some Delightful, where he was to Govern, and to be a Queen at least, till he was pleas'd to Spice my Porridge.
O hellish Usurer, this Cabinet and the Contents thereof were put to Interest for a Notable Return. But how didst get into his Confidence?
By my Out-side, thro' his Eyes into his Heart, as he said, and by my Wit into his Imagination. He Sacramented I should out-blaze all, that Monarchs would be proud to lie at my Feet: O my Conscience, now it comes into my Head, the Dog wou'd have sold me to some sad-Colour'd; He lov'd Money excessively, was above 50 Years old, and certainly had much more Occasion for that, than such a Thing as I. This Tide, and this Wind will in two days waft him to, whither such a Scrole shall be sent, as may make him wish himself inbefore that time, and perhaps make a farther Penny of him.
Content. Now, I'll tell thee what made our other Merchant, Sir, scatter Words and Threats about my Credit, to make thee Uneasy, and endeavour to make me Ridiculous.
I'll be hang'd if 'twan't thy damned Wit.
Even so. Thou knowest he is a Knave, a Coward, and a peevish Ass; One that I guess'd since to be his Concubine, lik'd my Person and Chat at the Wells, and was smart upon him. I knowing him, seconded it, compar'd him to a Monks Flat Phyz, in an old Cathedral Window, histo aand his gate to a swimming Pig, and his whole Person, to the red and yellow Pictures ofin a Country Alehouse; some Spy upon her I suppose publish'd it. I don't owe the Dog 50and defy him.
Thou fool of a Wit; employ thy Sense in thy Profession to get Wealth and Pleasure at other Peoples Expence, and joyn with me in carrying on our Happiness, and in order to it, I will ever be Loving to thee and Easy.
And silent! And for thy sake I will be Diligent and Industrious.
And blind! -- Hold, What Noise is that in the next Room!
O my Soul, these Dogs the Drawers have left it open, some body came thither from to'ther Room. Ay by! A Gentleman in Red goes down Laughing, and puts a Paper and Pencil into his Pocket.
Well Captain, I am glad of the Honour of your Company to this Choice Glass of Wine. I wish I had as good Company to Entertain you with, as you had when you Treated me at the Tower.
Thank you Landlord; then send for your Wife.
O dear Captain, Would she were here, I'm sure she'd go all over the Town to wait on you; but she is at my NeighbourChild's Christning, he sent me this Wine; I'll assure you it never came near either Cooper's or Vintner's Cellar.
No, nor the Queen's Custom-house.
Pooh, no words -- Sincerely, my Friend is as pretty a Trader as --
Ever sung, kept a, or Cheated hisor.
Well, we have it. No matter how.
As you have your Estates and Credit.
I'll say it sincerely, my Friendis one of my, and understands Godliness notably.
To the Plague of all that know him, that are not in the Secret of his Gains.
O Sir, Sincerely he was much mov'd, and really so was I, at the two Swearing young Ensigns at the Guard, and the black young Gentlewoman their Coz. that began Bumpers.
I plaid the young Rake and their Damsel at the Hypocritical Puppy; but sincerely Landlord of mine, for all your Reformation, you wou'd have met theprivately; but the Jade was too Drunk to understand her own Interest.
Sincerely you Scandalize me; it was only to give her good Counsel; but however no words to my Wife.
No, no, if she knows you not, she understands her self I hope; but your brother Rogue, tho' he can stand a Chance Oath, or a Smutty word slipt in Gentlemens Company; yet you both cou'd dispence with most beastly Lewdness in his dirty Confederate Rogues of, and the twoStrumpets, when you brought me Sick up in the Pleasure-boat.
O dear Sir, People that are Employed in business will have their Frolicks sometimes, and must be humoured.
But if a poor Officer that can't say his Life's his own for 3 Months, gets a Glass Extraordinary, Swears by Chance at some unmannerly Whelp, and goes Singing to his Lodging; then it's, O the Debauchery of these Soldiers! theCause can never prosper with such Fighters for it; 'twas otherwise in the Protector's time; when Landlord, thou art sensible, I know thou comest home well loaden five days in the Week from the Tavern.
Ay with Moderation --
That is just on this side of Reeling, with 3 Bottles in your Guts, a grave Look, and a Hickup, and perhaps a Knavish Bargain in your Pocket-book.
And you would not have a Man serious and follow his Dealing with Industry?
No doubt, for you get by it. Faith Landlord, my Ensign would change his Colours for your Gains in the Company you are free of, and I would Swap my Commission for your Profits, in being a Top Parish Officer and Reformer, besides Gut-Stuffing, and Guzzle into the bargain.
Fy, fie, I fack no such matter -- But who made you so wise Captain?
Even your own bragging sweet Self in your Moderation, and your Spouse when you plague her with your Hypocrisy.
I wish she had a greater Sense of theParty and Reformation.
She is a Gentlewoman born, well bred, and sensible, and abhors the Canting and base Cruelty of your Reformers.
Well, you owe her a good word, you always have hers.
I thank her.
Nay seriously, since you have Lodg'd in my House, my Wife is twice as good Conditioned to me as she was before, and says you are the Orderliest Lodger in the World, and are always at Home when I am Sotting, as she calls it, at the Club.
Truly Mr., you are the greatest corrupter of Youth, and the most dangerous Person I come near; for I never drink more nor in worse Company than yours.
What think you of the several Gentlewomen that us'd to come to you 3 or 4 times a Week, to be Treated with your Cordial Water.
Pooh, my Soldiers Wives, Fool, that come about Business.
What! in Silks, Sattin and Silver, tho indeed sometimes a Handsome one would come like a Servant.
My Soldiers, likeand you, have more Trades than one, and maintain them well.
Well, but since my Wife perswaded you, I thank you, you order them to come to you upon the Guard about business.
I am willing to make any Family easie where I am.
Ay, Heavens reward you for it, that I have found. Come, here's honestHealth.
Ay, his Wives with all my Heart. Why are not you Gossip?
He would have had me, but Mrs.would have young Mr.theMerchant's Beau Prentice, and MonsieurtheMerchant.
What, that Synagogue fac'd, that from a Footman became a Pocket Pedlar for Table-books and Tweezers at Noblemens Levys, then a Peruke-Maker and Wine-brewer, next an Alamode Runner, and now dub'd a Merchant.
O dear Captain, you come too home to Folks Originals, you are a notable Satyrical Wit. I fack, I love Sharpness; and my Wife says you are like thein the Play, and for that she values you.
She is so far in the right, that I am as great a Bubble and Fool as he, and am as often teazed with damned Company; But why are not you at the Christning?
For five Reasons, my dear Capt. First, myordered me to Treat you. Next, there is one I do not care to see till a Scurvy business is made up between us. Thirdly, Mrs.rails at me ever since ourVoyagewith those merry Women, which she got anof; And next I expect three Constables, five Informers, and myJustice; and then an old rich Merchant's only Son is to have some Dealings with me, and Coll.of.
Really all very good ones: I was Invited, but would not go; the Men I don't like, and the Women I can wait on another time, and to Night must go to.
Come,, here's to the Confederates.
Ay the Queen's Health with all my Soul, and Prosperity to her Arms.
Oh Captain, if your Success in War went on as briskly against the French, as our Reformation of Manners does against Whores, Swearers, andTaverns, it would be brave.
Nay I wish we could lay theandunder as good Contribution, as you do your sinful Tributaries, and it would save 12in the Pound Tax at least.
Supposing it true; the Wicked should be punished all manner of ways.
Not with greater Wickedness; for, Conniving at Sin for Gain, Selling of Justice, ensnaring of Innocents, and often Oppressing those who have no Money; putting some into such Places of admirable Improvement, that those who went in only, come outand, is as bad as the Crimes they are Committed for.
Zeal for Reformation may be excused, if it carry a Man a little too far.
Yes, to the fulfilling his Pride, Malice, and Ill-nature, as well as his Covetousness.
So -- Satyrical Captain; And have you nothing to say against strict keeping the Sabbath?
No Mr., you have my free Leave to go to the Devil as painfully as anJogue, or aFryer. Only of all things a Generous Temper abhors a Hypocrite.
Would you have no Reformation?
Yes, our Laws are good and ought to have better Executors of them, than such as you.
Very sharp.
No. Very true. You may seem another Man to your Brethren, who won't know you; or your Bubbles, who don't know you; or your Subjects who dare not know you. But my dear Landlord, Here's to thy own Reformation and Health. I do know thee.
No matter, but I have so good a Cause as I dare Argue it out with you. Come, dear Capt. put off your Journey totill to Morrow. I have a Neat Supper; here is more of this Wine; my Wife is a coming, and she shall be Judge.
Content, provided you Teaze me no more with your Seizing, Gaoling, Fining, Whipping, and Reformation.
Agreed.and I will put off our going down the River till four a Clock to morrow Morning. Shall I send for him?
No -- As good Friends as we are, and as much as I love Diversion, I won't trust my self with Two of you at a time together; and then we should not be upon the Square neither, unless I could getthe late Lordor the Devil to keep my back-hand.
Good Capt. do not Abuse the Preservers of theParty.
I beg your Pardon, you are allalike.
But Capt. Cou'd you harbour such a Thought as to imagine we would betray or injure you?
I believe you would not; but WE might; Assemblies of you cannot blush. I once saw ina Generous, Stout Mastiff, for one Grumble only, torn to pieces by a Herd of well Acorn'd, and I suppose Reforming Hogs. The best of which single would not have stood one Snap of him, but have run away Cowardly, Grunting and Squealing, like you.
Envy it self could not take hold of you.
Yes, and Perjury too. I could quote some Evidences who endeavoured to return a Halter for the Relief of themselves and Family starving, as. Those of Magistracy, asonce Mayor of, and till lately in another Post too good for him, who would have Imprison'd, and may be Hanged, as far as in him lay, one that in time of Peace brought a Letter, only sent to her from his only Brother, one of higher Titles (with the Addition ofto 'em) who betrayed Conversation and occasioned much Mischief to one of the Greatest and most Successful Generals of our Nation; but the Rogueries of your Party are innumerable. O! here's your Wife.
Madam, I am glad you are come.
And I am as glad I am come from such Odious Company, to so good.
, thou art to be Judge between the Captain and I about Reformation of Manners. The Capt. has put off his Journey. I've got a good Supper, and We'll enjoy our selves.
If you don't sour it with the Relation of your Noble Campaign to, andat the Head of your, and.
No Madam, You are to see fair play, he is to maintain his Cause decently, and has promis'd to Teize us no more with it.
With all my heart; nay I could bear with all his wicked Stuff for your Conversation; upon my Life I have need of something Agreeable, I'm almost burst with the Vapours, rais'd by abominable Doings at the Christning.
Madam, Won't a Relation of the Impertinences continue them?
No: You Men will be apt to say I am so much a Woman, that Reflections upon the, will be ato contribute to the.
Now we are going to have mypull'd to pieces, because he is no Roistering Spark; but the Comfort is, he is a Man of Substance.
A man of the Devil! -- Substantially wicked, I'm sure.
I hope your Relation will be a Lesson to Mr., to shew how Wealth that's Got Knavishly, is Spent as Foolishly.
You Two were expected, for the People there were a Select Company, as he call'd it, at this private Christning. First Thethat can dispence with the Cross, and all Ceremonies and Order as well asHonesty. Then Spruce Mr., Monsieur,the Inn-keeper, and Owler of; Mrs.the Mrs. of the,her Leering Daughter, andthe.
What aat aBaptism, O monstrous!
Nay I believe he would have had him been Godfather.
Why not; we've lately seenmade Embassadors and Knights.
Truly then I interpos'd, and was forced to Swagger down right with the Beast, to have him kept out of the Room during the Service, while in the mean time, as I guess'd by the bustle over head, he was Russling one of the Maids.
We go to their Ceremonies; Why should not they come to ours?
Nay thou countest them both alike.
When I urg'd and repeated to him it was a Shame to Christianity, he replied as fast, He was a good Man, and worth 30000 Pound.
Were you well Treated?
Most profusely: Mrs.andhad order'd it nicely, onlythat was never brought up to any thing but,, and, with hisImpudent Nonsense found fault with every thing, till I was forced to take him up a little roundly about his own Original and Education, and I think I work'd a Miracle, that is, Silenced him, and put a mixture ofColour into his Phillamot Countenance.
What become of the?
He Eat and Drank devoutly, receiv'd his Present, squees'd and whisper'd Mrs.most vehemently, made an Assignation with her, and went his way first.
Thou art to Censorious.
They were too Foolish, for she pull'd out a Table-Book and Scribbled, and he call'd for a Pen and Ink below Stairs, before he went out, so fearful were they both to forget the precious Moment.
What was thy Part?
I'll tell you,;made Love to me with ends of Tag'd Lines, shewing his Teeth, and Diamond Ring, which with a fine parcel of, and a rare Pad, he said he would present me; I very honestly and innocently went and told, to ask her Advice.
Good, and she fell into Fits.
Exactly; So poorfled the Pit, and was forced to go down Stairs and Drink in his own defence.
What became of?
I told you before, he had too much of my Conversation, as he call'd it, but the Tawny Satyr findingengag'd, flew at the old Midwife and, hugg'd them up most vigorously, and after an admirable medly of Discourse of railing at themaking Love, and Persecution, it ended in an appointment of a private Meeting with, whichover-hearing Scolded as vehemently at him, as before she Cry'd about.
Grammecy, pious, he flies as briskly at Game of all Ages, as he does at all sorts of Trade, Diamonds and old Shoes.
How did my Brotherbehave himself?
Why he talk'd impudently to Mrs., and she answer'd him with as lewd Meanings in the Godly Phrase; he prais'd the Resemblance of his Child, which was no more like him than I am to a Negro, 'twas the Picture of; and then went down to drink with the, the, and his Pimp the Livery Stables-Man by.
What pity it was you could not hear their blessed Conversation!
Yes, indeed I did, for I got intoCloset in the drawing Room, and heard all; but such a Confusionn of Villanous Stuff did I never hear before; theFellow Swore like a Tinker, and Sung Songs as Nasty as himself.
Did not my Neighbour reprove him?
Yes, till he began to publish some ofFemale Adventures, for which his Champion the Horsecourser and he had like to have gone to Loggerheads but then they came to a Composition; for theby the help of a preparative Mornings Draught of Punch fell asleep, and Spew'd upon theCouch
How far'd the? His Pippin Pate can't bear Drink.
Drunk he was, and fell foul uponfor his buying twoFatherless pretty Sisters of, they were her Half-boarders, she prefered them to him to be his Hand-Maids, one at his City, the other at his Country House.
VVhat said the Unbeliever?
He cry'd it was meer Scandal, That they were to be Richly married to two of his Nation in; and meer spight in, because he had out-bid him, and got from him the Exchange VVoman's fair Hair'd Prentice Girl.
A very whimsical Controversy!
Thethen swore he'd Cuckold thewith all three of them; and the enragedbid him if he durst, he'd get his Master and Father acquainted with his way of Living; and what was worse, swore in, which the others understood not, That he would letknow of his Intentions, which immediately silenced the.
The Frenchman staid above?
Yes, till he had made his Peace with a Gold Snuff-Box; but I believe it will cost poorall he proffered me, before his angry Lady Regent will receive him into Grace, she has a notable way of managing with her; one would not think one with no more Education than she had by being an Alderman's Ladies Chamber-Maid, should be such a Politician.
O Madam, the Lady has, I presume, a double stock of Love about her, she is doubly or trebly Mann'd to dispose of that Treasure, and must needs have a double Portion, of what you call high Spirit, to govern her Subjects.
What do you call it, Captain?
We Men are uncomplaisant Creatures, and may give it the course Name of Devilism.
Right, Captain, sincerely a Woman might be contented with Letchery, and not add Malice, Wrath, and Covetousness to it.
Foul Mouth, hold your scurvy Tongue. When the Monsieur came down,was sent for up; but, I guess, the business was not ended, for he's to have his Charge tomorrow, whengoes out of Town.
How didmake up the Chorus?
Most admirably; for from Ribaldry above Stairs, Drink put him into a Fit of Zeal below, he Drank, he Swore, and talk'd Bawdy, andall for theReligion, Contradicted every body, Interrupted all that spoke, till he and thefell into a close Conference in French, about Pimping for an old Peer, and bubling a Countess in a Diamond Necklace; and then I left them Drunk, Mrs.in Fits for her Lovers, Mrs.in Vapours for too much Liquour, andstealing from her, and the Midwife asleep.
What say you to our Argument?
Hold, Sir, none of your Fustian till after Supper, it may chance to vex me.
You see, Madam, what reason I had, not to be there considering the Company.
Very true, either the Fops Impertinence, the Frenchman's Impudence, or the rest of the Knaves might have provok'd your Resentment, for they have no more Manners than Honesty, or else you'd have sat silent, for your Conversation with them would have made as unnatural a peice of Patchwork as Velvetand Brocade upon a Hop-Sack.
But sincerely,is Master of Languages, and an ingenious Fellow.
So is many a Fellon in, must he therefore be Convers'd with.
He is very Rich, who knows but he may be Knighted?
Not in this Reign, I'm sure,Honours will no more be prostituted to Foreign Wretches and Infidels.
I heard that upon my Lordgetting theKnighted, a Wag writ a Congratulatory Discourse between three Knights, Sir, Sir, and Sir.
I fancy it will make a pretty Figure in History hereafter, especially when aTapster improv'd into a Gamster, should be farther improv'd into a Baronet for being a private Spy, and a publick Adulterer; when Titles and the Noblest Ensigns of Honour are given to such as have no Father, or --
Sacred Robes to a Foreigner that has no Religion.
Right, Captain, it will look as Ridiculous as putting the Sinews of War into the Hands of a Profligate Unaccountable, as well as Unaccounting Bankrupt.
You are a Fool, forsooth; What care People for Satyr when they have Money?
VVell said, Mammon; And do these Money-mongers care for any but themselves? VVhat good will theorVVealth do you? I dare say, neither will make you their Heir, nor because they are wealthy can you hope to buy a better Bargain of them, indeed by joining in indirect Practices with them, they may clap ainto that part of your Wealth that is honestly gotten.
True,, I will have Conversation, aye and Dealing too, left off with them both, especially, and rather than want of Profit should be an Excuse, I, for my share of it, will go in Sack-Cloath, feed upon Ship-Bisquet, and lie in a Thatcht Cottage rather than have the Reputation of my Husband Linck'd with that of two such Villains.
Fairly Offer'd, Madam. Faith, Mr., you'll not find many such VVives; I am surewould not do so.
VVell, I agree to it, and must own, That with such Gain, there are such Hazards that shall be nameless, which I'll run no longer.
For Mrs., it was my Husbands importunity made me acquainted with her; The violent Temper, base Principles, and foul Feeding of that Lady, made me ever have an Aversion for her.
Some such Spouses, I suppose, gave occasion to that old Languag'dSonnet Monsieurpraises so much, it is a good one, and I promised you to get it translated, because, tho' a Satyr on your Sex, you lik'd it.
O good Captain! I'm sure you did not go far to have it done.
Don't Scandalize me with the Imputation of Rhime.
I remember I have heard you quote aSaying, That. As well as I love it, I thinkis an agreeable Accomplishment, but a very ContemptibleTrade. Come let's see the Translation.
Here, only mind thehas an old Turn of Language, because of the Subject., p. 239.
Very well; seriously a notable Question.
You're a notable Judge. I believe Supper's ready; but pray Mr., don't let us be interrupted by any of the Brutes that us'd to come to you at this time of Night.
I have left word below I'm abroad; tho' the wholeof theshould come, or Coll.either.
O bless me, have you Dealings with that Villain? I must have him and all his doings put into the Stipulation with his Yoake-Mate.
Right, Madam. And, Sir, if I should chance to see you with that Scandal of Mankind, you will give me leave to disown you?
Ay, ay, I don't appear publickly with such Folks -- But here is our Supper.
Now,, will you not own that the Land needs Reforming from Swearing, Whoring, Drinking and Sabbath-breaking, of the Soldiery and Gentry?
Yes, as well as from, andof the Trading Sober part of the Nation.
We put our helping Hand to Reformation, if you did your Endeavour so --
Every one speak in his own Station. My Soldiers dare no more Swear in my Presence, than your Prentice in yours; and when my Subalterns, or Staff Officers give me the Character of an Incorrigible foul Mouth'd Swearer, he is Stript and Cashier'd for a Profligate.
But, Captain,, How is that Punished?
By the,, the; That is a Feat is seldom done in Publick, but if a Rake does discover his Sin by the Punishment, then (as it is said in) I assure you he Rots for an Example.
But the--
When they are upon Duty, they don't break it, and when off, the Churchwardens and Constables look after them like other People, and I believe there are as many Prentices and Journeymen taken and punished, as Soldiers; As for Drinking, much more, for they have more Money to spend out of Two Shillings or Half a Crown a day, than a Soldier his Two Pence out of Six for, or now and then a Cup of good Liquor out of 2from a Horseman.
And the Officers who looks after them?
I can answer but for one positively, but can give a pretty good Guess at those I think worth my Friendship and Acquaintance. Come Mr.,
let your Lady be judge who is wickedest of us two.
Thank youfor your Complement, a fine Office to make me sit Umpire and Chief Justice upon Sin.
No Madam, I make your Breast the Court of Equity for Innocence, and stand so much on my Justification, that I appeal as far as Appearances, (and that's what he most covets to save) even to the Spouse of his Bosom, one who is a Gentlewoman and no Reformer.
The Name makes me sick and choaks me with the Spleen. I think themay as well go to his General's Levee, air himself on Horse-back, or in a Coach, and make innocent Visits, as you retire to be serious, that is overhawl and cast up the Books and Accounts of the whole Week, write Letters, or consult with the other two ofTriumvirate,, and.
I go to Church, and give a good Example.
Yes, and as often to a Schismatical Meeting, where, for ought you know, the Wretched un-ordain'dmay be a, and you write Sermons too.
Prais'd be Heaven I can, and repeat them to my Family.
Remember who was overlook'd when the Text in your Sermon-Book was the good Ship, whom God preserve, bound towith the Invoices and Bills of Lading.
Scandal --
Truth, for I'm a Witness to it as well as the Captain.
I suppose you'd fain have Musick a.
Not so fain as you'd have it out of the Cathedrals; but pray is not an Innocent Air on the Violin, as harmless as two Dozen Pipes of Tobacco extraordinary on a, when yourdon't let you go a Pinting as you do all the Week.
This is Uncharitable.
Nay, I'll commend thy Zeal, rather than Charity, that will sooner give five Shillings to have a poor Devil Whip'd or Stock'd, than six pence to Relieve a poor Starving Family.
And the Play-Houses.
There's much to be said against them, and something for them, only, I have observ'd the Closest Bargains have been made betweenand gravein the, and Un-Swordedand Mask'din the, and the Passages to it.
And all the Ladies of,--
Wou'd quickly go to Service, hard Labour, or the Plantations, if the wealthy Contributions from Sly, grave, Transgressors, did not uphold them; A Rake can't pay, and his very Acquaintance blows up the little gawdy Sinner.
Well, What wou'd you Reform in Us People of Business?
First, the imprudent Education of your Children, you either breed 'em, or privateand open, make the young Fellows Prove withoutand, and the worstin the World. And the young Women Half-bred, Vain and Proud, and the worst Wives in the Universe.
What for our Wives!
They Marry for Covetousness and Vanity, and are justly punish'd for it in you. I'll leave you andto readon all theof your Acquaintance.
What else?
Let yourandleave off their Gallopingand.
Their Expensive Journeys.
Yes, till they learn to Cheat as well as Trade by Whole-Sale, that is, break. TheirExpeditions, and all the little, andaboutand. Not forgetting some Naval Expeditions.
Ay Sir --? Then I am resolv'd you shall Sell your Share in that cursed Yatch.
Look you Neighbour, if you Cheated her Majesty in her Customs no more than I in my Musters, you need not be in Subjection to several dirty Rascals.
Leave off that odious Practice, or by my Life, I'll peach thee my self tho' I starve.
Then for the., they are no Reformers.
I dare Swear --
Let their Brother Knaves take them to Task with their Servants, Wenches, and Concubines, they're not content to make them forfeit their Virtue and Modesty, but they must fartherthem, to clench their, and renounce their.
O horrible!
You'll hear more of that hereafter; a Generous Convert from them has promis'd to lay open the Iniquities of Satan's Factors, that Trade by Commission from the Devil. There are as many Laws in force againstas.
What was thy Chief End in making thy self a Publick Nuisance, that is such a kind of Reformer?
I'll spare him the Labour of Speaking and Blushing too, it was to be before-hand with the World, that it might not observe him: to gain the Confidence of a Party he thought most to his Interest to be talk'd of for such things, rather than for Closer, I do not say worse.
Yes, his Breeding, first under a, and afterwards hisin that Virtuous Place,, had rarely fitted him for it.
He found it was easier to be a Censurer of other People, and a Pharasaical, than a Man of Justice.
Sir, I read good Books, and enquire into Religion.
Have a care of your enlarg'd Thoughts, yourandLinsie-Woolsey. There are many of you that Coxcomically aim at Learning, and Read without Guides, till you have blunder'd thro' all Reveal'd Religion. Ais a Jewel to many of you; but it's not fit to publish what I know on that Subject.
By my Life,, you're worsted. Come, take our Advice, Live like an, a good Natur'd Man, and a Gentleman, reform your self.
And if a Preacher in Red that desires to be thy Friend, may be believ'd, thou wilt find an easy Temper, a clear Conscience, a sound got Estate, much more comfortable than the Applauses of Villains, indirect Dealings, and theandof the Oppress'd.
Captain, we have conquer'd, he's gone confounded; I'll pursue the Blow, and I hope he'll be convinc'd, and Honest, and Easy, and I Happy hereafter.
Madam, your humble Servant, I'm glad of your good Company; a Fellow Travellor of your Fashion will make me Amends for my five Miles Pennance.
Sir, I believe your Pennance will continue, for Women generally help to make your Sex Uneasy, at least if we may believe you.
Why Madam, that's as they are; but my Deaf and Dumb Neighbour wou'd make a much better Wife than a Companion.
Then you think they can't be found in one. God help our Sex since the Generality of Mankind have such an Opinion of us; it's in vain for us to hope for one that's a Husband and Friend.
Madam, Education fits Mankind for Friendship, your soft Sex is design'd for Love.
O wretched! If both Love and Friendship are not so united both in Man and Woman, as never to be parted. But, Sir, I never experienc'd either, Love has not yet reach'd me, I frankly own; Nor have I ever found such a Treasure as a Friend, but in my Relations; Yet I should be glad to be inform'd what sort of Education that is which fits your Sex for so Noble a Thing asis describ'd to be in the few Books I've read.
Why Madam, Do you ever read?
Sir, it's suppos'd I don't always say mywithout Book.
But I mean, Madam, for Improvement of the Mind.
That I can't tell; What if only for Amusement and Diversion.
O Madam! That indeed best becomes your Lovely Sex, and most Lovely self, the rest should be left to us.
O barbarous! This is likethe Apostate; you'd use the Women as bad as he did the, and deprive them of the Advantages of Learning.
Lord Madam, you are vers'd in Antiquity! Don't you understand?
Really no Sir, I have not that Happiness.
It is a Happiness indeed which I often pity you Women have not for your Improvement.
Does it make one Wittier or Wiser?
O yes, by knowing the Antient Poets, Orators, and Philosophers.
Sir, That's their Wit and Wisdom you read, and not yours; but we have it in their Translated Books. Must their Sense always go along with their Language?
Ever Madam, the Spring head, the Fountain is only to be valued, and those who imbibe from thence.
Then there never was a Wity or Wise Man, or one to be valued, but who understoodor?
Very true, the others are but a sort of Superficial Fellows, that only take things upon Trust.
Sir, with Submission, to pass away half an Hour of this ill Weather, I'll Discourse this Matter a little; but I've one Favour to ask.
Any Madam, you may command me entirely. But what?
That is, that you'll keep your Temper; for I have heard a Noble Friend of my Father's say, That he never met with LearnedandScholars, that ever cou'd have Patience when their Venerable Antiquity,andLanguages were attack'd.
Then he was an illiterate Wretch, and understood them not; How else durst he attempt such Impudent Nonsence?
Look you Sir, how true a Prophet am I? You see you are not Proof against it. Your Darlings and Favourites are no more to be touch'd, than a Substantial Merchant's Credit, or a Soldier's Point of Honour.
Ha, ha, ha! Madam, you've Caught me I own; but it's what hitherto I'm a stranger to. I humbly beg your Pardon, you have free Liberty to Scoundrel the most Venerableand, and Scout the Sacred Languages down to the degree of the Clucking of theof,orCant; and use the Teachers and Readers of the Antient Sages as Scurvily and unmercifully as --
A Witty Woman does a mere Scholar. But Sir, this Gentleman I mention'd, was both the Ornament, and a Happy Instrument of the State, a brave Soldier, a Wise Senator, Speaking and Writing three or four Languages of, a Traveller, and most useful Mathematician.
What! and not understand?
Again Sir? May he not understand the Nature of a Circle, or a Triangle, and Employ them to the Benefit of Mankind without the very Words and Language of; he was in Years when I saw him, and I not ten Years of Age, and yet so Universal, Pleasant, and Agreeable a Man, that we Children as much admir'd him as our Parents.
This is a single Instance.
That's enough to make it possible; but had you convers'd with the World half so much as your Authors, you'd find Numbers in the Glory and Prop of our Nation, Navigation, and in the Revenues, Privy Council, Army, Engineers,TheKing did not fetchorfrom the College; Nor are his Forts, his Havens, and mighty Works built by School-masters,, or, and our Noble and Wonderful Sirwent young into the World, and owed most of the Great Knowledge he had ofand, to his barbarous Usage and Prison; his Gallant Actions he performed without it.
You are a Historian too, and give Admirable Instances. Surely Madam, you must have read much.
No truly Sir, and never one line of.
But Madam, How came the Gentleman you mention'd, (who by your Ingenious Description must be a Great Man) to be destitute of the Learned Languages?
As my Father told me, 'twas because he was bred under an Impudent ill natur'd Rascal of a School-Master, one so much a Clown himself, he either cou'd not find out, or hated the Gentlemen in another.
Madam, Scholars are not bred without Manners.
Where shou'd they learn them? Among Lying, Orchard Robbing Boys, or by Smoaking and Ale-Bibbing, or Capping in a Quadrangle: but thisThrasher, so Scourg'd and Buffetted Learning into him, that the Sound ofwas as Terrible to him, asandis to aSea-Coast Village at Midnight, when a small Fleet of, with their Musquets, Cymetars, and Shackles surprize it. He hated aas much as ever aordid a.
Smartly express'd, but Madam, thewere the Worthiest and Noblest People in the Universe.
Yes, witness their Gladiators, and beastly Dealing with their best Prisoners of War. Not all the united Crimes of those Nations they call'd barbarous, ever came up to it. But Sir, I shan't disparage your Friends, whose Vertues you find in their own Poets; and the Christian Apologists,,,,, &c. for they are in. This Gentleman us'd to say, The Cry of Fire in a Ship, of Surprize and Slaughter in a Beat-up Quarter, which he afterwards experienc'd, made not that dismal Impression on him, as the Grammar Rules when rattled over him by this evil Genius of.
Madam, 'tis impossible to learn a Language without Rules and Grammar, andour Method of Teaching them.
The generalExpression was (how true I know not) That his wretched Master would havekept him seven Years, to learn to make Files, Axes, Hatchets, Saws, Plains, and Hammars to do a Work but of two Years, when he might have all his Tools made to his Hands. I guess'd at his Meaning, and imagine a Language was made before Grammar, that does but Polish the Work, and often spoil it. Pray Sir, how long were you at School?
Nine Years, Madam!
And were not you Scourg'd and Beaten?
O Immoderately! Madam.
What did you learn in that time?
and, and to write a pretty Scurvy Scholar's Hand.
I suppose you speak them Accurately well.
O Madam, that's not usual, we don't speak them; that's a Custom but of some Foreigners; Perhaps by practice with them, I cou'd be brought to Speak them; tho' not so Readily, yet in a more Accurate Phrase. But we pretend to Write and Understand an Author.
Then for Speaking, you are to go to School again, I perceive. But had you Arithmatick and Geography?
That Madam, I learn'd since.
Sir, I beg you'd pardon me the Impertinence of some Questions.
Your Ingenuity and Goodness commands me, Madam.
Can you Speak, Read, and tolerably Write?
Madam, I have eight Months since, by the Help of a, and a, began to learn it, and can pick out the Meaning of an Easy Author; but I can't pretend in a Year or two to hope to speak or write it.
Can you Design, or Paint, and Japan, or Distill?
One requires a Genius for it, and Practice, and a good Master; and the other I may know when I go through a Course of Chimistry.
Can you Sew, Knit, Spin, Embroider, make Lace and Fringe; Silk and Wax-Work; Dance, Sing, Play on the Harpsicord, Raise Paste, Preserve!
Heavens! Madam, these are Womens Work.
Yet all these, I may without Vanity say, in less than four Years, I learn'd, and never was once Scourged; and that you may not suspect any Extraordinary Genius; a Dozen more Girles learned almost the same, and as well. With almost any two of these, well apply'd to, I could gain an honest Livelihood in most parts of,,, or the, where it's probable the Lot of a Native ofmay fall; with, I am a stranger in almost no Part of. Sir, pray, should you be taken a Slave by an, or a, who have not the Fear and Reverence of, and their Authors before their Eyes, What could you do, to save your self from Drubbing?
Work and Dig if I had my Limbs.
That acould do as well, who had never been Nine years at School, to learn,,, and. Suppose such a thing should happen (for to as easy bred, and as well born as you it has) Would you not willingly part with some of your,, old, orPoetry, to be able to make a, a, or a, to help to gain your Liberty or Ease? And yet these are Learnt to Perfection in half the Time, and with half the Expence.
Madam, you have almost confounded me; but our Learning is for Ornament, and to Improve our Souls in Thought and Contemplation.
We live in, and speak; and I think,, and, are as good Garniture for a Discourse as yourPoets, if Ornament be your end; and our Souls by a fewandBooks, may be better fitted for Reflections on a future State, and our present Being, than by eitheror, they Spoke and Thought well; and we (Improved by) Speak and Think much better. But Sir, should you chance not to get a, or not take to, or the, What would you do with your Learning, even in?
Get a, or Teach, or be ato some Gentleman's Son.
What might that gain you a Year?
Perhaps Forty, Fifty, or Sixty Pounds a Year.
What might your Father bestow on you a Year in order to your?
Madam, at School for the Nine Years, from 12 to 20a Year; and at the University, from 20 to 40
A hard Return for such Time and Expence! A good Workman of ain our Neighbourhood, is not yet 30 Years of Age, has got 80Land, a50, a200. Two Masters of Ships, one a, the other aTrader, are Worth each 1500All these, I've beentold, set out at the same time with my Brother, bred like you; but their Parents had the Grace to take them from Uncharitable Learning, and he with his Authors is not like to Improve his Moderate Estate a Penny, unless the Government will be pleased to give him a sort of a Gentleman's, called a Place.
Your Air and Face, Madam, made at first an Extraordinary Impression upon my poor Heart; but now your Wit and good Sense, your bright Soul has quite Enchanted me.
There it is, we can't displease in Discourse, but all our Sex are Satyriz'd for our sakes; and if we chance to please, then Love is thrown about at our Heads, as some doandfor want of real Knowledge.
Faith Madam, it's a sign I have a real Value for you, to Esteem you for making me an Ass, and showing I've been Bred, and spent my Time like a Fool.
Well Sir, it's granted, I accept what you call your Esteem and Love.
Millions of Blessings and Ten Thousand Joys! --
Hold -- No Raptures, for I have no Fortune.
Your self alone is Heav'n and All --
Which will not buy me a Twelve-penny Stuff Mantua, you a Pair of Shooes, or our Children Bread and Milk.
To gain such a Felicity, What wou'd I not Attempt! What must I be to gain you!
A Ship-Carpenter.
Heav'ns! That's so foreign to my Education, that I must begin the World anew.
So you must to be any thing to purpose, but that will always be of use in; There if you Excel, you'll gain an Estate, Reputation, and the Comfort of being Useful; and a Satisfaction arising from all these, will go beyond the Empty, Ridiculous Pride of the most Towring Pedant.
You might inspire me! --
Hold -- Have a Care -- I am afraid you're Infected.
On my Soul, Madam, I'm Sound and Wholesome, and --
With Poetry, I mean, that word seems to be a Symptom. Have you not lost time enough withFustian?
Are you not sensible of the Power of Numbers, Noble Expression, and well imag'd Truth. I heard you praise,, and.
Yes, I love it, and have been told our Language is as proper for it of all kinds as the most boasted of Old: So I love Musick extreamly, but I would not marry a Fidler.
To obtain you, Madam, that you might be the Reward of my Labour, I wou'd Study --
Till you made your self very Dull. Take care of that, Observe and Read Mankind and your self; he that Encumbers himself up with other Folk's Stuff, has hardly room for his own. But what Insolence I am upon to instruct a Man of Education?
I wish some body with their well turn'd Thoughts had Instructed my Parents, who were Ambitious to make me a Scholar, and knew not what it was, or what good for. But Madam, since you are gone so far as to lay thingsbefore me in a light, I am infinitely pleas'd with, and what I knew not before; For Heavens sake continue, pray tell me what you'd advise me to?
You see I've had a fair Field of Ridicule, had you been full of your self; but since you are so good Natur'd as to accept of ain Petticoats of 21 (for Sir, I'll as frankly own my Standing, as you your Degree.) I'll advise you the best I can, with what I can recollect from excellent Men and Women; for I have, thank God, Convers'd with much better and Wiser than my self. First, Sir, as I am a Christian, I must enforce the Virtues that belong to Christianity, among the rest Humility; You have had a Hint how little able you are to depend upon and Advance your self. Despise no man for want of Quickness of Parts, Reparty, or any thing of the Fashionable Waggery of the Place you are bred in.
What if my Genius soar above another's, Must the dull Animal have the Preference?
I say that's no Consequence; but have a Care while you are making Verses and quaint Epigrams, he does not grow up to be a Man of Note, and use, while you make Epigrams and Verses still.
Next have a care ofjoyn'd with, Confine not Perfection to one Sett of Men, or their Particular way of Education; it's as absurd and ill-natur'd as thewith the Pale of their Church. You see how useless the best of your boasted Gawdy Toppings are.
How must I live in the World?
By living in the World, and like one of it; and as it's presum'd you are soberly bred. Be so, let not the Nauseous Porterly Trick of Smoaking overrun you; your Noble Places are Accus'd of having it learnt there.
I think it for my Health, I cannot leave it.
Ridiculous, Consult an Ingenious and unbyass'd Phys. He'll convince you to the Contrary; and if fortake it as a Vomit should be taken in its proper timeand place. Endeavour to Converse and be acquainted with Men of Business, among them you'll find Conversation may be maintained, without theandbeing the Essential part of the Company.
A chearful Glass with Moderation --
-- Is an Excuse for frequent and nauseous. Must an Man of Letters and Ingenuity be like a dry Pump, nothing to be got out of him till you pour Liquor into him. Were I one of you, I'd Scorn the briskness of my Wit and Mirth should be owing to any thing, but the Liveliness of my own Imagination.
No doubt, some Dull, Unconversable Fellows introduced the Custom.
Yes, may be our Neighbours, who have left it, and we have kept and improved it. Why should a Man of Quality and Business, think going to a Tavern a Scandal; and you that think your self as Virtuous and more Learned, practise it? They seem to leave it to the Mobb of a higher Rank, I would Scorn to be reckoned one of the Number.
Open-hearted Friendship, and Hospitable Entertainment, were the first Occasion of this Good Fellowship; and I'm ashamed when I reflect how it's kept up by Clowns, or better Born People as Boorish. Madam, you are in the right, and even the beginnings of it should be carefully avoided.
To parallel in our own Sex, that Gayety and Liberty of Conversation, thecall Coquettry, has nothing really Criminal in it at first, tho' it Intrenches upon Maiden Decency, (at least so it seems to us) but when continued, it often leads to Crimes, but certainly to Scandal.
Madam, may I beg to know who I am Oblig'd to for this Instructing and Delightful Conversation?
Sir, I am as willing to let you and all the World know who I am, as you can be to know. My Father Coll., had a Handsome Gentleman's Estate, which he Ruined with his Loyalty in the Civil Wars, in which he was a Considerable Officer; the Remains of which maintains my Brother in an Idle Scholar's Life. My Mother died, and left my Sister and I very young. A Noble Lady bestowed good Education on us, and took us home to her; whence my Sister married to an Honest, Industrious Citizen; They live Lovingly, and God has bless'd them with a Competent Estate, still Encreasing. She it was brought me to the Coach, from a pretty little Seat they have Purchas'd. I am in the same Noble Family stil, Respected as I'd wish; and am, thank God, Secur'd hereafter from the Injuries of the World, and Want in a Moderate, Humble, Single Life, by a bountiful settled Annuity. If ever I change my Condition, it must be to a Man of some Wealth, and I hope good Humour, else my small Maintenance will not Support us.
Madam, May I hope for the Continuance of your Friendship (I dare name no more, till I am Worthy of more) and the Favour of an Answer, if I should beg your Advice in order to Improvement, when Opportunity offers.
With all my Heart, and the Assistance of any of my Acquaintance, to Serve you. But Sir, the same Question I must ask?
My Father was younger Brother to Sir, and by my Mother, who liv'd but Six Years, had my Elder Brother and my self. He spent his Days in Drinking and Hunting; but however he rather Encreas'd than Diminished his Estate of 250a Year. He died six Years since, and left my Brother and me an Annuity out of it of 40and a good Study of Books of my Grandfather's. My Brother has taken to Grazing, and is very Successful; and they that know his Concerns better than I, say he'll raise a Great Estate; he is Unmarried, Moross and Close-fisted to all the World but my self. Indeed I never disobliged him, and we always Lov'd. He generally encreases my Annuity to 60His Quarrel to me is like your Reflections,, as he calls it. I am of no Foundation, and therefore must the sooner get out into the World, and my Brother says he will Assist me; but Patrons I know none, should I take Orders.
By no means, Enter not into that Sacred Function without a Call in all Sences.
If Madam, your Soul (that has kindled me) can enliven me to be considerable in the World, and deserve your farther Favour, I then will wait on you out; and if in the mean time, some other Man is to be made Happier, I beg to have Notice of it.
That I promise you. I think we have Chatted to 
our Journeys End.
Sir,.<|endoftext|>Your Worship is wellcome into the Country, you have been kind to us this time, and made more hast down then we expected, we never wanted the Gentlemen to live amongst us more than now, for all our Comodities lie upon our hands, we can vent nothing, we must be forc'd to Eat what God hath sent us, in our own Families, if we can sell as much as will pay Taxes, it is all we can expect or hope for, God help the poor Farmers.
God help us poor Farmers indeed, I am glad to see your Worship well, I must depend on your Forbearance this year, or else my poor Family must be ruined, I thank God I can pay you in stock, if you'll take Cattle and Sheep, but I can get no Money for them, unless I will sell to great Loss.
How do you good Neighbors, I am glad to see you both well, how does your good Families, I thank you for your kindness in coming to see me, and bidding me so heartily wellcome into the Country, but I am sorry to hear such dismal Complaints of the Market, how shall the Landlord live at this rate, if he can have no Rents? especially we that spend so much Money in, in the Service of our Country.
If Money be so scarce in the Country, I doubt we shall have but a bad Harvest next Term in.
Come Gentelmen take Courage, providence is sufficient for all, God send us good Success in, and, and we shall recover from these misfortunes again, we are happy that we can enjoy that little we have in Peace and Quietness. It is a great Blessing to us, thatis not made the Seat of War, that we have not a standing Army in the Nation, and the Souldiers quartered in our houses, and that we can preserve our goods from Plunder, and our Wifes and Daughters from Rape and Violence.
In troth Sir, you say right, for I shall never forget the late troublesome times, when we could call nothing our own, and could neither keep our Wifes, our Daughters, our Money, or our goods to our selves: God be praised that little we have at present, we quietly enjoy; but pray Master how long shall we do so? What is the meaning of these disputes between the L--ds and C--ns, we begin to think our selves fine Folks in the Country, when those that should Govern begin to appeal to us; but for our parts you might as well have kept your Proceedings and Resolutions to your selves, as sent them down to us, for we learn nothing by them, but that our Neighbours are going together by the Ears
How so, I am sorry for that, Neighbor, they were sent down with another intent, that you might be Judges of the reasonableness of our Proceedings.
That's well contriv'd indeed, we send you up to Judge for us, because it is impossible for us all to meet and Judge for our selves, and you send your Proceedings down to us, that we may Judge of our Judges, we appeal to you as the wise Men of our Nation, and you appeal to us, as if you had no Wisdom at all; pray Master pardon me, if I am too bold, but if this be the way of it, we had as good Judge for our selves at first, and never give you the trouble to go to.
I am so far from being offended with you for this Freedom that I am well enough pleased with it, for I assure you I am one that was always against perplexing the People's heads with Politicks and News, or Printing so much as the Votes of the House.
I wish all the Parliament Men were of your mind, for I can hardly get a Labourer or Plowman but they will beRunning to the next Town to hear the news, and then they come home with some dismall Story or other, which puts them so out of humour, that they cannot speak nor whistle to the Oxen for two or three days, and perhaps a month after they begin to understand the meaning of the news better, and what they at first apprehended to our prejudice, appears to be for the publick advantage: So we are like to be rich, whilst you are Laying heavy Taxes on us above, and at the same time sending down printed papers to confound the brains of our workmen, and draw them away from helping us to get money to pay them;
Really Sir, this honest Freeholder Speaks a great deal of truth, for I am sure I have lost more in my way of Trading by my Prentices running to the Coffee-houses to read the News, than by all the Taxes of the Late Reign, and yet there was no reason to Complain of the smallness of them neither;
No, in my Conscience; but Sir, these printed papers have made us all mad, I can never go to the Market, but I meet with some Rascallions or other, that assaults me with hard words about my Landlord; Your master is a brave man (say they) to take bribes from, and to sacrifice his Country to Popery and Slavery; and when I ask them what they mean; who puts those strange Notions into their heads? They presently pull out a paper and shew me your name in Print, and a great many more, who they say have conspir'd together to Ruin their Country; and if I happen to speak one word in your defence, if I tell them you have always been a Patriot of your Country, and all your Ancestors before you, If I tell them you have a great Estate, a fine Lady, many hopeful Children and the like, and can any Man think that you can be Bribed to sell them all to Popery, and French Dragoons? they will not hearken at all, but are ready to knock out my Brains, and Swear that I am one of your listed Troopers, to serve against your Country, and so bring in the pretended Prince of, and sometimes I am forc'd to leave my Goods unsold, for fear of them; I am sure I shall never be able to pay my Rent at this rate.
The Liberty of the Press will be the ruin of the Nation, and I must Confess any thing that doth but Look like an appeal to the Collective Body of the People, is of very dangerous consequence to the Constitution, you had better a great deal to keep your disputes to your selves, than Communicate them to the Publick, for if you cannot agree togeather, who are the great Council of the Nation,who come from all Corners of the Kingdom, who are well instructed and able to Debate and Reason the Case with one another, how can you imagine that the People will ever agree, who can never meet together to argue the Point? You have really the best Constitution of Government in the World, and at this rate you'll make it the Worst.
You say very well Sir, for as a late Author hath observed,(and that is by their Representatives).
It is very true, and the Last Sessions we got the House of C--ns to be made Sensible of it, for it plainly appearing at the free conferrence with the L--ds, that the misunderstanding about the proceedings relating to the A--r of the R--pt of thewere chiefly owing to the printing of our Votes, wherein they say a Member of their House was publickly Censured in print, in the Sight of the whole Nation; before he was convicted on a Tryal at Law; tho' the Commons did hardly think that to be a Sufficient reason for their Proceeding. Yet to avoid giving any handle for such another dispute, the House came to a Resolution not to print their Votes any more; so very desireous were the C--ns to preserve a right understanding with the L--ds for the Common good of this Nation.
Why then did they print their proceedings concerning the Bill for preventing Occasional Confirmity?
Because they understood that the L--ds made an order for printing their Arguments upon it, and therefore they thought it requisite to print theirs too; or else I hope you'll not be much Troubled with printing from our House any more;
But what is the meaning of it, that the L--ds proceedings upon the said Bill are not only printed at Large as they used to be, but they are reprinted in a less Character, and many Thousands of them printed by Subscription of private Persons, industriously dispersed all over the Kingdom, and sold at a Low rate under the usual price.
These are very extraordinary proceedings indeed, and I cannot imagine what the meaning can be, unless they are also making Subscriptions for a Dissolution of the Parliament; but that will never do with the Ministers in this Reign, they have not such Tools to work upon as they had formerly.
I hope not, or else we should be in a miserable condition; but I have taken notice that there is a Gentleman in our Country, who imploys so many Mercury's to disperse those Papers with Comments upon them; that there is never a Messenger to be had for Money in all our Neighbourhood.
We have a great many busy People in this Nation: But why did you censure the A--r of the R--pt in Print?
Because we thought he had highly neglected his duty, and that it was time (when the Nation was engag'd in a War, and Twenty Millions in Debt) to Prosecute some, in order to deterr others; for we can never hold out long at this rate; we have Mortgag'd all the other Funds, and there is nothing else left, but the Land must now bear the burthen.
No doubt of it, God help us poor Freeholders, it is time to punish Offenders indeed, it is plain her Majesty was of that Opinion, when she was pleas'd to use these very words in her Speech to the Parliament;. This was encouragement enough, but why did not you Prosecute him first, and Censure him afterwards?
The Commons have but two ways of Prosecuting great Men for any Offence, and that it is either by Impeachment, or by Addressing the Queen to order her Attorney-General to Prosecute at Law, and which way soever they take, their Resolutions will be Printed if they Print their Votes; and they must first come to a Resolution that a great Man is Guilty, before they can either Impeach, or desire the Queen to Prosecute him, for the Commons are in the nature of the grand Inquest of the Nation, and must first find, before they can regularly proceed any farther.
It is plain, if you publish your Votes, your private Censures and Resolutions will be publish'd too, not only to the People of, but to all the World, and therefore I have often wondred that the great Council of the Nation should take so much pains to expose their proceedings to their Enemies abroad, as well as at home, when certainly it is for the interestof any Kingdom that they should keep their Proceedings as private as they can; The States of other Wise Nations think it so; for tho' they do indeed publish on a particular occasion, what they think convenient for the Information and service of the Nation, yet all other matters are kept as private as may be.
If all Lawyers had been as Honest, and as little Avaricious as you, Printing of Votes had never been brought in fashion, for if I am not mistaken, it was a Gentleman of your Profession that first brought in that practice for his own Advantage, when he was Speaker of the House of Commons.
I remember that Gentleman very well, he was one that lov'd Money as well as another, and had more of mine than I desir'd, or he deserv'd: But pray what was it worth to a Speaker?
It was formerly worth no more than Five Pounds a Day, but now they say it is worth Ten, because they Pay double Price for the Votes.
Ten Pounds a Day, that is Sixty Pound a Week, a very pritty business; then I'll warrant you, the present Speaker has too much Wit to part with such a Perquisite in his Office; he might be contended to loose the Benefit of it for two Days the last Sessions, but he'll make Friends enough to renew the Order for Printing the Votes next Sessions.
That is your mistake, our present Speaker is a Man of Honour, and scorns to Sacrifice the Interest of his Country for any private Advantage; he was always against Printing the Votes, and ever will be.
That will be very honourable in him indeed; but if this practice was so lately introduc'd, and by no better a Man than the person you mean, I am contented it should be let alone for the future. The Representatives of every County and Burrough, will (I presume) take care to give notice of every thing that relates to them in particular, and the whole House will publish as much as is requisite to be known in general, and for the rest you may keep it among your selves.
This method of proceeding will make us more careful what Members we Chuse for our Bourroughs; for as long as the Votes were Printed, we knew what they were a doing in Parliament, as well as our Members, and therefore it was no great matter who were our Representatives, whether they liv'd in, or in the Country, nor whether they attended the publick Business or not; but now on my word, we must take care to Chuse such as live amongst us, are concern'd for the true Interest of our Burrough, and will be sure to atendthe publick service, or else we may suffer in our Priviledges, or our Trade, before we are aware of it.
That is an advantage to the Publick, that I did not think of, and for ought I know, may be one good way to prevent the Electors from taking Bribes in Elections, I am sure the more you consider of Printing the Votes, the better you will be pleased that we shall keep to the Ancient Constitution of the Government, which never allowed of this practice, but pray what did you mean by saying that you learn nothing by publishing our Proceedings, but that your Neighbours were going together by the Ears.
Mean Sir, I mean to tell you the truth, that the People begin already to take sides, some are for one, and some for the other, and they are ready to Quarrel at every meeting, which of them have the best of the Argument.
That is very fine indeed, I was afraid of such Evil consequences, and what do they generally say? on which side are the Majority in your Neighborhood?
Nay I must confess we have not many, that appear against the C--ns, for we naturally incline to favour our own Representatives, but the Dissenters (who are but few amongst us) do generally incline to the other side.
That must be expected, tho' if the Dissenters had heard all the Debates in our House, they would be better Satisfied with this Bill ofthen they are, for if I can understand the matter, all the honest Dissenters will have an advantage by it.
I wish they may, and that some worthy Member of your House would state the matter a little more at large to us, for tho' the Arguments of the C--ns are very strong, yet they are very short, and ordinary People do not immediatly comprehend the Force of an Argument in so few words; besides the Arguments on the other side are more Copious, which makes them more easily apprehended by vulgar Capacities.
The C--ns may be easily out done in matters of this Nature, for they are a great body, full of business and perpetually in a hurry, and others are more at leasure, and take more pains in drawing up their proceedings; but I think the Arguments on the other side are not rightly grounded in this Case, tho' it must be confessed there is as much said on that side as the nature of the Case would admit, but they do not confine their Arguments to the Subject matter of the Bill, which only relates to publick Officers, and not to private Dissenters, which is indeed a plainand short answer to all the Objections made against it, but what do the People say to the other Proceedings concerning the publick accounts?
Nay, there you have the advantage very clearly on your side, for tho' some Persons seem to aim at a discovery of mistakes by the Commissioners of accounts, of which I am informed some are only Errors of the Clerk, and are rectified in the other Papers given in before, yet they confess the substance with you, and prove more plainly then you did;, and tho' there may have been several Deficiencies in the Funds, yet it does not follow, but that with good management, the many Millions given by the Commons would have answer'd all thePublick occasions.
I don't like the way of Arguing so much in favour of offenders, which looks to me as if the first draft had been made by some of the Parties concerned; and I observe that they compute the deficiencies from the Estimates given it, but perhaps the Estimates were as unreasonable as the management, for both were under the care of the same Persons; but suppose there have been some Deficiencies in the supplies or in the produce of the Funds, does it therefore follow that there hath been no Mismanagement? methinks they Labour a little too much, to excuse the Parties Accused by the C--ns.
And a little too soon in my opinion, for if they are Innocent it will appear on a fair Tryal, without any previous Arguments in their favour; but I must confess, I think there are some things mentioned in the C--ns Address to the Queen, upon the observations and Representations of the Commissioners of Accounts, which prove themselves, and (amongst the rest), for by what other means could they get them? a great many of them to my knowledge, had no other way to get a Penny, and some that were hardly able to shew their heads, have now got great Estates, and have no more Wit then to keep their Coaches, that the world may know it.
There was a very good method formerly prescribed in this Case, if it had been put in practice, and that was.
That would for ever prevent any publick Frauds, but I am sure there is one thing mentioned in the C--ns Address, that we Conveyancers were very sensible of, and that was the Stock-jobbing Trade between the, and the, for the Money'd men got so much that way, that my poor Clyents could not borrow a penny of Money tho' they were willing to give Procuration, Continuation,Besides the Lawful Interest of Six.
That was not only an inconvenience to private persons, but to the whole Kingdom, for there was so much Money misemployed that way, that it Lessened the true Trading Stock of the Nation, and thereby hindred the exportation of our Woollen-Manufacture,and the importation of other Comodities to be Manufactured in, and yet we are told on the otherside, that there were no Tallies with interest Struck unnecessarily, all was well manag'd, and no Body in fault.
I am sure there was something or other done unnecessarily, for they got so much in thisTrade, that Land was become a meer Drug; we could neither Sell nor Mortgage.
You were not like to do either, when the greatest Money'd men in the Kingdom sold their Estates in order to lend the Money into the, and what did they lend it for? only out of their great zeal for the publick Service? no doubt of it, they had no unnecessary Interest nor large Premiums: Fie, fie, this daubing work will never do the business of the Nation.
It is no wonder such men were willing to grant heavy Taxes on the People, for they not only got by it, in the, where they doubled their Estates in a few years, but slipt their Necks out of the Collar in the Country, and avoided the Taxes, by selling their Estates to so great an Advantage; but as to the publick Accounts and striking of Tallies, let the Commissioners of Accounts answer for themselves next Sessions: pray Sir, don't you plead their Cause without a Fee; for my part I think they need no Council, they have done very well, and are able to Defend themselves, and if it had not been for them, we should have had no account at all.
That is certain, but I don't speak now as a Council when I am retained for my Client, I must make the best of his Cause, but now I may speak freely and impartially without favouring either side, and I must confess I think the Commissioners of Accounts deserve the thanks of the Nation, they have acted like men of Honour, Quality andIntegrity, and have demonstrated the same, to the whole Nation; what can they get by Quarelling with great Men? if they consulted their own private Interest, and not the good of their Country, they would accept the Complements, the Caresses, and the Bribes that are usually offered on such occasions; but it is plain they have stood Buff against all Temptations, and been faithful to the true Interest of their Queen and Country.
It is very true, but what thanks have they had for their Pains? here is a Hue and Cry, after their mistakes but not one word in their Commendation; Is this the way to Encourage honesty and Fidelity in publick Officers?
We will not be put out of conceit with them, for all that, if these Observations had been printed before the Parliament was Prorogued, we should have had an Answer, Il'e warrant you.
No doubt of it, but what do you say to the good management in the last Reign, when the late Ministers prevailed on the King to give near three Millions out of his own Revenue for the Service of the Nation? What do you say to that?
Say to it, I am ashamed to hear it mentioned, what sad Shifts are we forced to make, to save one another; the Revenue of the Crown, is a publick Revenue; Three or four hundred thousand pounds a year did formerly maintain the Civil List, or expence of the Kings Household, and the residue was to be employed in keeping the Fleet in good order, and in other publick uses, and it has been formerly sufficient to maintain a standing Army, but the Late King of Glorious Memory, being at more expences in travelling abroad, and treating the Foreign Ministers and Generalls for the good of; The Estimates given in to the Parliament by the Ministers for the, was generally five or six, and for some years Seaven hundred thousand pound a year, and the over plus above that was employed for the publick Service, and carrying on the War against France, and thus you have this great management of those Ministers explained to you;
Is this all? does not the Queen now do the very same thing? She pays to the publick a rent Charge out of the Revenueof the Crown, of three thousand seaven hundred pounds a week, which is near Two Hundred Thousand pounds a year, and in fourteen or fifteen years Reign will amount to three Millions or thereabouts, and yet the Customs and Excise do now yeild a far Less Revenuethen formerly. Is this then the mighty Service done by the Late Ministry for the Publick? if they had saved for the Nation one hundred thousand pounds out of the allowance for the Civil List, as the Queen hath done, they might have boasted of it;
They were so far from saving any thing, that whatever was allowed for the Expences of the Kings Household, they generally expended a great deal more: Nay when Seaven hundred thousand pounds was allowed for the Civil List, they had some times Eight, and sometimes Nine hundred thousand pounds for those uses, besides all the other misapplications mentioned by the Commons;
Now I understand their Frugality and good Management very well, the publick Aids and the standing Revenue of the Crown, were it seems by the Kings directions and consent to be applyed promiscuously for the Service of the publick, but Liberal estimates being made by the Ministers for the Occasions of the Civil List, and agreed to in Parliament they still took more than was allowed; And the overplus that was not misapplyed, must now be attributed to the good Management of the said Ministers;
Is this the way of it? hold, let me see, I have the Address of the C--ns in my pocket give me leave to read one Paragraph;EnglandSunderland,Albermarle,; This it seems, is the Clause that is now to be evaded by a Calculation how much Issu'd out of the Excise, Custom, and other Branches of the Civil List, to the use of the War during the Late Reign.
That's fine indeed, what matter which way it issued, since it was agreed that the late King should have a rent Charge out of the whole for his own occasions? and that the overpluss should go to the Service of the War?
None at all, for when the Money for the Civil List was first paid and satisfied, the Publick must take the overpluss for the Service of the War, where they could get it, is this then any answer to the Representation of the Commons?
No surely, but you may guess by these sort of Answers, who takes most care to make right Representations to the People, but do you observe what frequent occasions are taken to applaud the Actions of the A--r of the R--pt?
Yes, Yes, it is plain enough, we poor Freeholders are not so silly as the great Men think us, we can see thorough these Cobweb Politicks well enough.
Nay but pray Neighbour do him Justice, he has done more then any of his Predecessors, ever did before him, he takes care of the Cash every day and Locks it up in a Chest with three Locks and Keys (which was never done before.)
I wish he has not lock'd it up so fast, that it will never come all out again.
Pray observe the true state of this Case. He solicited a Bill when he sat in the House of Commons, to regulate others, and boasted then of his great service therein, and now he wont be regulated by it himself, but if he performs any one direction of that Act, and breaks all the rest, he draws an Encomium of himself beyond all comparison; this Act was madeExchequer. The King, Lords, and Commons take upon them to say what was the Ancient Course, and this Noble L--d was the promoter of that Interpretation; and amongst other things this Act directs,; and it farther directs; these are the Directions of the Statute, and the said Officer has Lock'd up the Cash, but has done nothing else as the Act directs.
This is very fine indeed, the A--r has done his Duty in one point, therefore he has done it in all the rest, is this the Logick used amonst all the publick Officers?
Nay but observe how this is expressed by some persons; the.
That is remarkable indeed; as if it was not thebut the A-r had made this new Regulation;.
It was not convenient to give too much credit to that Statute, for except this Clause about the Money, it is aver'd that the rest of the Act is mistaken.
Ay, that's fine indeed, to aver against a Record, against an Act of Parliament, against King, Lords, and Commons, and tell them they are all mistaken; the Act declares what is the duty of the A--r, and also the Clerk of the Pells, and in setting forth the same, affirms that the A--r shall transmit the Imprest Rolls to the Remembrancer, and not one word of any such thing to be done by the Clerk of the Pells, and yet others say, that the Act is mistaken; the Clerk of the Pells must do it, and not the A--r.
The Act is mistaken, that's a jest, then there is an end of all Laws at once; that's an Answer will serve to cover all evil actions whatsoever.
Why may not the same persons that Stock-Job the Publick Money into their own Pockets, expound away the Statutes into wast Paper.
Of what use then are these general words in the Act,Exchequer.
The meaning of these words were to keep up the Course of thein all other matters, not Enumerated in the Act, as that the Imprest Rolls shall be Sign'd and Indorsed by the A--r as usual, that the Clerk of the Pells shall have the usual time of 30 days to examine the same, and that he shall also Sign and Endorse the same,according to the Ancient course of the; but these general words were not to contradict the Special words before; for that is contraryto express Maxims in the Law, for the Interpretation of all Statutes whatsoever that where there is a General and Special Clause in one Act, the Spicial Clause shall Govern the General one; but the contrary would be a contradiction, and destroy the Act,.
But you are told it is not practacible to account by these Rolls.
The act says otherwise, but if the Rolls are not made up as they ought, whose fault is that, shall we be allowed to excuse fault by another?
Thats too Common a thing in this Age; but as to the processes against accountants, its said, that it would be Vexatious to issue them out in Course;
Process ought to issue of Course, and on an application, the Treasury may respite the same and give a reasonable time, and such proceedings would make Officers follow their accounts and get them passed, for want whereof, the accounts are so very far behind;
There is a World of Excuses made beforehand, but what are they to the purpose? Let the Law judge of these matters, if the party is innocent, Let it appear on his Tryal, and that is the best way to clear his reputation, and not to banter the Nation at this rate;
But as to the examining the Tellars Vouchers, they say the Act was mistaken again, for who can tell whether a Voucher be Legal or not; and to what purpose then is that Law made?
To what purpose indeed? For tho' no man can be certain whether a voucher be forged or not, yet he may guess even at that, and he can tell when he sees an acquittance Signed with the name of the proper Party who was to receive the Money, and Witnessed by an Officer, which would be very much for the Publick Safety; for what Officer would venture to be guilty of Forgery and forfeit his Office? And I am sure for want of this examination a great Sum of Money has been lost in the.
Is this the way of it, When a man has made a breach of the Law, instead of Arraigning the Offender, he Arraigns the Law.
Nay, and Arraigns a Law obtained by his own Solicitation, but thus it is, the Law and the Commissioners must bear all the blame, for the A--r is above all Law and Com--ns whatsoever.
And above Parliament too, for the poor Commons shall neither have Remedy in Parliament nor out ofParliament, if some can hinder it, Ee'n let them take all at this rate;
The only way to preserve any Government, especially in time of War and publick dangers, is a strickt observation of, but if honest men must suffer and there be no way to punish great Offenders, then farewell all indeed;
But of all the contrivances to run the Nation in debt, there was none like the project ofbills; which (as I am Credibly informed) served a great many evil purposes at one and the same time, for they had thereby an opportunity of obliging several Members of Parliament with good offices, by evading the Law,; Then they had an opportunity to oblige their friends by letting them have a considerable interest for subscribing to the Circulation of them, without paying in all their principal Money, and they had an opportunity to gain great Sums for interest Mony to themselves (tho subscribed in other Persons names) without paying in any principal at all; and after all this they let the said Bills run at a great discount of 15, 20, 25, and 30loss to the publick, that they might buy them up at a low rate, and pay their Debts with them at parr to the Crown; and thus the Nation has been used, and the publick Money Stock-job'd away into private mens Pockets;
We were a long time before we could find out the mystery of this project. But I hope that Debt will be discharg'd next Sessions, for it is a great Clog upon all the publick Revenue.
It is so, and you would do well to make a more effectual Law next Sessions, for the better regulating the method of passing the publick Accounts of the Navy, Army,and for compelling the Accountants to prosecute and pass their Accounts, for we shall never get out of Debt whilst the publick accounts are so far behind and unpass'd.
I see but little hopes of having many good Laws, till there is a better understanding between the two Houses.
Pray Sir, how did those misunderstandings first begin, who made the first false step, the L--ds or C--ns?
Those unhappy misunderstandings first began upon the Impeachments of the L--ds; but who made the first false Step I will not determine: I presume you have read the Vindication of the Commons. I think that worthy Author hath writ very plainly and very honestly upan that Subject, and I do not remember that I have met with any book that has fairly answered him;
I agree with that worthy Member, in most things, but not in all, however I wish he would apply his thoughts how to reconcile these Differences; That would be a noble undertaking, and becoming his Character, for it is much easier to find out a fault, then to find out a remedy for it, and we are not now so much concerned to know who was in fault, as how both Houses may be reconciled for the publick good;
You say well Sir, That is the main concern, what is past cannot be helped, we must not now look backwards, but forwards, I believe the L--ds themselves do think they were a little too hasty in that matter to go to Trial and Judgment of acquittal in so many Impeachments, the very same Sessions, without the petition or assent of the C--ns, and to let men sit as Judges for one another in their own Cases; No History, no Record from the foundation of the English Government can give one other instance of such a proceeding; but we must remember that the Commons have been as faulty formerly in another particular, when they Voted the Lords useless; and therefore I think it will do well if they set one failing against the other, and so shake hands again for the publick good;
When the Divines and the Lawyers agree together in the same opinion, we may have some hopes; but the matter of the impeachments is past, and in a manner forgot, therefore there must be something else that occasions these misunderstandings at this time a day;
The matter of the impeachments will never be forgot whilstremains, but there is some thing else indeed that causes fresh misunderstandings, for it is easie to start new points, however I beleive an Act of Indemnity would reconcile us all;
An Act of Indemnity! I do not know what you mean, I cannot understand how that would tend to a reconciliation.
A Guilty Conscience is always full of Fears and Jealousies, and some men will never think themselves safe, unless they are sheltred by an Act of Oblivion, or by keeping up a misunderstanding between the two Houses;
Now I understand you, truly I am afraid you have hit upon the true Cause of all our differences.
But how is it possible that two or three persons can be able to influence a Majority of so great a body of men of Honor and Principles, and who can have no other thing so much at their heart, as the Common good of their Native Country;
The L--ds are naturally Jealous of their Rights and Priviledges, as well as the C--ns, and any Members that will stand up as Champions for the Rights and Prerogatives (as some now call them) of that Noble House, will be sure to get into esteem amongst them: and if they be men of parts and speaking Members, they become at last, to be great Men in the House, and to gain the Ascendant; and such men will never want Numbers to support them; it is the Common failing of both Houses, to be a little too much Influenced by particular Persons, who are therefore commonly known by the name of, because by their Oratory, by their plausible Arguments, and by their Established influence, they, and some times, very Honorable Members into their Opinion.
I hope Master you are none of those: I know of nobut what are in the Crown, and if you can both keep the Priviledges that belong to you, it is well enough; I had rather be Governed by one Tyrant if I were to chuse, then by a Multitude of them; but God be praised, we have now as good a Government, as our hearts can wish, and I hope you'll neither Lead, nor be Mislead to change it for any other, for in Troth, if I thought you would, you must excuse me as poor as I am, i'll never Complement away my Free-hold to a Leading-Member.
Thou art an honest Fellow, and a true, no honest, I am entirely of thy opinion,, and I am one of those in the House of Commons, they call the, sometimes on this side, sometimes on the other, as the Justice of the Cause leads me.
Then I'll Fly to your Election as long as I Live; I am but a poor man and of a mean Capacity, and therefore I'll be glad to be advised, and to hear every mans opinion, but I am resolved to follow my own poor Judgment at last, and not to be led by the Nose blindfold.
Thou art an Honest heart I'll warrant,, I wish all our Senators of both Houses were of thy mind; but what will you say, if men resolve to stand by one another right or wrong, and in a manner Subscribe their names to it?
I think they that do so, ought to have but one Vote amongst them all, for if Twenty Souls be as it were glew'd together by Combination, they are in effect but one Soul, and therefore ought to have but one Vote in Parliament.
Thou hast certainly pass'd a very good Sentence, if it were possible to be put in Execution.
But pray Sir, what is it that can possibly give any men an opportunity at this time to create any differences amongst us, we have certainly.
She does so, and if you did but know what pains she takes in Council every day, you would wonder; she spends all her time in taking care of her People, she is always consulting how to preserve them, or praying for a blessing upon her Endeavours for their good; she Scarce affords her self time for necessary Refreshment.
The Nation is happy, I warrant, there are few Ladies about her, would take so much pains to be Queen in her Place.
I have stood amaz'd to see with what Patience she attends in Council to hear Causes and Complaints, to redress Greivances and Consult with them for the Common Safety.
She is an excellent Princess indeed, and has not only care of the outward happiness of her People, but like a true Parent of her Country, she thinks her self concerned also to take care of their Souls; Witness her several Proclamations for Encouragement of Piety and Vertue, and for the Discouragement of Vice.
We had abundance of such Proclamations in former Reigns, but it was then a general observation, that about the same time, some very Lew'd and Debauch'd men were preferr'd, and advanced at Court, that made all the rest look a little like a Banter; pray Sir, can you tell me any Nobleman that hath been Advanced or taken Notice of on account of his Virtue, for that once known would be the best Proclamation to promote Piety and Virtue.
I have no very great acquaintance amongst the Nobility, I believe there are many, but I know one Noble Lord lately Advanced, that is a man of Piety and Virtue, and I doubt not, will always maintain that Character.
I wish I could hear his Name, for I would Endeavor to get his Custom, Prompt payment is a brave thing amongst us Tradesmen.
I am sorry I cannot oblige you with his name, without asking him leave, I am afraid he meets with many discouragements already, but if he were named, he wou'd be the standing mark for all the Debauchees in the Town to let fly their Randome Shot at; truly I believe there are many Virtuous and Religious Noblemen who conceal themselves in this Wicked Age for that very reason;
Well, if you know one Good man, I can tell you ten bad, that have got into places, notwithstanding these Proclamations;
Why, do you think that the Queen can know mens hearts, do you think that she is personally acquainted with her Officers; all Kings and Queens are forced to hear with other persons Ears, and see with other persons Eyes, and so are their Ministers too, therefore we must not wonder, that in all Reigns, more bad then good men are preferred;
The reason of that is plain, for they get the places that Solicite and make the most Friends; but good men are Modest and never seek for them.
I hope you will not loose a good Place for the sake of your Modesty, or for want of asking; but we that have no other Aim but the good of our Country, do not complain of any preferments whatsoever, it is indifferent to us who have the places, so they are well managed for the Service of the Queen and Country; if they are good men so much the better; if they are bad, perhaps the Example of such a Queen may reform them, if they do well, we are contented, if they do ill they must be contented to hear of it from us.
But it vexes me to see men of no merit, men that have formerly railed at this Court, men that are Enemies to the Established Government, both in Church and State, intrusted with the Administration of Publick Affairs in this happy Reign.
You must be content to let some weeds grow up together with the Corn, neither the Queen, nor her Ministers, have had much time yet to look about them; they are Buisy on the Grand Affairs of, how to preserve our Religion, our Liberties, and our Properties, from a Foreign Enemy; but they'llfind you out at last, and then we shall hear no more complaints.
I thank you Sir, for your Reprimand: I confess it do's not become a Man of my profession to be speaking of these matters, for it naturally raises a Jealousy; and I am afraid there are too many that hunt after faults and Male-Administration, and make great complaints of this nature, when they really are angry at nothing, but that they are not preferr'd themselves.
Truly Sir, I am always Jealous of any man that is very violent in these matters; let us have a little patience, and I doubt not as fast as ill men are found out, good men will come into their places.
This Bill of Conformity will help the Queen, and her Ministers to know men; but pray Sir, who are our great Officers in all the high stations?
Thou hast a mind to be a States-man, I am afraid you will be as great a Politician as your Ploughman.
In troth Master, since I am got into so good Company, I would willingly learn as much as I can, that I may baffle my Ploughman, and keep him close to his Work, and if I could learn so much as to free my Neighbours from fears and jealousies, and settle their heads to their Husbandry; I believe you'd have your Rents better paid.
Indeed you wou'd Master; pray give him a little Instructions, for he is a leading Member in our Parish, I assure you, and makes a great Figure at a Quarter-Sessions, he is generally Foreman of the Grand-Jury, and will baffle a Whigg Justice very handsomely.
Prithee leave of thy Old distinctions of Whigg and Tory, I know no distinction but one, and that is between an Honest Man and a Knave, between those who love their Queen and their Countrey, and those who do not, between those who are for the Established Government in Church and State, and those who are against it.
Right Master, I know no other neither, but when I dare not venture to call a man, least he should break my head, yet I can say he is awithout danger, and that is the same thing in my understanding; but I confess we often mistake, and call an Honest Man a Knave, and a Knave an Honest Man, and so I doubt we do not always apply the Name of Whigg and Tory as it ought to be; but pray excuse my rudeness, and do not deny my good Friend a little Information.
I do not need much entreaty in this matter, for I would have all the Freeholders ofknow what great care is taken for their common safety and wellfare in this particular, and first you haveDanemarkEngland,England,.
He is a Prince of an extraordinary disposition indeed, but among all his other good Characters, pray don't forget his ready submission to the will of his late Sovereign, his constant, and I may now say dutiful affection to the Queen, his former tenderness of his Children, and great condescention and kindness to all his Servants.
This is a certain sign of good Principles, as well as of a good Disposition, but since you are for recollecting my memory, give me leave to recollect yours too, and to entreat you not to forget his Conformity with the Establish'd Government, both in Church and State, for tho' as a Foreign Prince, he was bred up in a National Church abroad, that differs in Ceremonies from ours; yet he has order'd the Lyturgy of the Church ofto be Translated into the, orLanguage which he best understands, and so by using the same, hath given a noble and Princely example of a Christian and Dutiful submission to the Establish'd Government, in order to comply with the Laws of the Land, and preserve the Unity of the Church.
This was a noble Compliance indeed, and I pray God his Princely example may have the good effect, that may reasonably be expected from it, we should then be a happy Nation, and entirely United among our selves.
Pray Sir, how comes it to pass that some Men do complain of this Prince's Bill; certainly the Husband of a Queen ought to have a great deal more than the Wife of a King, besides the possibility of surviving was very remote, and the Advantage of obliging him was very great.
One reason is, because he is good; for you never knew Wicked Men love a good Man in your life; and some persons are pleas'd to fancy what I believe they'll find themselves very much mistaken in; that by such proceedings they make Court to the Successor, but that wise Princess well knows, that they who are ready to support one Prince will be ready to support another; and what the People give out of the Civil List, they can easily supply to the Crown another way, if ever there be an occasion for it; which there is great odds there never will;and she also knows that such sorts of Complements are more for hopes of preferment to themselves, than any real kindness to the Successor.
No Question of it, but I am very well contented to bear my share of the Prince's Bill, if it ever takes effect; I don't doubt but he will deserve a great deal more from the Nation; but I perceive he is so good a man at Home, the Queen cannot spare him abroad. Pray what kind of man have you to be Admiral at Sea?
We have Sira man of undoubted Courage and Conduct, Loyal to his Queen, Zealous for the Interest of his Country, a true Lover of the Seamen, and heartily belov'd by them, and all that know him.
But I have seen some scurvey papers against him; as if he had taken French Money;
Ha, Ha, he has taken some, that is certain, and has endeavoured to take a great deal more, if he could have got at it, but the Bird was flown;
O, you mean at, that was a lucky hit for him, for his friends the Whiggs had a rod in pickle for him, if that Job had not prevented;
Nay, that Job did not save him neither, for he was under as strict an examination as he could have been, if that had never happened; but such was his Integrity and Conduct, that even the L--ds bestowed a Vote of Commendation upon him;
I am sure the C--ns unanimously Voted the thanks of their House to him, for his great and signal Serviceto the Nation, which he received with the presence of an Admiral, and returned with the Language of an Orator;
What an Admiral, and an Orator, a man of Courage and of Conduct too, Loyal to his Queen, true to his Country? Nay then, so far we are Safe, now for our Armies abroad, who is General there this Summer?
You know well enough, the same as the last, only his Loyalty to the Queen, and great Services to his Country have been the meanes to advance him from Earl, to a higher Title of Duke of
I like that way of Rewarding great men very well, for it pleases them, and Costs us nothing.
I am for rewarding publick Services every way, I
know by my little Affairs in the Country, that Frugality in
such cases, is no better than Folly.<|endoftext|>How d'ye Friend? have you heard the News?
What News d'ye mean? We have little cause to fear ill News, now we have Peace.
No? I'm sure I have a piece of ill News to tell you. Did not you hear that my Lord Mayor went toon Sunday last, with the Sword carried before him?
To, what to do? to a Play, or a Ball there?
Pox on ye for a nump-skull'd Fellow, to a Play or a Ball on Sundays!
Why all this Fury,? I'm sure I have read a Play that was acted aton a Sunday in the Blessed Martyr's time, present King, Queen, Prince, and God knows how many Stars and Garters: but indeed I don't know whether the Sword was carried thither in State or no.
Come, come,; you love to play the Rogue; you know the Lord Mayor went thither on no such Account.
Why so? how sho'd I know? d'ye think I am a Conjurer? What did he go thither for then? was it to hear ArchbishopBook of Sports? I hear my Lord Mayor is a brisk Man, perhaps he loves Sport and Pastime, and is a good Gamester; for you know we use to say of such,.
Plague on ye, leave off your Banter, I tell you he went thither to a Conventicle.
Pish, what is that your ill News? I was afraid you'd have told that he had gone toGuidhall; or that you had had some such frightful Story to tell me,, and we should have been forc'd to be at the Expence of a, which would have ruin'd the Orphans to all Intents and Purposes.
Well well, Friend, tho the Town be not a fire, I am sure the Church is.
Nay then Friend, my Lord Mayor did very well to carry theaway from it, for that would have added Fewel to the Flames.
Prethee leave off thy fooling, and let's discourse the Point in good earnest; thou always pretendedst to be a true Church-of-England-man, and don't ye think that the Lord Mayor's going to a Conventicle with the Sword is an Injury to the Church of?
Why truly, whether thou believest it or not, I am as much for the Church ofas any Man alive, and for my part I think that my Lord Mayor's going to Meetings with the Sword is a very: for it seems to me, that by carrying the Sword thither, he designs to make a Conquest of 'em for the Church of.
Well, I see you love to banter: but you know that by going thither with the Sword, he makes a Surrender of the Church ofAuthority to a pitiful little Conventicle.
Why prethee Man, if the Sword be all, no matter if it had been burnt a dozen Years ago: Thou knowest very well, that in the late Blessed Reigns it was the peculiar Doctrine of the Pulpits, that the Church had no other Weapons but Prayers and Tears; and why dost make all this pother about a wooden Sword? Sure thou art not afraid it will produce as strange Effects as the old rusty Sword in, with which they say the Norman Duke conquer'd.
Thou talkst like a mad Man; it's not the very individual Sword that I mean, but it's the Badg and Ensign of Authority that is carried away fromthe Church to a nasty lowzy Conventicle: a Pox on 'em, damn 'em, I hope to see 'em fast in theyet once more before I die; and then we'll make 'em pay for their Insolence, and Contempt of the Church.
Prethee don't rage so: thou hast been so out of Humour ever sincewas necessitated to resign his new Conquests, and abjure King, that thou art fitter forthan any Place else. Come, I tell thee, that my Lord Mayor's carrying the Sword thither, neither adds to the Authority of the Meetings, nor derogates from the Authority of the Church of, but rather enlarges her Pale. But after all the doe and stir you make about the Church, I believe I may say to you as the little Boy said to his Mother,.
That's nothing to you: do you make out your Assertion, and then I'll say something to thee.
Have but Patience, and I will. Thou knowest that the Dissenters are allowed their Meetings by Act of Parliament, which I hope is another kind of Authority than my Lord Mayor's Sword; and most honest Men think it but reasonable they should have that Liberty, notwithstanding the threatning Words of the D--n ofWilliamHolland.
Prethee let your Stories alone, and come to the matter. I own that an Act of Parliament is a better Authority than my Lord Mayor's Sword.
Thou knowest also that that Liberty is allow'd them on conditionEngland.
I do.
Why then it's certain that my Lord Mayor could not go thither with nor without his Sword, if the Dissenters did not qualify themselves according to the Terms of the Act.
No, he could not.
Is it not plain then, that if my Lord Mayor's Sword signify any thing, it comes to defend the Doctrine of the Church ofat the Meeting as well as in the Church? And is not his Presence there with the Ensigns of Authority an Evidence that the Doctrine of our Church is preach'd there? whereas in former times the Meetings were look'd upon to be quite another thing than the Church of. So that I think it is plain to any Man's Understanding, that his being there is only a Declaration that the Pale of the Church is enlarg'd, and that we now own them for Brethren, that by the heat of some ill Men were formerly accounted our Enemies!
Nay but you mistake the Matter. The Meetings have only a Liberty, but ours is the Church establish'd by Law; their Meetings must not be accounted the Church, because they have neither Bishops, nor Ceremonies, nor Benefices.
Pretheedon't talk such Nonsense. The Meetings are as much establish'd by Law as the Church of, if an Act of Parliament be a Law: and you know that it's only the Acts of Parliament that defend you in the practice of those things wherein you differ from them. And our wiseLaw-givers finding the mischievous Consequence of having one Party of Protestants impower'd to destroy another that differed from them only in Circumstantials, as if they had been Hereticks, Schismaticks, and God knows what, thought fit to take those Edg-tools out of the hands of a set of Men that know not how to use them, but to the wrong of their Neighbours, and to throw the Nation into Convulsions; and have granted Liberty to cur Brethren to worship God in the very same Ordinances that we do, tho they don't observe all those Modes and Forms which by our selves are accounted indifferent.
How do you mean indifferent? Is it a thing indifferent to observe the Directions and Commands of the Church? that's fine Work indeed!
By Indifferent I mean a thing that may be done or left undone, and so the Law means; otherwise it would never have left me at my liberty to go to a Meeting where there are no Ceremonies, or to a Church where there are Ceremonies.
I am sure the Church is Apostolical, and enjoin'd those things upon her Members on pain of Excommunication, both as to Belief and Practice, if we may believe her Canons.
Thou art in a grand Mistake,. I grant you there was once such a Set of Men as arrogated to themselves the Name of the Church, that did so; but you know that the greatest Divines of the Church ofdid always account those things indifferent even in Queentime: Read but the Lord Bishop ofLetters, and you will there find plain Proofs of it, under the Hands of ourgreatest Bishops to the Divines in: and for what hath been done since, you know that it was a Court, and a Popish Faction that enjoin'd those things on such and such Penalties, merely to widen the Differences amongst Protestants, that they might swallow up both our Religion and Liberties; but the Church ofhath altered her Mind since.
How! the Church ofalter'd her Mind? What? d'ye make her akin to? as if her Religion depended upon the Moon, and were as changeable as she.
Prethee not so fast, I know what I say; the Church ofhath alter'd her Mind oftner than once; and no Disgrace to her neither. Protestants hold no Church nor Council Infallible; we have indeed an infallible Rule, the Scriptures, but so long as we are clogg'd with Humanity, we are either like to come short of it, or shoot beyond it; and in both these Cases must alter our Mind, or set our selves in opposition to the Almighty.
This is Fanatical Cant. When did the Church ofalter her Mind?
Nay, if you be so forgetful, I'll tell you:
Thou hast said a great deal to convince me; but pray let me see how the Church ofhath alter'd her Mind as to the Point of the Dissenters.
Why they have alter'd it in giving them their Liberty by a Law, whereas they formerly persecuted them.
How strangely do you talk? It was the Parliament that gave them the Liberty, and not theChurch; if she had done it, it must have been by Convocation.
Nay, you talk strangely, and not I. Is not all the People ofrepresented by the Parliament?
Who doubts that?
Is not the Church then represented in Parliament?
That's another thing: The Church is the Bishops and their Clergy.
Grant it be so:
Nay now thou speakest big,.
I have reason for what I say. It's the Parliament that hath settled the Limits of our Church, and given her all the Authority she has, otherwise 'tis a mere Bull to call her the Church by Law establish'd; and that same Authority may enlarge her Bounds and Pale when they please: and therefore to be so angry at the Parliament for taking in all those that embrace the Doctrine of the Church under the Protection of the Law, tho it has not admitted 'em to partake of the Benefits, is a horrid piece of Ingratitude to that August Assembly, who have all along defended the Church ofin the Possession of what she enjoys, more than her Brethren the Dissenters; and by this Liberty the Parliament have added to her Strength, by giving those a Legal Authority to defend her Doctrine without Wages, which so many of those that profess themselves to be her Sons, have either slily undermin'dor but faintly asserted, notwithstanding their Benefices. And you know,, that the Dissenters have been as stanch Patriots of their Country, and Defenders of our Religion and Liberties, as any Men in the Nation: and therefore it's the Interest of all Men that wish well to either of 'em, to promote a hearty Union amongst Protestants of all Denominations whatsoever. So that for my own part I can see no harm in my Lord Mayor's carrying the Sword to a Meeting as well as to a Church; it has heard Passive Obedience preach'd long enough, and it will do it no hurt to be taught the Doctrine of Self defence in its turn: for if the latter Doctrine had not been more serviceable to us than the former, we had neither had a Protestant Church nor Meeting House to have carried the Sword to long e're this.
Well, but for all that you can't but say it's an ill thing to carry the Sword thither.
Prethee in what sense is it ill? For my part I think the Sword ought to be carried thither rather than any where else; because to give the Dissenters their due, they always held that it was lawful to make use of the Sword in defence of their Religion and Liberties, as well against Tyrants at home, as from Invaders abroad; whereas many of our Churchmen would allow of no other Weapons against a Tyrant at home but Prayers and Tears: but to say the truth, and no more, that was only while the Tyrant impowered them to tyrannize over the Bodies, Consciences and Estates of their Fellow Christians and Subjects; for when he came to touch themselves, nay, as a famous Author hasit, they made use of Guns and Spears, instead of Prayers and Tears, against him; and, as the same Author says,.
Ay but a pox on't, tho we allow our selves to do so, yet we would not have the Dissenters use the Sword; ours is the Apostolical Church, and they are but Schismaticks.
That's easier said than proved; they hold the Doctrines of our Church, and live up to it as well, if not better than many of our selves: so that we must not call Men Schismaticks for differing from us in those things which we our selves account Indifferent. And as for the Sword, tho some Gentlemen have thought fit to endeavour the preventing its being carried to Meetings by an Order, I cannot think that the Act of Parliament did ever intend to make better Provision for our Swords than for our Souls, or for the Ensigns of Magistracy than for Magistrates themselves. If our Legislators had thought the going to Meetings would be either hurtful to the Bodies, Estates, Liberties, or Consciences of English Men, they would never have allow'd them at all; and if they had thought that the Nation would be any ways endangered by Magistrates going to Meetings, they would have made an Exception against it. So that for any Party of Men to take upon them to bind up any Person, especially a Magistrate of so great Power and Trust as the Lord Mayor of; where the Law has left him at liberty, seems to me to be a manifest Incroachmentupon the Legislative Power: and I wish with all my Heart there may not be more of Envy and particular Pique, (in such especially, that are angry to see the Lord Mayor have more Courage than some of his Predecessors) than of Zeal for the Church of, at the bottom of this Opposition: for my own part I know not why those Dissenters who have so cordially contributed to deliver us from Tyranny and Popery, should be suffered still to languish and groan under the Yoke of an Ecclesiastical Tyranny themselves, and be deprived of the Liberties and Privileges that other English Protestants enjoy. So farewelltill next Meeting.
I have not had such a rude Mercurial this
good while; I'll go to, and get a Glass of
Cordial Water, and then to the Commons, and recruit
my self over a Bottle, and muster up more Forces
against next Meeting. Farewel.<|endoftext|>What moody, musing, winding up thy Politicks? Come prethee what project on Foot now? For I know thou art a Man of Projects.
O my dear! why 'faith I'm just now going to your House at, that Famous Nursery of your Name and Family.
What to the Parliament House? Prethee what Business hast thou there?
Why, to tell you the Truth, I'm going to try what I can do in order to stem that Tide of Blood that runs with such a mighty Torrent from the Veins of my distressed dear Country-men.
What some Project of Peace on foot,? 'Tis so upon my Life, and the Grandhas made thee Mediator. Well, thou'rt a rare Fellow; a most excellent Undertaker. I see thou hast not thy Name for nothing, no more than I.
No 'faith, he has not employ'd me; nor am I going about his Business, but my own, and my Countries.
As what prethee?
Why look you, I intend to propose it to the House, the carrying on a vigorous War against, or carrying on the War againstwith vigour; take it which way you will.
A very pretty Proposal. Why this has been proposed, and resolved on, Seven years agon.
Why ay this is true; but you see, and we all see, that here is nothing come of it. Therefore I intend to undertake the Business my self, my dear: And first, I'll know of our wise Senate how many Millionsthey will give me to do it; and how many Years they are willing to allow me to humble this great and mighty Monarch of.
Well, and what then?
Why then, for Six Millionsand Seven Years to effect it, I'll undertake the Business.
What alone, and without an Army?
Ay, ay, alone; and without an Army. Give me but Money enough, and let me alone for Undertaking?
As how prethee?
Why thus, do you mark me? Look you, as soon as I have got the Money, away go I into, live great, spend the Money, no matter how; look on peaceably, and be a Witness of the King oftaking several of our strong Towns; and when theArmy have done the Business, they cut out for that Campaign, and are gon to their Winter Quarters, away come I home again; tell the Parliament what noble Feats I have done, ask them for another Six Millions, return toagain the next Season, and do just as I did before; and so go on till the Seven years are expired: And if this won't reduce, and save the Lives and Reputation of our braveBoys, the Devil is in't.
Ha, ha, ha, by my troth thou makest me laugh; a most incomparable Project! O rare Mr.! But thou'rt not in earnest sure?
Not in earnest? Yes, in good gerning earnest. Why pretheewhere is the Difficulty? Is there any Difficulty in my going into, and back again? Is there any Difficulty in my standing by, whilst thetake our Towns? Isthere any Difficulty in my asking the Parliament Money? And can there be any Difficulty in my taking the Money, when they frankly give it me? Where, in the Name of, then lies the Difficulty of carrying on my Project? Now, Mr., what occasion have you for laughing?
Ha, ha, ha; Oh I shall die; ha, ha, ha; Oh I shall kill my self with laughing. Why the Devil's in thee sure to talk at this rate.
Now can't I, for the Soul of me, understand where lies this merry Conceit; nor what in the Name of Fate it is that thou laughest at. I ask thee where's the Difficulty in my Undertaking, and thou fallest a Laughing.
Ha, ha, ha; why no, my noble, here's no great Difficulty in thy going into, and back again,But the Difficulty remains Man still of conquering. And the Difficulty is, That the Parliament should be such a Pack of Fools, and Asses, as to give thee such a Mass of Treasure as thou hast projected, to the impoverishing and sinking the Nation, to carry on a Project that has neither Head nor Tail; to carry on a vigorous War with, and here's no War commenced, nor like to be, according to thy Project.
Shaw, shaw, you talk like an Apothecary. Why is it not the same Thing for the Parliament to give me the Millions for looking on, and seeing our Towns taken, as to give it to aMan, who takes with him a mighty Army, and does no more with it than I do alone? Nay, don't I deserve it infinitely better? For do I hazard any one but my self, and that not much you see? Do I harrass a Hundred thousand Men off their Legs, one Year after another, to as little purpose as to set our Dogs to bark against the Moon? Do I let Men die like Dogs in Ditches, and starve them for want of Bread? Do I lead on an Army to Face the Enemy, cry holoo, set them on, and then run away, and leave them to be sacrificed? Where's the Wonderment then in giving me these mighty Sums, who am an honestMan, for doing alone better Service than theMan, and all his Army? Why don't I maintain the Honour and Reputation of our Country, and Country-men, infinitely better than he? For I'm resolvednever to put it to the hazard of a Battle, or being shamefully beaten, when I know we must be beaten so often as we fight. What think you, Mr., I think the Case is plain and clear: And yet if the Parliament gives me these formidable Sums presently, they are a Pack of Fools, and Asses. But to give it to thisMan, who has no more Right or Title to it than I have, they are a wise Senate. Prethee shew me the Wisdom for the one, and the Folly for the other, and now you had best laugh again.
By my Life I begin to think thou'rt in earnest indeed.
Why have I not Reason to be so? I don't see but the Project may take. I have as much Money as he 'tis true, but still I save the Men. And if the Parliament is so prodigal of their Countries Money, as to throw it away to no purpose, may it not as well, nay better, be given to an honestMan, as well as to aMan? Besides, I could find ways to spend the Money at home, and so let it circulate, and not impoverish the Nation. And is not this better than theMan's sending it abroad to be circumcised, and so sent home to us again to set us all together by th'Ears?
Come, prethee leave off this Boffoonery, and be serious. What, in the Name of, should make thee imagine that the Parliament should give thee such vast Sums of Money for no Service; only for looking on, and seeing theconquer, and take our Towns?
And what, in the Name of, should make thee approve of their actually giving it to aMan, for the very same Non-service?
Prethee has not thisMan (as thou callest him) a formidable Army at his Command, to oppose the Growth and Greatness of the Power of, to hinder them from making any further Progress in their Conquests, and to carry on the War with vigour against them?
Ay, ay,; and let the Nation Squeek and Groan on; so long as we Laugh, the Care is taken. Prethee who may they thank for their Squeeking and Groaning but themselves? Was not almost the whole Nation mad for aKing, and a War with? And now they have them, they are sick of them; but so long as we the Representatives are Gainers by it; so long as theStadtholder is kind tous, and feeds us plentifully with Money, let them be sick, and dye, and be damn'd; we matter it not, for we are resolved to give him Money still. Look you,, you know one good Turn deserves another: And so long as our K.is kind to us, why should not we be kind to him? Especially when we can do it at so cheap a Rate, as the picking one Pocket to fill another: 'Tis but robbingto pay: And so long as theKing feeds usMen with goodGold, he shall never want it old Boy.
O most incomparable Patriots!Men,Devils rather, Pick pockets, Betrayers of your Country, Hang-men of your Fellow Subjects and Country-men, the Peoples Scourge and Plague; have we entrusted you with our All to do us Justice, and to redress our Grievances, and ye make it your Business to undo us, to rob us, to enslave us? Ye have already beggar'd the Nation; and what is the Consequence of Beggary but Slavery? And thus ye go on in your Villany, and laugh at us. 'Tis but robbing, ye cry, to pay: But whenhas no more Money, how, in the Devil's Name, will ye pay? And 'tis almost come to that already. But I suppose whenhas no more Money, he is to be stript, sold, and sent a Slave to, or some of thePlantations, to make room for them to Lord it here. Ye Crocadiles! Ye brood of Vipers! O if it was but Lawful, with what pleasure I could curse ye! O! unhappy! betray'd by thy own Children! What is there never anthat has the Courage to run through the Streets of, and cry out to the People, We are betray'd? No trueMan that dare stand up for Liberty and Property?
Why how now,, thou'rt Angry.
I think thou art a rare Fellow at Projects: But this wont do by any means. This will never take in the House; for what shall we get by it?
Get by it, what do you mean? If we don't get, at least we shall save.
As what prethee?
Why we shall save many a sound Drubbing, we shall save our Bones whole in our Skins, we shall save spilling our Blood, we shall save Three Millions of Money yearly; and I think this saving is a kind of getting.
Poh; all this is nothing, thou mistakest me. I say, what shall we the Representatives in Parliament get? What is it to us who Loseth, so long as we are Gainers? For 'tis not the Nations Business that we are concerned for now, but our own proper Interest. Will theKing bribe us, as does K.? Will he make us his Pentioners, and will he be more generous to us than K.?
He will upon my Life; provided ye prove as great Rogues to King, as ye did to his Father. Betray him as ye did his Father, kick him out of the Kingdom, and thenswear he has abdicated, and then vote your selves all Kings: And I'm sure all honest thinking Men will believe ye as good Kings as theStadtholder. Do this, I say, and the King ofwill give ye any Thing: Nay, I dare engage ye Three Millionsshall all be at your Service.
Why 'faith,, set this Project on foot, and I fancy it may take. Make us but sure of larger Bribes from theKing, and I'll engage for my Brother Rogues he shall have the Money. Why prethee Self-interest is our God, and Religion: And as we have for this betray'd our King and Country; where is the Difficulty, for a greater Interest, of playing the same Trick over again, and leaving the Prince ofin the Lurch, and becoming Friends to? Look you,, that you may not doubt of Success in this Affair; be assured 'tis our Principle, to sacrifice Father, Brother, King, any Thing for Interest.
Dear, I'm satisfied it is so. Well, I'll to the House, and propose the Project there; you assure me it will take? And then for, and the Business is done. But hark you,, you'll make your Interest in the House, and I will secure you out of the Three Millions: Let me see, -- Let me see, -- Five hundred Guineas for a Bribe. Be sure you lay before your Brother Rogues a Mass of Money, a Million at least of the Three shall be distributed amongst them, as a yearly Pention, to encourage them in their Roguery, and make them a Pack of thorough paced Villains; for those you know are the Men of Honour, the Men of Worship, in little.
Fear not,; if thou canst manage the Project right with Grand, and secure us the Money, the Business will most assuredly be done:
Fear not, it shall be done.
But stay, now I think on't, what art thou,, to get by this Project, in case it succeed? We you know are to give out of the Peoples Money Three Millionsthat theKing will be quiet, and keep within his Lines; and for this doing, the great Monarch is to give us the Representatives in Parliament, One Million back again. Good: This is just as we do with the Prince ofHe puts the Question,Will we pick the Pockets of our Fellow Subjects every Year, and give him out of them Six Millionsto carry on a vigorous War with? And our Answer was, Give us 500000for every such Sum, and the Business shall be done, as you see effectually it is. Now ifwill be contented with half the Sum, and redouble upon us whatgave us, I see no difficulty in the Business: For this way we shall get more, and oppress the People less. But then what will my honestget by the Project?
The Honour to do my Country Service, the Reputation of a true honestMan, and Lover of his Country, nothing else. And this I value more than all your sordid Gold, that ye have unjustly and barbarously squeezed from the Sweat and Blood of your Country.
Why then, my true honestMan, farewel:
And may'st thou grow fat with Honour and Honesty, whilst
we Knaves wallow in Gold, and rowl in Plenty. And so I
leave thee to think and wish for better Times: Ha, ha, ha.<|endoftext|>How nowhow comes this kindness betwixt thee andthe Barge-man? last time I saw you together at, you were for heaving Stones at one anothers heads.
O, that's long since, and utterly forgot; we are now good Friends.
God-a-mercy Horse, this Roguewas tugging up Stream whilst his Oars were ready to break at, and seeing us come up with three good Horses Towing our Punt, his Stomach came down, and he begg'd most devoutly to give him a Tow to; not a word of the Bell-Wether, or any of his usual Complements. I took mercy on the poor Rogue, and let him fasten his Wherry to us, and I think in my heart the Whelp has eaten us half a Stone of Beef to day.
Upon the honest word of a Waterman,I never eat daintier Beef in my Life, nor better Mustard, but not one mouthful of Mutton was to be seen.
Sirrah, one word more of Mutton and off you go; you cannot forbear your Roguery.
But pray thee,whither art thou making at this Time of the year?
Why, faith, thou knowest I follow the Court for the most part, and now I am going before it, and intend to get a goodat: Acquaintance is a main matter with a Waterman: besides, here's honestpromises me Lodging at his House; and when he goes for, his Wife and I canmake as merry as if he were gone anVoyage.
But, I hope, there will be another Voyage found out, they say the King will make us a way West-ward tofor our Barges, and has sent forthat can make Boats go by Land as well as by Water, and thenwill be. The saucy Rogues t'other day atwere ready to Brain us, and threatned to fire the Barges, because we belonged to. If the King would take my Counsel, he should come no more amongst them for one seven years, I would make the proud Rogues know themselves better.
I am not for that,neither, for that would quite spoyl our Ferry: when all's doneis.
And will be, that is, a Nest of unthankful Rogues that hate us Country Gentlemen, tho' they get all they have by us: What wouldbe worth, if it were not for the Country? And faith, since all the wealth of the Country is gotten thither by the Kings living so long amongst them, I hope His Majesty will even now live in the Country till their Money be brought into the Country again.
I could agree well enough to all thou say'st, but only for this, and that would quite be ruin'd if the King should leave.
For that, if thecome, they will dig so many Cuts to make therun from our Town to, I warrant thee, thou may'st get a New, and better than this, upon some of those New Cuts.
But do'st think the King will keep his Court atany long time? I heard our Parson say, for all this the Parliament would not be held at, because there was a Parliament once held there, and it was called the mad Parliament.
Thou may'st tell the Parson from me, that there has been many Parliaments held at, that have been worse than mad; and it's well if this last was not the madest that ever was yet.
I must confess there was a strange Touse whilst they were Sitting: Our Townsmen ofwould have talked so of the brave Acts they were a making, and what good they would have done to the Commonalty, and how they would have handled the Courtiers, and abundance more than I can remember. Thouwouldst have admired, but to say Truth, this Town of, though they be our Neighbours, is as Roguish a place as any is in. If I were worth to advise the King, I would make a great Wall betwixt the Castle and the Town, that should reach down to the River on the one side, and down toon the other side, and never a Gate through it, but for the Kings conveniency to go a Hunting into the great Park, or the Duke into the Forrest, and shut at all other times. Then would I build a New Town to entertain the Kings Court, should reach to the.
Still, still thisis the Burden of the Song,
But pretheetell us what this Parliament would have done for the good of the Commonalty that is talked on so much; thou carriedst Parliament men in thy Boat every day, and I know thou hast heard all their Speeches; I have heard them make Speeches as they have pass'd over here at our Ferry Boat.
Thou art in the right of that, for there is not one Member (for so we call them at) of forty, but they are still making Speeches: I heard one of them make a Speech to Deaf, an old Sculler, fromto the.nodded at him now and then, and he went on as Policitly as if he had been in the House all the while. When they landed at the, where I also landed my Fair, he bidgive him three pence, but wanting Change, he asked me for three pence, but I having ne're a three pence, sayes the Member to, I see thou art a right English man, a good Protestant, and, I dare say, hates the Popish Successor with all thy heart, and therefore I will give thee the whole Six pence.
'Twas well he had the Wit to Nod at him, being a could not hear him.
So it was, and that was enough, for I dare say, a Nod now and then, would have continued the Speech to. O, our Water-men have thousands such Stories as these of their Worships, they were for the most part so full of it, they could not hold it in.
But pretheetell us what thou heard'st they did in the House as well as out.
Well, in the first place they kept aat theon the back of thea long time before they sate.
A! what's that?
Why, as the Players Rehearse or Act over the Play in the Morning, which they intend to Play in the Afternoon: So, did they make their Speeches, and set all their Matters in order in the Tavern, before they met in the House.
Methinks, if it were needful for a Parliament to have such a Rehearsing, his Majesty should provide them a place to rehearse in: It is not very handsome in my mind, that the matters which concern his Majesty and the Kingdom should be medled with in a Tavern.
It's very true: but the Master of the House, he got well by them; and the Drawers of that House are become notable Boyes, they can talk of State Affairs, it would do your Heart good to hear them: and for any thing that I know, when these Boyes come to set up for themselves, and keep Taverns in the City, they may be the fittest men they will have to serve in Parliament: they will now, as young as they are, make fine Speeches to their fellow Prentices, when any Rout of them meets together, and have their Lessons full ready on any occasion; and will.
A Pox on 'em, 'tis such work as this that makes the King leave, and will undo us all at: But this is all still out of the House.
It is impossible I should tell you a tenth part of what they did in the House: but the remembrance of Men and Things they fell upon will put me in mind best; and therefore the first I think on, is the Kings Majesty, God bless him, him they cryed.
What, asof our Town cryed his Wife?
I don't know what he did, but they Voted that no body should either Borrow or Lend, nor Sell or Buy with him under pain of their Displeasure.
This is almost as ill as the Parson said of the, that the Pope would have done with Queen, for he forbade any Body to Borrow or Lend with her, Sellor Buy, Eat or Drink; Nay, he forbid her to come in either Church or Market.
But then to make him amends, they took care to kill him an Old Lean Lord at; and that's all I remember they have done for him since they met.
What did they then do?
Next they took the Duke into handling.
And what would they do with him?
They would have taken away his, whatever he had done to them I know not, but they were resolv'd to have worried him.
What was it provoked them so much against him?
They said he was a, and was for the Pope and the Plot; but the Truth on't is, I think the true Reason of their Cruelty was, because he put his Brother in mind who were, and had been Rogues, and were sure to prove so in the end: and for this they would never forgive him; and with talking with one another, they were got to that pass, they matter'd not what they said; for they were permitted so long, they thought no body durst gainsay them.
Why, I thought no man living durst have medled with any of the Blood Royal.
Thou art a Fool, did not they behead the last King, and kept this banished a long time? and all that was still a House of Commons.
What would they have done with the Duke thinkest thou?
Hang'd him if they could have catch't him, but being he was out of their reach, have taken away all his means, and all he was ever like to have, if (which God forbid) he should have surviv'd the King.
They were very bold.
Thou may'st swear that; when the Fore-man of OldShop, a blind Scrivener was so bold as to speak a saucy Speech against his Highness.
What was he, a Prentice?
No, he was out of his Time, and had set up for himself.
Why, I thought no such Hand-crafts men had ever been chosen Members.
Any body that has money to pay for Drink, Gentle or Simple that will spend his Guinneys upon some Town in theis good enough: for I'le tell thee, as I heard SquireHuntsman say, that he cared not for above three or four Couple of Hunting Dogs amongst twenty Couple, so they would give their Tongues and go along with those that were Hunters; no more do they in the Parliament care whether the greatest part of their Members have any Wit, or none at all, so that they will Vote with the Old ones.
Well, though it was sore against my will, I was Press'd once into the Service when the Duke was our Ambral, and I dare swear never a man in the Fleet had a better Heart than he.
Pox on you Rogue, you staid but one Bout and run away; but we that staid and were in both theWars, know the Duke well enough; and let them do what they will at, I am sure all the Seamen and Watermen inwill be for him against any Body but the King, God bless him.
And I am sure he'll never be a Rebel, as many of those that are his Enemies have been.
Rebel! they would like him better if he would stand in the Kings Face and do what he pleased, whether the King pleased or not; do'st not see how they lovefor coming home whether the King would or no.
Well, I hope to see the Duke at, and there he will be welcome, I dare say, letand the Devil say what they will.
For, surely it is notthat does all these ill things you talk of.
Thou art in the right of that, for I never heard that the Houses met together to Petition or raise Tumults, there's no fault in the place; 'tis some roguish People that lives in it, whom nothing vvill ever make better Subjects than they have been: I have knovvn them long enough.
But prethee, go on vvith thy Story.
Novv I think on't, I should have told you, that I am novv going to say, first of all, that is, vvhat they vvould havedone about the Church; for I have heard the Church should take place of both the King and the Duke.
Ay, but not of the Law, for I know a Wise man as any in, an Attorney, that says, That the Law was above both Church and King.
Why then, according to that Rule, I should first have begun with the Law.
No matter, amongst us we are not so punctual, go on, now thy hand is in, with the Church.
As for the Church, I carried a Member up to, and he told me, they had resolv'd to Overhall all the Nine and Thirtyof the Church, and that they had already heaved away Three and a half of them.
Belike, if they had gone on, they would have hove away most of them; Three and a half in one day was a great step.
No, I do'nt believe they would have hove them all away, but they would quite have new moulded them so, that one should scarce have known them. Ha'nt I seen an old Ship that has been a long time at Sea, when she has been in the Dock, her Rigging Overhall'd and Tarr'd, new Painted, Carved and Guilt, a man that has sayled in her, could scarce have known her.
Thou art in the right of that, and I do believe that the Church was grown very old and much decay'd, and had need of repairing, and it will never be done but by a Parliament. I was atlast Saboath-day, and there at the Meeting the Minister said, That the best Church in the World should be repaired once in a hundred years; and that the Church we now have, was repaired (but he had another Word for it) about a Hundred and Forty or Fifty years since.
Was it not? the Scholars attalk much of that.
Ay, Ay, it was, that he said; and that the Church (but more especially the Church-men) should be Reform'd.
Besides, this Member told me, the Parsons must use theno more.
That was only for the good of the. I carried a Clothier over the Ferry not long since, that said they werehereafter to wearSurplices, and the Bishops were to wear white, in stead of Lawn Sleeves.
And then for the Bishops Courts, that as we call the Bawdy-Court, they would have mauled those Rogues to some purpose.
A Pox on 'em, they made me pay above five Pounds about a Bastard, a Whore laid to me, that a Scholar ofgot, I dare say; for I kept reckning, and the Child was got when I was gone down with the Barge to; and for want of a Flash, we lay above ten Weeks before we came again.
It seems thou diserved'st for it however.
That which troubled me most, was, that I must have done Penance in a White Sheet, and then my Wife and all my Friends would have known it; and so saith, I was forced to borrow the Moneys, and make my Peace with them: And after all, they would have had Ten Shillings more for a piece of Parchment no bigger than my Hand: I was e'en glad to pay them a Noble get clear of them.
As far as I could understand, they would have taken these Courts away, and have made the Bishops poor Gentlemen: They would have clipt their Wings, if not quite slaved them. O this Member, as we passed by, shaked his Head at it, and said, There were Raggs of Popery kept there; and so did he at, when I landed him at.
What did he mean by that?
Why, the Arch-Bishop oflives at, and the Bishop ofhath a Countrey-House at.
Well, butThou said'st, they would also have had a Fling at the Law.
For any thing of the Law it self, I heard not so much of it; but they were in hand, to have reckoned with almost all thein, some for one Fault, and some for others.
What had the Judges done?
Whether they had strained a Pin, to do something extraordinary for the King and the Court, I know not; but the main matter was, that most of the Talkative Men of the House,were Lawyers, and the only way for them to get Preferment, was by turning out of the, that they might get into their Places.
I think in my very Conscience, these Lawyers are the Bain of the Kingdom: For they are so accustomed to talk against their Consciences for Moneys, at, that when they come to talk in the House, it is the same thing: So that whatever they think for their Advantage, they never want broad Consciences, nor smooth Tongues, to drive on to the utmost.
Pray theetell me one thing, are not these Lawyers the Men, that either doe, or should understand the Law?
No doubt of it.
Well then, when the Rebellion was begun, and carried on in our King's Father's Time, and in his own, did not the Lawyers know, that the War was contrary to the Law?
Certainly they did.
Then do I say, That as many Lawyers as Sided with the Rebells in those days, deserve yet to be Hanged for what they did then.
O! but they were wise enough for that: For they got the Act of Oblivion, to pardon, not only their Faults by-passed, but those that were to come; and abundance of those very Men that talked the People into that Rebellion, are yet living, and as willing to do Mischief, as ever they were.
It goes beyond my Understanding, how, and why they are admitted to abuse the People at this rate: For if they can set poor ignorant Men on a Mischief, for which they may be Hanged, and can talk themselves off again, it is time for poor men to have a Care.
I am of this mind, that had I been the King's Advisar, when he forgave all the Rebells, I would not have forgiven one Lawyer; for they could not plead Ignorance.
And that it was a Rebellion is clear: For if it had not been, what need was there of an Act of?
Thou art in the Right of that too.
Nothing troubles me so much, as that these Lawyers, are not only Lawyers to follow and maintain the Law; butthey can make what they will to be Law, and what they like not to be no Law: Nay, they will hang the Honestest man in, and find Law for it; and save the greatest Knave, and find Law for that too.
Did not Judgepronounce Sentence against, andplead against him? And both these were great Lawyers: Nay, an a bungling Lawyer, that is a Justice of the Peace, at the Quarter Sessions, will take upon him to talk more than all the Bench, and be very angry at any Justice that dares oppose any thing he says.
There is reason for that: For there is not one Lawyer of twenty, but is certainly bribed (tho' they call it feed) of one Party in all Controversies, at the Sessions, and frequently by both. O they make great Gains at a Sessions; for there they are bothand. and all goes as they will.
I'll tell thee, for that I had a wrangling Quarrel once with a Drunken Fellow at the Ferry; and upon some Words, I up with the Boat-hook, and broke his Head. He went and fetched a Warrant for me: I was advised to go my self to the same Justice, being a, and bind my self over: Which I did, and would have given his Worship an Angel; for so my Friend advised me: He said, he would take no Moneys upon that Account: For indeed, it seemed, he had taken before from my Adversary; but he said, if I would give any thing to his Wife, I might: Upon which, I sent a fat Wether, worth a Mark, in the Night time to her Worship; and within two days, both he and I were sent for, before Mr. Justice; and after he had talked a great deal of Law, and seemed angry with us both, he made us good friends, and got both our Moneys.
There may a thousand Stories be told of them: I hope at one time, both the King and the Kingdom will see what they are, and never let them have more to do, than with matters of Law; and then those that employ them may take the mends in their own Hands, as I do, when I go to the Alehouse: for all mischief principally comes from them.
A Pox and Plague light on 'em, they will never be quelled: For they have always either one or other great Lawyer in Power with the King, and that keeps them up: So let ustalk no more of them. What did the Parliament next fall upon, honestthou hast a pure Memory?
They would have banished a plain bundance of Courtiers and Privy-Counsellors; and without any more ado, sent to the King to desire him (they called it Humbly) to turn them out of his Service.
But did they tell any good Cause, why they would have him turn them away?
None at all, but because they liked them not.
That was an humble Trick indeed; but sure they had some Reason for what they did.
For no reason, but because they were in Favor with the King, and themselves would have their Places: Nay, there be some of those men they complained of, were as ready to complain of those were in place before, such as the last Treasurer, and the like, as these are now against those they would have now turned off: for in all this Parliament, Doings, and Peaching one another, it is not for Faults done against the King, or the Government, but against the House of Commons.
But I hope these Noble Men are not turned out of their Services, are they?
No, they have scaped this Bout; how they will do at the next at, time will shew.
If they scaped at, I'll warrant them at, no man is Condemned there, but he has (as the Scholars call it)andfor it: But vvas that all their Faults, that they vvere in Favor vvith His Majesty?
God help thee, do'st not thou knovv, that it is a sufficientParliament-Crime to be a Favorite. I have heard my Father say, that he wore the Old Duke ofCloth, and was Master of his Barge; and that there was one Parliament before I was born, would have hanged him; but the Devil a Fault could they find, but his being in mighty Favor. So the King would not let him suffer.
But they put away my Lord, I can remember, that my self, and they say, because they could find no Law to condemn him, they made a Law.
So then, he suffered for breaking a Law before it was made.
So he did.
That is as much as to say, that if the Parliament have mind to hang a Man, or undo him, if they have not sufficient Law or Matter to do it, they will make some: God bless me and mine out of their Clutches.
But I have heard, they were so Civil, as when they made this Law against the Earl of, they then made it so, that no more should suffer by the same Law.
That was very kindly done to him indeed: I would rather, if I had been in his Cloaths, they would have saved me, and hanged who they would beside.
This shews plainly they had a particular Malice; and then down a must go, right or wrong: There are some of those Old Dogs yet alive that hunted him to Death, and would as willingly give their Mouth for making away more Noblemen.
I have heard many say, the King repented himself at, that he consented to the Earl's Death.
But those Rogues that procured his Death, never repented at all, nor does not do yet: Nay, they have tought some young Whelps to be as good Blood-Hounds as themselves. A Man has a brave time that should come to be tryed for his Life in any Court, and have half a dozen of these to chase him out of the World.
'Tis strange the Noble-men does not stand for one another against those Lawyers, who, if they might have their Wills, would hang them all: Especially, being there is no body of the Jury, when the Lords are to be tryed, but Lords.
They had such a Power when my Lordwas Headed, that neither the King, nor the Lords, durst stand against them: They made Routs of Prentices to run down to, and call out for Justice, and threaten all those Lords that would have saved him; and in the end they had his Blood.
I have heard many say, that there were very few of those many that prosecuted the Earl; but they were after Ring-leaders in the Rebellion against the King, and continued so to his Death,as violent against him, as they were against the Earl, and against our King that now is (God bless him) till the Souldiers and Seamen joyned withto bring him in again.
And yet I'll warrant thee, these were as ready to welcome Home his Majesty, and make shew of their Duty and Affection to him, as his best Friends.
Ay, and pretended they had as much a Hand in his Restoration, as the General that brought him in; and talked themselves, not only out of the Faults they had committed; but by Bribery, and means of some Lawyers, that had been Abroad with the King, they got suddainly into such Favor, that a Round-Headed Lawyer had more Power than a Cavalier Colonel that fought for the King all through the War: And so they have carried it ever since: And now thou may'st see what they have brought it unto, at long run: For nothing but the Ruine and Death of a great Number of the King's Courtiers and Counsellors will please them.
They will not stay there if they have leave to go on: The Old Game must be play'd over again; but I hope the King's calling them at our Town of, will mend this matter: For I have heard hundreds say, that if his Father had called theParliament thither, instead of, there had not been so much Mischief done as there was: But pray theewas this all they did?
This, no, not the hundred part: For any one Man's Fault or Suspicion, that he was against them, they would have ruin'd a whole Countrey. There was aNoble-man, I know not his Name, that they had a Spite to, that was Steward of a greatin; and out of Malice to him, they would have taken that Court away, tho' it was a great Benefit to all that Quarter of the Country: Nay, there was one day a Member, so angry at a Waterman, for asking an unusual Fare, for bringing him from some place, in the, that he said, he would have a Bill brought into the House, for his sake, to restrain the Numbers of Watermen; and that all the Wherries that go upon the River, should be forced to take a Licence, and should be Figured on the Back-Board, as the Hackney Coaches are. Upon which, the Waterman civilly reply'd,That, he hoped that being a Freeman of, they could never make him take a Licence: with that the Member said, Sirra, for your sake, and such sawcy Rogues as you are, we will have thatpulled down, as well as vve have pulled dovvn the Court of theof: That vvas the Court I vvas talking of.
I hope thou heard'st them say nothing of theBargesdid'st thou?
No, Hang you, you are belovv their Consideration; but they talked much about Seamen, and the Fleet, and against Souldiers: And then for the Papists, they vvould have utterly destroyed them; and no great matter if they had; for those Rogues have been the occasion of all this Poder, has been even since the Beginning of these Times: And they say, they Fired the City, and brought the Plague out of, and set it amongst us at.
How should that be? For vvhen the Visitation began at, I heard of no Plague in.
But I heard a Doctor, one of the Royal Society, say, as I carried him once, There be Rogues that vvill bring Bottles of Infected Air vvith them, if it were out of, that as soon as they are opened, vvill infect a whole House; then they take an Antilop, that no Infection can touch themselves: And that some Papists did this, I have heard a Justice in the City took Examinations upon it, and it was proved.
But what would they have done against the, and: The Scholars at, say, those are as great Enemies to the Church and the University as the Papists.
They would have made them as good Protestants as any is in.
Which way must this have been?
Why, they would have made the Church-men have left out some of their Prayers, and given over the Surplice, and some other Popish Tricks; and then they would have come to Church, and been all one.
That is, the Church-men must have become, and then all would have been right.
Indeed, I think they would not have yielded much to the Bishops: For they were bloody mad at them; and I think if they had sitten till now, they would have sent them to the Church from the House, to pray to God; but not to have letten them prate any more to the House of Lords.
It will be good for them to talk no such Talk at, the Bishops are in great Power amongst the Scholars.
Then as to their own Members, they turned them out, and took others in at their will and pleasure; and if they made any Fault, they expelled them; and wherever any stood in Competition for any Town, him they knew, would give his Vote along with them was admitted, right or wrong: And then they terrified all the Sherriffs, Mayors and Bailiffs in the Kingdom, besides abundance of Gentlemen, and other honest Country-men: For on the least Complaint of any Man's misdemeanor, or Information from any Member, immediately a Serjeant at Arms was sent for them, and so much a Mile, and Hour paid, and down on their Mary-bones to their Worships, and a sound Scolding from Mr. Speaker; or else to the Tower, or the Gate-House they went: The King, God bless him, never took a quarter of that State on him they did.
It seems they would have all the World to ask them Forgiveness, whether they made them any Fault or not; and they themselves would ask no body Pardon for what they had done.
It was brought to that pass, that two Foot-boys, Boxing one day in the Palace Yard, he that was beaten, proved to belong to a Member, and told the other Boy, if he knew his Master, he would cause him to be sent for in Custody, for keeping such a Rogue as he was, that had committed a Breach of Priviledge, in beating a Member's Servant. The Boy replied, if it would do him any Kindness, he would beat him again, and tell him his Master's Name into the Bargain; and would lay him a Crown, that tho' his Master should bid the Speaker, and all the House of Commons kiss his -- they durst not send a Serjeant at Arms for him. The beaten Boy much netled at his Speech, laid down his money, as the other did. Now, said the Boy, my Master is the King of, and I am comeover with some of his Servants, to fetch Horses out of: Go bid thy Master, and the House of Commons send a Serjeant at Arms to fetch him over.
Before my Heart, is was a good Answer: I hope he won his Moneys.
So he did; but it was put into a Waterman's Hands, and when it was demanded, says the Beaten Boy, Sirrah, give it him if you dare, if his Master be the King of, I'll make you answer it before the House of Commons. The Waterman durst do no other but give either their own Moneys: There is no contending with Parliament Men, or Parliament Men's Men, nor Boys.
And yet I know a Bayliff has nabbed several of them, and matters not a Straw to arreast any Member of the last Parliament.
That's nothing, they are now no Parliament-men; but let's see if that Stout Fellow dare nabb any of them when they are new chosen.
That I don't know.
O those that are in any danger of Bayliffs, are mighty cunning at their Times, and know their Hits to a Minute; they appear abroad ata certain Number of days before the Sitting of the House, as sure as Swallows against warm Weather; and after the Sessions they are, not one to be seen: except it be that we chance to carry them by Water from the Temple or, to; they have a strong Garrison in either of those Places out of Priviledge time, as they call it.
Well, but pray theelet us have it all out what they did.
It is impossible as I told thee, For me to tell a quarter what they did; they stopped, andCattel from coming to the City, and Pork, Mutton, Veal and Lamb, from any of those Places; and it was said, if they had sate long enough, they would have stopped, and.
And yet the City still doats upon these Parliaments.
Nay, they would have made such Laws about wearing of Cloth, and Woollen Stuffs, as would have beggared anhundred thousand Souls that are Silk-Weavers, Silk-Dyers, and such like.
What matter they, if they can but find a way to make Acts, to set their Grounds dearer, and rack their poor Tenants, they care not if half of the Kingdom starve.
And yet they talk so much for the General Good, and against the absolute Power of the King and the Court, how can they make this out?
They call that Power which they themselves both do act by, and would govern all by, the Liberty of the Subject, tho' no Subject, but a few Members have any Liberty at all: But if his Majesty, God bless him, should act by the same Power, and do the same things which they do; then they call the very same Power flat down-right Tyranny.
Do'st not thee remember,one day the last Summer, when our Barge lay againstStairs, there was a great Noise about the Head Bayliff of, breaking into an Embassenders House, to seize upon some Goods which belonged to a Man was condemned to be Hanged at; and upon Complaint of the Embassender to the King, the said Bailiff was taken and clapt into the Tower; and every body said, he would be hanged at the least, for breaking the Common Law of all Nations: But the next News we heard, was, that he had got some sort of a Warrant, was made by the Long Parliament, that set him at Liberty within three Hours after he was committed.
I remember the time very well, they call those Warrants, and they will fetch a Prisoner committed by the King, out of any Goal in; but not one Committed by the House of Commons: And this they call Priviledge of Parliament.
All these Gentlemen that were fetched up by Messengers and Serjeants, they might by the Common Law have chosen whether they would have come or not. There was a Knight in our County at, that was sent for by a Messenger, and he told the Messenger, he had something else to do, and would not come, and said he would justifie it.
Surely this was just about the time they were Dissolv'd, otherwise he durst not have been so bold.
He said he had been a Member himself many Years, and knew no Law to compell any Man to come before the House of Commons, unless they had a mind themselves; and therefore they sent to the King, to get his Majesty's Proclamation, to fetch him before them.
So then His Majesty's Proclamation, issued out at the desire of the Commons, is of Force; but when sent out by himself is worth nothing at all.
Why so?
Because I remember there were several sent for in Custody, for obeying the King's Proclamation against Petitions, and brought to their Knees: If therefore that had been a good Proclamation, why should any body have suffer'd for it? And for any thing I know, if his Majesty should have made a Proclamation to fetch up that Knight, or any body disobeyed their Messenger, it had deserved as much to have been disobeyed as that about Petitions, unless the House of Commons can make a Proclamation, contrary to Law, a good one, as this would have been: For, what need had they of the King's Proclamation, if there had been Law to have fetched those men before them.
Now if those Men were fetched up, did dare to sue, and the Lawyers did dare to do their Office, and the Judges did dare to give Judgment, I am of Opinion they might bring Actions of false Imprisonment against the Messengers that fetched them up: For if they had not full Power to punish those who did not obey them, then surely those who were fetched had wrong done them.
But I dare assure thee, neither Lawyer nor Judge dare meddle with any such matter: If any of these Gentlemen would be so ventersome, they will find no Law to stand against the Votes of the Commons, till they find they are as much brought under, as they saybrought them; they durst not prate in his Days, as now they do.
What did he do?
I have heard a Fellow of, say, he tumbled them, and made them do what he would himself, and not what they had a mind to; and not a word of Tyranny or Arbitrary Power.
But pray theesome more of their Doings.
I have told thee it is without end; and therefore I will tell thee the last thing they did, which was, they Voted, that if any man advised his Majesty to Prorogue them upon any Account but to disinherit the Duke, he was an Enemy to the King and Kingdom: Nay, he was a Pensioner to theKing.
What, whether he ever received any Money from theKing or not?
Ay, though he never received Penny of Mony from him, or any body else by his means or order.
For any thing I know, they might as well have said, that he had been my Lord Mayor's Bull-rider: I have often heard say, that a Parliament can make a Man into a Woman; and now I see, they can make a man into a Pensioner oftho' he be none.
What then was done?
That very day, notwithstanding all this, they were Prorogued.
Then surely, they will say, either they were Prorogued by the Advice of some Body, who, for that Advice, are Pensioners; or if his Majesty Prorogued them on his ovvn Head, then they vvill think, tho' they dare not say, that he himself is a Pensioner.
And vvithin fevv days after they vvere Dissolved, and ather order'd to be called at your Tovvn of.
Well, for all thatParson said, There vvas a Parliament called at, that vvas called the mad Parliament, yet vvill I be hang'd, if ever that vvas half so mad as this thou hast told us of: For according to thy Tale, this Parliament let nothing 'scape them; to his Majesty they vvould have given nothing, nor let any body lend him any thing; but vvould get from him vvhat they could: From the Duke they vvould have taken his Birth-right; the Church and Religion they vvould have cast in nevv Mould; the Bishops and Clerks, they vvould have nevv-fashioned, if not utterly laid aside, banished many of the Nobles, taught the Judges ofnevv Lavvs, and made them pay for practising the Old, terrified most of the Loyal Gentry of the Kingdom, vvith Serjeants, Messengers, andExpensive Journeys, the same with Mayors, Sheriffs and Bayliffs, Fault or no Fault, taken away Courts and Priviledges from several Shires, to their great harm, to revenge themselves of particular men; not only hinder'dCattel, and other Provisions, from the City, but Beggar'd many thousands of Families of Silk-Weavers, and other poor Handicrafts-men.
Nay, these very Men were got to that Height, they would have abused any Body they met with, Gentle or Simple, not paid a Farthing for crossing the Ferry, but said, they werein Parliament-time, as their Masters Letters were at the Post-house.
Was not this then as mad a Parliament, as that Parliament they talk on at our Town? If this next prove a madder than the last, if it sit at our Town, I'll give any man leave to hang me at the Mast of my Barge.
For all this, I believe they will not sit at: for they say, a many Noblemen have Petitioned the King's Majesty against it.
And I can tell thee, his Majesty said, they should Sit atfor all that.
Pray thee, who were these Noblemen that Petitioned?
I cannot tell thee who they were by their Names; but he that was the Rump's first General delivered it.
He! thou art a Foolhe is dead at least thirty years since: I remember I have seen him, as if he had been alive, in a Buff Coat, amongst the Tombs at.
Well, I am sure he bears the same Name, and probably it may be his Son; for this man follows that man's Steps: Then there was him that was General of the Horse to the Rump, that I am sure is the very Man himself, and another Lord that sate in the Rump House of Commons, with a Blew Garter about him, a thing was never done before.
That cannot be, I remember that Lord my self, he is dead, I am confident.
It may be then it was his Son; there was besides another, whose Father some say Beheaded the King; but if he did not, 'tis certain he was in Disguise on the Scaffold: And then he that setthem on all this, as it is talked, is a little, lame, purblind Lord, that has been a Man in all the Times ever since the first Rebellion, and still turned time enough to save himself, though others were Hanged for the same Fact: He now sets them upon all the Mischiefs done, and if he live to it, will leave them in the Lurch.
That's Old usual with him, and yet he's no better than those that stood it out to the last, and deserved Hemp many a fair Year since.
He'll come to it yet; for all his Cunning, the Devil will cozen him at last: All the rest were Covenanters, or their Sons, except one or two disguised Lords.
I hope his Majesty will remember what these men did with his Father, and not be advised by any such.
Well, when all this is said, I am still of Opinionis the fittest place in the Kingdom for a Parliament; for there every Body finds their Conveniency: His Majesty his House at, the Nobles their own Houses, the Members convenientAccommodation of Lodging, and every Body their Ease.
I question whether too much Conveniency for Parliaments be not hurtful to Business: For when they are less commodiously served, they will mind their Business the better, and make more haste with their Work, that they may get so much sooner home: Not but that I know, they may have all Conveniencies at our Town, and sufficient Accommodation for all the Followers of a Parliament that are requisite to attend it.
The plain truth is, there are now-a-days abundance of People do follow Parliaments, over what there used to be in former Times, as I have heard People say: And thishas such New Buildings, that it lodges them all conveniently, if they were five times as many.
Thou art in the right of itthat there does more People follow the Parliaments a late time, than formerly, that is, the Scoundrel Rabble of, who are ready, and have been this Forty Years to back any Seditious Petition; and to come down toand, like a Land-flood in our River, that threatens all the Countrey: These encouraged by Discontented Members, when they cannot get the Lords to joyn intheirmalitious Acts, threaten no less now, than they did to his Majesty's Father, God bless him: And I think it no great loss if these Gentlemen be left at Home to mind their Trades at.
But the Scholars of, are thought, by many, will be as unmannerly as the Prentices in.
I'll tell theeif the Parliament will behave themselves as they ought, to the King's Majesty, and the Royal Line, and offer no Injury to the Church, Bishops, Clergy, University, nor Scholars, and give the King his reasonable Requests, I'll warrant thee, the Scholars will be as civil as can be; but by my Faith, if they find either the Church, or themselves touched upon, it will be a hard matter to rule them: They are like Seamen, one and all.
Still I am for Old, thou knowest the King has borrowed many Hundred Thousand Pounds of the City and theCompany, and never needed to want Moneys for a fair word to the City.
It's very true; but he always paid double Interest for what he had of them: So that it was a greater Courtesie to the City, to lend it, than to the King to have the Loan. But now that Business is over, they will lend no more Money, but upon Parliament-Security: Had they continued to have been the same City they were in 1660, and some Years after, I believ the King would never have removed the Parliament to; but since they now are become that City they were in 1640. I think the King does wiser to remove the Parliament to, that True, Loyal City, where every man loves the Name of the King, and that shewed so much Fidelity to his Father: Then let the Parliament and the Factious City ofsend him toas they did his Father.
Then let us all go to, and pray for the good Success of this Parliament.
How does all our Friends at the Court at? 'Tis strange,thou shouldst come again so soon!
Thou knowest, I told thee, I mostly follow the Court; and 'faith, at this time, he had been a cunning man that had gone before it; his Majesty gave not so good warning of his Return to, as he did of his going to.
But what saysnow to his mad Parliament? I hope he has no reason to complain of this Parliament.
But the Town ofwill have reason to complain while they live: But the best on't is, somewill have Houses to set in, at as good Rates as they took them: Had his Majesty made a Cocking, or a Hunting-Match at, he had done it a better Turn, than to have brought such Guests as these were.
I heard some say, they were so mad they were called from, that they resolved to do something at, should make them be suddainly sent away again; and so bilk the Town of their Expectation.
They say the Town much matter'd not the Court, and the Mayor, and the Aldermen of, were as much against it as the Common Council is at.
O, that is because the University is so much for the King, God Bless him, and his Houshold: For this is a certain Rule, if the University be for the Court, the Town will be for the Country, as they call it: Nay, if the University be for Jesus Christ, the Town holds themselves obliged in Conscience to be for the Devil.
But stillthis does not answer what thou said'st of this Parliament, which thou would'st a warrant would do such brave things, if they sate at.
I must confess I was mistaken, as my Father was before me: For he took once aBoy to be his Prentice; and tho' he knew him to be a little light-finger'd, and given to Lying and Swearing, yet he hoped if he could get him to, he could cure him; and took infinite Care and Pains about him, and daily told him what would be the end of him, if he would not lay aside hisTricks, and become a down-right, honestBargeman; but all in vain, what was bred in the Bone, would never out of the Flesh: He fell by little and little, to down-right Thieving, and Hang'd he was in the End; and as my Father afterwards learned, the Rogue's Father and Grand-father, and many of his Kindred had been Thieves before him.
What's all this to the Purpose, what have either we or the Parliament to do with thy Father or his Thievish Prentice? He was not the first Bargeman by a hundred, that have been Hang'd.
Well saidhere's a precious Story indeed, and nothing to the Purpose.
You don't know the meaning, I perceive, of a Parable, or an; when ye have taught these Shavers at, with your Rehearsals, and at, with their Votes, Resolves and Stories, to nose their Master, and abuse their Fellows, then you send 'em down to, to be cured of the R-- When 'tis too late they are no more be reclaimed than a Sheep-Worrier; nor will any thing cure them, but that which cured my Father's Prentice: Now there's the precious Story you talked of so much. And yet for all this, you cannot dash us in the Teeth with anyActs of Parliament: Had their Noses been kept to the Grindle-stone as close at, as it was at, they would not have been so high in the In-step. I was sure, if they sate at, they must either make good Acts, or none at all.
A will have it one way or other; theseRogues learn to wrangle of the Boys, and will never yield Right or Wrong.
Well, but for all his Bragging, there was that done at this Parliament at, was never done at.
Pray thee what was that?
There was as near a Lye, not to be the down-right Lye, given to the King, as Heart could think.
How so man?
I'll tell thee, for Example sake, If I should say, it is an unwarrantable thing for any man to pull downgreat Park Pail, and ride through toMarket, if thou sayest this is a warrantable Trick, tho' all the World knew the contrary, do'st not thee come very near to give me the Lye, what thinkest thou by this?
Surely he that did this, had his Breeding at, or at.
But if he had a foul Tongue, he had a good pair of Heels, for he gave Ground a Hundred miles, in a very few Hours.
That was but to be out of the way while the thing was hot, it will quickly be forgot I'll warrant thee, once in a short time, I shall see this very man come in his Coach to, with a Quoif on, if not a Red Gown. Such mannerly Behavior as this, has been an only way to Preferment.
But I think he better deserves to go upin a Wooden Chariot, and have a Horse Night-Cap put on at the farther end.
These kind of People do no more matter what they say, than a Dog does that has stolen a joint of meat from the Cook: they only run away for a while, and when they think all's quiet and forgotten, then they come again with as much Confidence, as if they had never done no mischief at all.
The reason of this is, because they never light of the Whip for their Roguery, and so scaping Scot-free, makes them so bold.
Ay, Ay, let a man suffer a Prentice to prate and talk, and the next, he gives you two words for one; and then, if you offer to correct him, have at your Ears, Blackof, that was an honest, good Fellow, as ever took an Oar by the end, suffered his Prentice so long, that when he would have corrected him, it was too late; and being a lusty young Rogue, he threw him o're Board into the; and had not I come by, by chance, he had been drown'd.
Nay, nothing madded me so much, as that the House of Commons praised this Fellow, and order'd him Thanks for his Complement he made.
O bravestill; for at, they always used to have so much good manners, as to give his Majesty Thanks for his Speech, whether it pleased them or not; and now they thank a man that gives him the Lye.
But pray, my Masters, what did they do that little time they sate; or, at least-wise what would they have done?
I'll tell thee, thou sayest, the Parson told thee of a Parliament once at, was called the; I think this may be called theandParliament: They were in hand to make such a King of the Duke, if he should have Survived his Brother, as thou never heard'st of in thy life.
A King, why, theKing, that they keep a Close Prisoner, in an Old Castle, at the Rock of, is anEmperor in Comparison of that they would have made him: A must have had the Name of a King, but none of the Power; nor have lived in any of his Dominions, or within 500 Miles. Would not this have been a brave King?
Pray thee tell me, what have they to do with?
With? O, they make a good Title to: ForConquer'd it for the, and these being theHeir's, they thinkbelongs to them as well as: For as sure as thou stands there, they keep the Commonwealth's Title a Foot in their minds, though they dare not publickly own it.
How should that be?
I'll tell thee, if I have a Crown in my Pocket, and thou hast a mind to have it from me, there is but three ways to get it, either by Slight of Hand, to pick it from me, or by words, to persuade me out of it, or take it from me by Strong Hand. Now the first and last not being so convenient nor easy: if thou canst use Words to make me give it thee, is not that the best way?
No doubt of itthen Words have prevailed a great way, and will possibly be attempted farther; but if those will not do, thou knowst what follows next: Besides, it is apparent, they aimed now to make a Push for a Commonwealth: For they affronted the King in the first place, as I have told you; then in the next place, they Voted the Lords Denial to Try, was a Denial of Justice, and Hinderance of Discovering of the Popish Plot, and twenty Stories more they called it; which was as much as to say, they were not fit to sit in that House: For if they were unjust in their Doings, and countenanced the Popish Plot, what worse could have been said of them? And if this had taken, at the next Vote they had been useless, and then welcome theagain; they would only have wanted him that was Headed at Tower hill Twenty Years ago, what did you call him?
I believe thou meanest Sir.
Ay, Ay, that was he, if he had been alive to have joyned with the Purblind Lord, and the Colonell with Cut Fingers, and a few more, all had been right.
Pray theewhat would they have done with this, what is that Fellow?
'Faith, I think no Body knows what he is; but I take him to be a Cross-Biter; but if he chance to be Hanged, as he is like to be, it is doubtful he will be Cross-bitten himself.
Why the Parliament were Bloody mad at him, and would needs have Hanged him themselves.
Othou knowest not Parliament-Craft, the next way Home, sometimes is the farthest about: If they could have gotten the Lords to have received the Impeachment against him, they would have kept him alive, and played more Tricks than thou can imagine; they would have made him Bowl off and on, as thou doest at Nine pins; and made his Evidence good and right in what they had a mind; and errand Lyes in what they liked not: And he has been as far from Hanging by their means, as the Lords in the Tower; only they would possibly have found Law to have Bailed him; which could not be foundfor the Treasurer, whom they know they have no power to Hang, unless they do with him, as with the Old Earl of.
But for all their Cunning he may yet come to be Hanged; and if he be, stand clear, I believe there will be Stories told, some will not be willing to hear.
Before my Heart, you two are gotten very cunning at State Affairs, I believe you did nothing but listen and hearken after News.
If the Parliament had sate at our Town a Twelvemonth, I would not have wrought in my Barge an Hour; but if ever Parliament deserved a By-Name, this littleone, deserved that I have given it, both for medling with what they did so simply, and medling with those People and Places out of their Power.
Well, but now this Parliament is Dissolved, all this is over, and now they have power to Vote, nor Act, nor nothing; neither and I hope we shall have Quietness, and the Court at.
It's true, they are unroosted from their Publick Sitting Places, both atand; but the Men that shape out all the Work are not idle; that will appear e're long in theof, and from other places where they have Power to set Mischief on Foot.
I remember Gafferof, had a Dozen Men and Boys that laboured his Barge; and to his Cost, he found they were all plotted together to Rob, Steal, and do him any Mischief they could: Nay, would almost tell him to his Face, they would have what they list: He was a Quiet, Honest Man, and loved not Trouble, and hoped, in vain, for Amendment a long time; but at last, he took a Resolution, and turned them all off at once, and got a New Floor full, that knew nothing of the Roguery of the other Crew; and then all things went well with him.
He was in the Right of that: For if he had left any of the Old ones in the Barge, they would have corrupted all the rest.
Do'st not think, there are some Oldhas done a great hurt amongst the Members?
I am for a New Floor full, or none at all; there's no Hopes of any Good fromOld Crew.
Gafferhad a special Care, not only to keep his New men from companying with the Old Ones atand at; but also, that they should not come and Rob him by Strong Hand.
They durst hardly do that; for then it had come to: However it was Wisdom in him to have an Eye to them: For they met often together, to consult which way to be revenged of him; and however he knew the Laws of the Land would protect him, vvhich must protect every Body.
I pray, and give him 
Povver to put
his Lavvs in Execution; and then, I think, none but his 
Enemies vvill have occasion to repine; and let the Disbanded 
Reformadoes do what they dare.<|endoftext|>Ha Neighbour, and where are you going in all this haste, if a Man may be so bold as to ask you the question?
Yes, it is possible, for as yet I know not.
Be quick then, for I have but a little while to stay.
VVhy, are you going to Market then, pray what de'y design to buy that you fear to come too late?
But pray where is it to be sold?
VVell, but all the News now is about, who as 'tis said on theofwas Tryed at the, for the Highest of Treason that witty Mischief could invent.
'Tis but just he should, and condemned too, nay, after that Drawn, Hanged and Quartered, who dare attempt the Deposing and Murthering of his sacred Majesty, who is the Breath of our Nostrils, as a worthy Judge wasonce pleased to say upon the Bench; and not only his, but to destroy all our lives and Liberties, by raising Rebellion and bring in aPower, thereby to enslave us to the Tyranny of the.
Proved, yes, under his own Hand, and by several witness of candid Reputations, who swore it positively.
By Libelling the King, to render him odious to his subjects, by Charging him with such things as no good Man can express without horror and detestation; by endeavouring to set all in a Flame, or Combustion of Civil VVar, which should be Carryed on under the name of the, so that the Father should have been against the Son, and the Son against the Father, to have sheath'd their swords in each others bowels, till all had been weakned and ruin'd, when as theArmy was to be raised here, and the powers ofwas to have broken in upon us, and so to have born down all before them.
Yes, this had been our case had this Instrument ofand Hell set on and mannaged by the art and cunning of the Jesuitick Policies succeeded.
VVhy, he haveing some small acquaintance with one Mr., being the Gentleman that was kept so long in the Tower, he came about theoflast to his Chamber, and there falling into discourse with him about several matters, began to commiserate him for the hard usage he had suffered, since his adhearing to the Protestant Intrest, telling, him if he would forsake it, and cleave to the Popish Party, he should not onely meet with great Rewards, but likewise be put into places of trust.
Yes, he seemed so to do, but it was onely to find what he would be at, for he knew him to be a great Villain.
VVhy then he began to open his mind, and proposed to him the Indicting of so venomous and Treasonable a Libell, that I think no Age e're heard the like, as for me, my hair stood an end when I heard it read in Court.
Nay, it contained what I will not presume to repeat; nor can I liken it to any thing, unless the Box whichsent to, full fraught with Plagues and dire destruction.
VVhy the honest Gentleman, for so I may well call him for detecting so horrid a Villany, disclosed the business to several worthy persons.
No I'le warrant ye, but gave the more countenance to proceed, and promised to take his Instructions for drawing up the Papers, and Appointed him a time to come for them, when as he had placed a Gentleman to over-hear the discourse that passed betwixt them.
Yes, he did, and uttered many Treasonable words, promising the Gentleman that he should have four Guinnys from theEmbassadors Confessor, and that he should be entred a Pensioner to theKing, and have several Thousand Crowns.
Not at all, for he boggled at it, saying it was a Treasonable Design, and that he knew not what to think on't; Think on't (said) why the more Treason the better, am not I deeper concerned in it then you? have not you my hand for it, and is there not many great Persons concerned in it, or words to this effect.
VVhy several Thousands Coppies were to have been dispersed amongst the People in Penny-Post Letters, and many put into Gentlemens pockets, and they apprehended with them about 'um, so that it could not chuse but blow up aflame of horrid mischief, for all the Kings good subjects were to have been brought into the Plot, and to be taxed for endeavouring to raise Rebellion and Insurrection, so that the Popes Agents thought themselves Cock-sure of prevailing against us, this being their last, but most dangerous shift, and shew'd it self to be the very Spawn of the Jesuits, but Heaven that has hitherto blasted their Designs, prevented it, and broke the Cockatrices Egg e're it could be hatched.
It was, and much more then I can remember; but stay, I had forgot one passage that was very material, which was, That one of the Gentlemen that gave Evidence against him (whose known Fidelity renders him of unspotted Reputation) because he would not be mistaken, marked the Papers that Mr.brought to him, and whilst he looked through a Crevice, he sawmake several alterations, crossing out some and putting in other some, and after he was departed, found those Papers to be the same he had set his private Mark upon, and that at the takeing them up, the Ink was wet.
No, but some days after, and carrying him before a Magistrate, he confess'd a Treasonable Paper to be his own hand-writing.
Truly little or nothing to the purpose, for he rather strove to Justifie what he had done, then any ways to deny or detest against such wicked designs, insisting that he had been Impeached by the Commons, and that his cause lay before them.
No, nor could he, for the Court before had over-ruled that Plea, and all the Judges ofgiven their opinions, it was in the power of the Court to Try him.
Yes, several, and many of them persons of Quality.
Why truly very little or nothingthat would avoid his Cause, for it was so foul that no good Subject could any ways countenance it, but rather their Evidence tended to his prejudice.
Why, to prove that he had been with them from the King about business of importance.
Yes, they agreed that he had been with them, but they did no ways believe his Majesty sent him.
No, no, he called several to testifie that he had received Moneys by his Majesties Order, the which he would have put an evil Construction on.
Well, but how came he off at last?
And do you think they believed him?
Why then they went out, and staying near an hour, they returned, and gave in their Verdict, That he was Guilty of the High Treason for which he stood Indicted; which Verdict was accordingly taken and Recorded: the Court telling them they had found a very good Verdict.
Yes, and gave such a Hura as made the Hall ring again.
Why he was found Guilty of High Treason.
For the most part in, and the Evidence Sworn against him in Court, was to this purpose, That he held Correspondence with theKing, and that he was to deliver up certain Towns upon the Sea-Coast to the, that they might Land an Army: and farther, that in order to the leavying War in that Kingdom, he had made several Collections of monies, and that he had endeavour'd to compass the Death of His Majesty, and enslave that Kingdom to, and the Insulting Tyranny of thePower.
Yes, and much more, even by his own Country-men.
Why truly little or nothing, forTreason is always attended with a guilty Conscience, only he objected against the Insufficiency of the Witnesses, alledging he stood Convicted upon record.
No, but being asked why he had not done it, his answer was, That he had not time nor opportunity enough to procure them.
Yes, one or two, I think, but their Evidence was not any thing material for his advantage.
No, but only endeavour'd to degrade some of the Kings Evidence, but could give no grounds for what they said, it being altogether groundless.
It's true, he might have done
it; nay, he said he did, but that they
being for the most part Priests, they durst
not come over without His Majesties
special<|endoftext|>Welcome, my dear! I have long'd to see you.
Sweet! I have had no less impatience for your dear Company. Lord! how you're alter'd, methinks you seem more beautiful than ever: A very Angel!
Fie,, do you begin to abuse me thus already?
No, I vow; you appear such in my eye, really.
Perhaps my new Mantua adds to my little Beauty: You like the Fashion then? 'Tis the newest Stuff.
As I live, I never saw any thing more pretty; sure 'tis all Spanish Wool.
Yes, yes, the Wool is Spanish, but it was Dyed at.
There is no Silk can wear neater -- And what a delicate Colour! -- For Heaven's sake, from whence had you this Noble Present?
From whence,? From whom should a Vertuous Wife receive it but from her Husband?
Oh happy you, who have such a Husband! wou'd I had Married a Cobler when I met with my Bargain.
How now, Friend! do you repent already?
How is it possible I shou'd do otherwise? do you see these Rags, and how I am dizen'd? Thus it goes with my Husband's Wife. Let me dye, if I am not ashamed to appear in Publick, when I perceive how genteel other Women go, whose Husbands are much inferior to mine both for Quality and Estate.
The true Ornament of Wifes does not consist in Apparel, or Dress, as we are taught by St., (for I heard this ofMr.lately in a Sermon) but in chast and modest Behaviour, and in the imbellishments of the Mind. Let the tawdry Misses of the Times seek, by their gay Dress, to attract the admiration of many Eyes; we, that are Marry'd, ought to esteem our selves fine enough if we please our Husbands only.
But, in the mean time, my good Man, tho' he be so very penurious to his Wife, is other ways sufficiently profuse in wasting that fair Estate which I brought him.
In what?
In those Debauchees which are most pleasing to his wicked nature, Wine, Dice, and Whores.
Oh! good words.
'Tis even so,: And when, at length, after a tedious expectation on my part, he comes home between One and Two in the Morning, Drunk asSow, he lyes by me the rest of the Night snorting like a Bear. Sometimes he Vomits in the Bed; not to say more.
Hold, hold, you have said too much already; and I must tell you, you disparage your self in disparaging your Husband.
As I hope to breath, I had as good have a Broom staff to my Bedfellow as such a Man.
And do not you Scold when he comes home thus?
Ay, and reason good, I think; he finds I want no Tongue.
And what does he?
Why, at first, he answer'd me again in the same manner, thinking, I suppose, to Silence me with high Words and Rhodomontades.
And did all this stir never end in blows?
Once we were both so well heated, that we were just ready to fall to't.
What do I hear!
He flourish'd his Cane, and huff'd after a very tearing rate.
Did not you fear?
Not at all: I snatch'd up a Buffet-Stool for my defence, and had he touch'd me with one finger, he shou'd have found I wanted not hands.
A pretty kind of New-fashion Shield, had you had but your Distaff instead of a Launce --
He shou'd have found me a very Amazon.
Alas, alas, my, this is not the way.
What way wou'd you have me take with him? If he respects me not as a Wife, neither will I respect him as a Husband.
But St.Teaches, That Wives ought to be subject to their Husbands with all reverence: And St.proposes to our imitation the Example of, who call'd her Husband Lord.
I know all this; and besides that, the samecommands, That Husbands love their Wives, as Christ loved his Church. Let him remember his Duty, and I will not forget mine.
But where Affairs are in that posture that both cannot Rule, 'tis fit that the Wife yield to the Husband.
But how can he be call'd a Husband, who regards me only as a Servant?
But tell me,, did he then forbear striking?
Yes, he forbore; and he did wisely, otherwise he had been soundly beaten.
But you, I warrant, did not forbear Scolding.
You may swear it.
What did he in the mean time?
Sometime he seem'd to sleep Dogs-sleep, sometimes he wou'd laugh and neglect me; then he wou'd take up an old rotten Lute, on which there was hardly left three whole strings, yet he wou'd Fum, fum, on that damn'd Instrument, only to drown my noise.
This enraged you.
So far, that I can hardly express my Passion; much ado had I to hold my hands.
My dear, will you permit me to speak freely to you?
Most willingly.
You shall have the same liberty with me. And thus much seems due to our old friendship, which was first contracted, as I may say, in our very Cradle.
True,; nor is there any of my Acquaintance more dear to me than your self.
You must know then, that whatsoever your Husband proves, there is no means of changing. Of Old, indeed, there was a thing in use, for a Remedy in this case, call'd a Divorce; but Authority hath Abrogated that Custom. There is now no Remedy, but that you must be his, and he yours, during Life.
Our Superiors did ill to remove that good Law of Separation.
Oh, forbear such expressions, it was Christ's Will and Pleasure.
I cannot think it.
'Tis so; there remains therefore nothing now, but that both Parties endeavour a mutual Peace and Concord, and that they strive which shall conform most to each others Humour and Inclination.
But may not I endeavour to make and mold him as I see fitting?
I know not what you call making and molding; but of this I am confident, that most Husbands, how bad so ever they are, owe much of the occasion to their Wives.
It seems all goes well between you and yours.
The very heighth of Peace and Quiet.
But was it always in the same calm from the beginning?
We never had what I may call a Storm! 'Tis true, some little Clouds (such as are natural to all Mankind) might, perhaps, sometimes gather, and seem to threaten foul Weather, unless prevented by discretion. Every Man hath his peculiar humour and fancy: And in truth,, every Woman hath her peculiar Deserts; which things ought always, especially in Matrimony, to be known and observed, but not hated.
You are in the right.
It happens frequently, that Affection decays between Husband and Wife before they sufficiently know one another: Have a care therefore in the beginning, for Conjugal Love being once shatter'd, is hardly ever well united again, especially where there have been bitter Reproaches between them; where things are but new glued together they are easily disjointed, but if you let them fix till the Glue be well dried, they become as strong as if all of a piece. Nothing therefore ought to be omitted between the new Marry'd in the beginning, that so their actual kindness may the better fix and settle; and this ought chiefly to be sought by obsequious and complacent Endearments, for that Affection which depends only on Beauty is seldom lasting.
But tell me, I beseech you, by what unknown Arts have you wrought over your Husband to so much Complacency.
I will tell you, that you may use the same method.
If I am able.
There is no difficulty, if you are but willing, neither is it too late, you are both young enough; and if I am rightly inform'd, it is less than a Year since ye were Marry'd.
'Tis very true.
I will tell you therefore, but you must mind me.
Most attentively.
My principal Care was to appear to my Husband always in a good humour, that so I might give him no occasion of disquiet; I observ'd his Affections and Inclinations; I observ'd proper times, and methods, by which he was most apt to be appeas'd, or offended; just as those do who reclaim your Elephants, and Lions, and such like Creatures, which are not to be overcome with force.
Even such a Beast have I at home to deal with.
Men appear not before Elephants in White, nor before Bulls in Red, in regard these Colours have been observed to exasperate those Creatures, just as the sound of a Timbrel or Drum is said to enrage the Tiger, so far as that he will tear his own Flesh for madness. So those that manage Horses, they speak them fair, theysmack their Mouths, they stroke them, and clap their Necks; and by such means, they become as gentle as a Lamb. How much rather ought we to observe these Arts towards our Husbands, to whose constant Society, both at Bed and Board, we are fatally obliged for our whole Life?
Go on.
These things premised; I conform'd my self to him, shunning all occasions of offence.
As how?
First, in the Affairs of the Family, (which is indeed the pecular Province of a Wife) I not only took care that nothing should be wanting, but that all things might be to his humour, even in the most criminal Matters.
Name some.
For Example: Suppose he loves this or that Dish more than other, or his Diet thus or thus order'd, or his Bed made or furnish'd after this or that manner.
But how could you behave your self to such a Husband who is never at home, unless Drunk?
Permit me and I'll tell you. If my Husband appear out of humour, I observe the time; I neither laugh nor jest, as isthe indiscreet Custom of some Wives, but put on a Countenance suitable to his, very serious and grave. A good Glass represents her Face exactly who looks in it, so shou'd a good Wife that of her Husband, when affected either with Joy or Sorrow; when he is sad, she ought not to appear pleased, or laugh when he laments. When he is angry, she ought either to sweeten him with soft Language, or in Silence submit to his Passion, till she find a more proper opportunity either to vindicate her self, or to admonish him. Thus did I, if at any time my Husband came home in Drink; I used no Language but what was pleasant, and forced him to Bed with all the little Tricks of Love and Fondness.
Unhappy is the condition of us Wives, if we must thus submit to all the Extravagancies of Cholerick and Drunken Husbands.
As if the Sufferance were not Mutual: Come, come,, Wives have many faults which Husbands are compell'd to bear with; yet there's a time, when, in a serious manner, a Wife may Lawfully advise her Husband, if the occasion be of weight, but if it be about a Trifle, she ought not to contest it.
Well, proceed.
Thus, when she finds his Mind at liberty, neither Troubled, nor Pensive, nor Drunk, then is the time, in private, and with obliging Language, to advise, or rather intreat him, that in this or that particular he wou'd more consider his Estate, Health, or Reputation. Yet, as I said, this Admonition must be deliver'd in a pleasant and obliging manner, or else it will do more harm than silence. I have used sometimes to make a long Apology by way of Preface, that he wou'd not be offended, if I, Silly Woman as I am, think my self concern'd for his Honour, Health, or good Condition. At other times, when in few words I had advis'd him of such things as I thought convenient, I have immediately, of my own accord, broke off the Discourse, and found out a more pleasing Subject. It is almost a general fault in our Sex, my, that when we have once begun to speak of any thing, we can never tell when to give over.
Men say so.
But, above all things, I give you this Caution, That you never contest with your Husband before Company, and that you never complain abroad of what's done at home; the Breach that happens betweentwo without Witness, is not hard to be composed, but in case any thing shou'd happen of such nature, that the Wife can neither endure with patience, nor prevent by all her intreaties, Civility requires that she complains to the Parents or Relations of her Husband, rather than to her own, and that in such a modest temper of Language, that it may appear she is only displeas'd at her Husbands Vice, and not his Person. Nor wou'd I have her discover all for by this means her very Husband will candidly acknowledge, and love her Civility.
The Wife that can do this,, must be a perfect Philosopher, a very Stoick in her Passions.
By such Behaviour, we win our Husbands to the like Civility and Complaisance for us.
But there are some Men whom no good Offices can oblige.
I am not of your Opinion. But suppose there be, consider thus: Your Husband, be he what he will, yet he is your Husband, and you are tyed to him for Life; it is therefore much more tolerable to endure his humour, such as it is, or by fair means to render it something more easie, than by ill Language to makehim worse. What say you, if I produce Examples of some Husbands who have used this method in reclaiming their Wives? How much more convenient is it then, for us to observe towards our Husbands?
You will produce an Instance of a quite different Nature from my Husband.
There is a Gentleman of my Acquaintance, one of singular Learning, and very accomplish'd Parts, who not many years since marry'd a handsom young Girl of about Sixteen years of Age: She had been constantly Educated at home in the Country, where you know the Gentry delight most to abide for the conveniency of Hunting or Hawking. He had always desired a Wife of that condition, Untaught and Innocent, that so he might with less difficulty form her to his own humour. They were no sooner Marry'd, but he began to Instruct her in Grammar, Musick, and such like Arts, that might be of future advantage. These things were new to her, who having been bred at Ease, and unacquainted with all Conversation or Divertisements, but what she had been used to among her Fathers Servants, found her self quickly tired with her Husband's Documents. She began to be stubborn, and when he urged her to her Duty, she wou'dweep bitterly, and take on in such an extravagant manner, that sometimes she wou'd cast her self on the ground, as impatient of Life. When her Husband saw there was no end of this unreasonable Behaviour, dissembling however his disgust, he invites her to accompany him to her Fathers in the Country, for the Divertisements of a Summers Journey. This motion was very grateful to her; being arriv'd there, he Rides out one Morning to Hunt with the Father, leaving his Wife at Home with her Mother and Sisters. Being in the Field, he draws the Father from the other Company, and complaining, tells him, That he hoped to have found in his Daughter no small Comfort and Ease to the remaining part of his Life, but that he had found her, much against his expectation, continually in Tears, always Discontented and discontenting him, and Deaf to his Advice; he desires him therefore, to use his Authority toward the Reformation of her untractable Humour. The Father replies, That he had given up his Daughter wholly to his Government, and that if he found his Words ineffectual, he shou'd use what other means he pleased, and reduce her by force. I know my Power, and what I may do, says the Son-in-Law, butI am unwilling to use such extremity to one that I love so tenderly as I do your Daughter; I desire rather that she should understand her Duty from your Perswasions, and the Authority of a Parent. Within two or three days after this, the Father finds his Daughter alone, and, with many frowns, begins with reminding her how, that she having so little Beauty of either Mind or Body to recommend her, that he often had dispair'd of ever getting her a Husband; that having now procured her such an Invidious Match, and made her happy with much Industry, yet she, not considering what he had done for her, nor the value of such a Husband, who, had he not been of a wonderful good Nature, would hardly have received her into the number of his Servants; and she to Rebel thus! In short, he seem'd so moved, that he hardly forbore striking: For you must know, this Father was a Man of such a ready Wit, and such quick Parts, that he would Personate any Character or Passion as he pleas'd. The Daughter hereupon, partly overcome with Fear, and partly with a true sence of her own Guilt, casts her self at her Fathers Knees, begs his Pardon for the past, and assures him of her future Duty; on those Conditions he Pardons, and Promises his Affection.
Well, but how was this perform'd?
The Girl being parted from her Father, returns to her Husbands Chamber, where finding him alone, she falls at his feet, with these expressions:. At these words the Husband rais'd her with a Kiss, and promis'd mighty Matters on her amendment.
And did she alter her Behaviour?
Never was any Woman more humble all the following part of her Life; there was nothing her Husband cou'd desire, but she flew to obey him with the greatest alacrity imaginable: So great, and so intire, was their Affection from that time. Within a few years after this, she freely acknowledged her self infinitely Happy in such a Husband; and that without him, she had been the most wretched of Women.
Such Husbands as this, are as rare as Black Swans or White Crows.
I'll tell you now another passage, which happen'd but lately in this City -- But I fear you are tir'd with this Subject.
Oh, not at all: Your Discourse, my dear, can never tire the Hearer.
Away, away, you Railly -- There is a Person of no mean Quality, but he shall be Nameless, who being much addicted to Hunting, as most are of his condition, met accidentally, one day, with a Country Girl of Exquisite Beauty, which, by the Poverty of her Mother, was not at all diminish'd. The Jolly Hunter fell desperately in love at the first sight, he frequented those Parts continually on the account of this Passion, tho' his pretence was Hunting. His Wife, a Lady of singular Virtue and Discretion, suspecting something, without much difficulty found out the Intrigue. She takes occasion to see the House, she views their Beds, tasts their Drink, enquires into their Diet, and finds nothing of Furniture, nothing of Conveniency, but all signs of a miserable Penury and Want. She returns home, and the next day brings with her an excellent Silk Quilt, a Treat of Sweet-Meats, Drinking-Plate, and Silver Dishes; these she left at the Country Cottage, with some Money, requesting the Old Woman, that whenever the Gentleman came, she should Treat him with more Ceremony, dissembling her self, in the mean time, to be his Sister, andnot his Wife. Some few days after this, the Husband gives his Country Mistress a Stoln Visit; he is amazed to see the Poor Hovel furnish'd after so unusual a manner, and so many rich Moveables in every Corner. He inquires the surprizing Cause, and is told, That a certain Lady of Quality, a Relation of his, but whose Name they knew not, had sent them all in, with Orders to Treat him after a more Honourable fashion than formerly. He begins to suspect his Wife had a hand in this, and at his return questions her upon the Point; she confesses all. He demands further, How she came to be so wondrous kind to Accommodate that House with such Furniture? My Dear, says she, you having been always used to Splendid and Noble Entertainments, and I finding how poorly you were received there, I thought it my Duty to take Care, that when you are minded to make those Visits, they might be able to give you a Reception more suitable to your Quality.
Oh! Miracle of a good Wife! Had I been concern'd, instead of a Quilt I would have brought him a Truss of Thorns and Briers to lye on.
Hear the conclusion: The Husband discovering, by this Action, such asweet and obliging Nature in his Wife, did, of himself, forbear all his old Debauchery, and became the most faithful Husband imaginable. -- I presume you know Sir.
Very well.
He, as you know, being in the prime flourish of his Youth, Marry'd a Wife of declining Years.
You mean he Marry'd a good Estate, not a Wife.
Let it be so then. Soon after the Marriage, he began to be weary of his Wife, and fell desperately in love with a young Beauty of the Town, at whose Lodgings he frequented continually, rarely either Eating or Sleeping at Home. What wou'd you have done in this case?
I wou'd have drag'd her by the Hair about the Streets. And for him, had I seen him going on such a Visit, I wou'd have Crown'd his Head with a full Chamber-Pot; and in that Ornamental Pickle he shou'd have sought a Mistress.
But his Wife acted more discreetly. She invites her Rival to her own House; she receives her in the most obliging manner imaginable. Thus she procured her Husbands Company, without any other Charm than that of seeing his Mistress athis own House; and in case he shou'd sometimes Sup with her abroad, his Wife wou'd not fail to send them some good Treat, and bid them be Merry.
I wou'd sooner dye than be my Husbands Bawd.
You do not consider,, that this way is much more secure and easie, than by injurious Language to exasperate him still more, and give occasion of a lasting Quarrel for Life.
I confess it the less Evil, but I cou'd never be able to act with so much Patience.
I will give you one Example more, and I have done with particulars. Our Neighbour here at the next Door, an honest good Man as breaths, but a little too subject to Passion, happen'd t'other day, in a sudden heat, to strike his Wife, a Woman of a sweet temper, who, without delay, retires to her Closet, and there weeps most bitterly; the only way she used to vent her Sorrow. It was not long after, that some occasion or other brought her Husband thither, who finding her in that posture,(says he). Her answer was prudent and obliging;. With these Words she touch'd her Husbands very Soul, who, in a thousand kind expressions, made a solemn Promise never to be guilty in that nature again; nor was he.
I have often desired thus much of my Husband for many reasons.
Yet you are still at variance with him.
What wou'd you have me do?
In the first place, consider calmly with your self the nature of those things which you complain of, and you will find you ought not to resent them so heinously, but rather pass them over in silence; and be assured, his Mind will, of necessity, be reform'd by obliging Behaviour; you will certainly wholly subdue his temper to your desires, or, at least, you will live much more comfortably than at present.
He is so Salvage, that no good Offices can ever oblige him.
Oh, say not so: The wildest Creatures that are may be reclaim'd by Endeavours; Dispair not then of any Man. Try the Experiment but some Months, and then blame me if you find my Counselunsuccessful. There are some faults which you ought to avoid with more particular Care: Above all, take especial heed that you never quarrel in Bed, let all there be kind and obliging; for if that place, which is in all Nations esteem'd Sacred to Love and Pleasure, become profaned with Hate and Discord, you lose the best means of renewing lost Affection. There are some Wives of such unquiet temper, that in the most ravishing Enjoyment they cannot forbear to Scold and Wrangle, changing very Pleasure it self into Wormwood, and by their implacable Behaviour, corrupting that good Medicine which is usually the best Cure for Discontent.
I must confess I have done thus often.
A Wife ought, at all times, to avoid any action that may be unpleasant to her Husband; but chiefly in Love's softest Minutes.
True, to a Husband: But, I have to do with a very Brute.
Fie, fie, forbear ill Language; most bad Husbands, as I said before, owe much of the occasion to their Wives. But to proceed: Those who are Vers'd in the old Poetick Fables, tells us of, which was a Girdle, in which was Quilted,with abundance of exquisite Art, all that was powerful in procuring or resorting Love; and this Girdle she wore continually when she enjoy'd her Husband.
I know the Fable.
But know the Moral too.
Speak it.
We are Taught by this old Tale,, that a Wife ought to employ all her Faculties most assiduously to oblige her Husband in Bed, by which means she will infallibly heal all breaches, or decays of Conjugal Affection, and expel all Clouds of Neglect or Displeasure that may be gathering in his thoughts.
But where can we poor Women procure this Divine?
You need not Conjure for it. There are no Charms requisite to obtain it, but only those of Behaviour, and a sweet obliging Temper.
'Tis impossible for me to comply with such a Husband as I am Curs'd with.
'Tis your own fault that he is such. Suppose it were in your power (as they say of) to transform your Husband to a Brawn or Bear, wou'd you do it?
'Tis a hard Question: I know not what to answer.
How! Not know? What, had you rather have a Brawn for your Bedfellow than a Man?
No sure; I'd rather have a Man.
But suppose further, that you were able, by someArt, or otherwise, to reform your Husband from a Drunkard to a Man of Morals, from a profuse Prodigal to a Purchaser, and from an idle Drone to an industrious Bee, wou'd you not do it?
Undoubtedly I wou'd: But who will teach me these Arts?
You need no Teacher, the Art is yours already, you only want a Will to use it. Never think whether you shou'd respect your Husband as such, he is such whether you will or not; but how to make him better, that shou'd employ your thoughts. They say all things have two Handles: You regard only your Husbands faults and imperfections, which your own aversion does continually aggravate; by this Handle you always take him up, but thus you can never hold him. View rather, and consider his Accomplishments and Virtues, by this Handle you may hold him fast; thus, if you take him, he's your own for ever, the proper time to search into his faults, had been before you Married.--'Tis now too late to accuse his faults, but not too late to cure them.
What Woman ever Married, or chose a Husband by her Ears, I wonder?
She Marries by her Eyes, who takes a Man only for Shape and Beauty; but she who guides her love by what she hears of his good Name and Reputation, chooses a Husband by her Ears, and acts much more discreetly.
You advise well; but 'tis too late,.
Not at all too late to endeavour to mend a bad Husband; I wish you had a Child by him, that wou'd conduce much to make up the breach.
I have a Child.
How! a Child! Since when?
Long enough.
Prithee how old?
Almost seven Months.
Why this is wonderful; do you breed Children in three Months time?
No. Why?
You must of necessity, if we compute the time from your Wedding.
That's true. -- But -- you must know, I had had some Discourse with him before we Marry'd.
Discourse,! I never knew before that Children were got by Discoursing.
I'll tell you all. During our time of Wooing, he happen'd one day to find me alone in my Chamber, where, not dreaming of his Visit, I had set my self close to Work on my Bed-side; he seeing the opportunity fair, began to play the Rogue, and tickle me, in a jesting manner. Now you must know, I am extream ticklish, and not being able to endure his Fingers, I fell all along as in an extasie; he, it seems, pursued his point, and almost smothered me with Kisses. What he did beside I do not well know, but I'm sure that soon after I found a great alteration, a thousand Qualmes, and all the signs of a breeding Woman.
A very famous History! But how can you,, find in your heart to hate that Man, who can get you with Child in a jesting manner? What cou'd he do think you, when he applies himself to Work in earnest?
Nay, I'm with Child again already.
Brave, I protest! You see a good Plowman, and a rich apt Soil, make a quick Harvest.
Ay, ay, he performs this way better than I desire.
Few Wives are of your Mind. But tell me one thing more, is the Conjugal Debt duly paid at present?
No, I have stopp'd all Payments.
He is the less then to be blamed for Rambling. Is your Child Male or Female?
A delicate Boy.
That Boy ought to make you Friends; and it will be effected undoubtedly, if you wou'd but yield a little. What do other People say of your Husband? What Character has he abroad?
He is reported abroad to be of a most obliging Behaviour, kind, liberal, and an excellent Friend to those that love him.
Thus far there's hope: I see he is without Door what you cou'd wish him.
But to me only he is quite otherwise.
However, be you such to him as I advised, and if you do not find him become the same Man to you too, never give me credit. Your Husband is but young, (I guess him about four and twenty) he cannot yet know well what it is to be a House-keeper, and all the Duties that belong to that Name. Think thus,, and do not think of Separation.
I cannot forbear it, my Life is so uneasie.
'Tis impossible you shou'd desire it, if you wou'd but rightly consider what a wretched Creature a Wife is when parted from her Husband, and how Excellent her Character who Loves and Obeys. Nature requires, and God commands, that the Wife depend wholly on her Husband. Be assured, a Husband is just like an Estate; you have both one, and if you lose that, you must starve, or live without any. In the last place, think of your poor Child,the Common Interest of both his Parents. How wou'd you dispose of him? Wou'd you take him with you? Then you dispossess and rob his Father. Wou'd you leave him behind you? Then I know you relinquish the dearest Treasure you have. Pray answer me one Question; have you any back Friends, that wou'd rejoyce to see you miserable?
Yes, some. I have a true Mother-in-Law for one; and to match her, there is my Husbands Mother as very a Devil as her self.
Are they very malicious?
I believe they have wish'd me ruin'd a thousand times.
And wou'd you gratify their Malice? You do it abundantly in a Separation. What thing can be more pleasing to them than to see you live forsaken; a Widow: Nay, worse than a Widow; for Widows may Love, and Marry again wherethey fancy, which you can never hope for.
I approve your Counsel, my dear, and wou'd practise it, but I am discourag'd to think of such a tedious labour.
You have a pretty Parrot here, that speaks some Words exceeding plain; have you been long in teaching him?
O Lord, aye; the Bird has cost me a World of Pains and Patience.
And can you think the undertaking tedious, when you endeavour to reclaim a Husband, in whose Society you may spend your whole Life with Pleasure? Can you take pains to teach a Parrot, and not endeavour to win a Husband by kind Language? What pains do some Men take to break a Horse, and makehim easie? Be assured,, it deserves more pains to make your Husband kind.
What wou'd you have me do?
I'll tell you in few Words. Take care that all things within Doors be neat, and in good order, that so he may not be Sick of Home. Let your Behaviour be affable and familiar, yet always within the limits of that Reverend esteem you owe a Husband. Be neither too sad, nor airy; neither too Coy, nor Wanton. Let his Diet be Choice, and well Dress'd. Observe what he likes best, and provide that often. Observe what Company he most favours, and Invite them continually; Treat them, and Oblige them often. Let all such Entertainments be gentile and pleasant, nothing to be then wanting; but least of all, Mirth and good Humour. And when at anytime you find him Merry with a Glass too much, or so, if he begins to Tune his Lute, be you also ready with your Voice, to make a Consort. Thus, by degrees, you will teach him to delight to be at Home, and consequently, to avoid a World of needless Expences; for he must of necessity, in a short time, consider thus:?
Well, suppose I shou'd act thus as you Advise, yet I fear Success.
Trust to me: I'll take it upon my self if you fail. In the mean time, I'll go and begin with him; I'll teach him his Duty too.
I love you for that; but for God's sake, take heed our Consultation be not discovered. If he shou'd smoak us, he'd run into all the Extravagancies of.
Fear not that, you shall see I will manage my Words with such Cunning, that himself shall begin the Discourse, and tell me all your Discords: Then will I handle him in such a manner, and use such Arguments, that I doubt not but to leave him in a better humour for your advantage than I found him. I will only mention you by the by,as one that I hear loves him with a perfect Affection.
Prosper th'Event sweet Heaven.
-- Do not suspect;
Heaven will not fail, unless your self neglect.<|endoftext|>, What have you to say as to the Crime you are now to die for?
I have spoke as much as I can speak already, and can speak no more.
In what shape did the Devil come to you?
The Devil came to me once, I think, like a Lyon.
Did he offer any violence to you?
No, not at all, but did frighten me, and did nothing to me: And I cried to God, and asked what he would have, and he vanished.
Did he give thee any Gift, or didst thou make him any Promise?
No.
Had he any of thy bloud?
No.
Did he come to make use of thy Body in a carnal manner?
Never in my life.
Have you a Teat in your Privy-parts?
None.
, Was not the Devil there withwhen I was once in the Prison with you, and under her Coats? the other told me that he was there, but is now fled; and that the Devil was in the way when I was going towith my Son who is a Minister. Thou speakest now as a dying Woman, and as the Psalmist says,. We find thathad seven Devils, and she came to Christ and obtained Mercy: And if thou break thy League with the Devil, and make a Covenant with God, thou mayst also obtain Mercy. If thou hast any thing to speak, speak thy mind.
I have spoke the very truth, and can speak no more: Mr.I would desire they may come by me, and Confess as I have done.
, Have you made any Contract with the Devil?
No.
Did he ever take any of thy bloud?
No.
How did he appear to thee first, or where in the street? in what shape?
In a woful shape.
Had he ever any carnal knowledge of thee?
No, never.
What did he do when he came to thee?
He caused me to go and do harm.
And did you go?
I did hurt a Woman sore against my Conscience: he carried me up to her door, which was open: The Womans name was Mrs..
What caused you to do her harm? what malice had you against her? did she do you any harm?
No, she never did me any harm: but the Devil beat me about the Head grievously because I would not kill her: but I did bruise her after this fashion
Did you bruise her till the bloud came out of her Mouth and Nose?
No.
How many did you destroy and hurt?
None but she.
Did you know any Marriners that you or your Associates destroyed by overturning of Ships and Boats?
No; I never hurt any Ship, Bark, or Boat in my life.
Was it you orthat did bewitch the Children?
I sold Apples, and the Child took an Apple from me, and the Mother took the Apple from the Child; for the which I was very angry: but the Child died of the Small Pox.
Do you know one Mr.about these parts, or any of your Confederates? did you or them bewitch his Child?
No.
, How did you come in to hurt Mrs.? did you pass through the Key-hole of the Door, or was the Door open?
The Devil did lead me up Stairs, and the Door was open: and this is all the hurt I did.
How do you know it was the Devil?
I knew it by his Eyes?
Had you no Discourse or Treaty with him?
No; he said I should go along with him to destroy a woman, and I told him I would not: he said he would make me; and then the Devil beat me about the Head.
Why had you not called upon God?
He would not let me do it.
You say you never hurted Ships nor Boats; did you never ride over an Arm of the Sea on a Cow?
No, no, Master, 'twas she,
for she said when she was first brought to Goal, if that she was hanged, she would have me hanged too; she reported I should ride on a Cow before her, which I never did.
, Did you see the shape of a Bullock? at the first time of your Examination you said it was like a short black man, about the length of yourArm.
He was black, Sir.
, Had you any knowledge of the bewitching of Mr.Child, or did you know a place called?
No.
Are you willing to have any Prayers?
.
;
.
You are lookt on as the woman that has debaucht the other two: Did you ever lie with Devils?
No.
Did not you know of their coming to Goal?
No.
Have you any thing to say to satisfie the world?
I forgive them, as I desire the Lord Jesus Christ will forgive me. The greatest thing I did was to Mrs.; and I desire I may be sensible of it, and that the Lord Jesus Christ may forgive me. The Devil met me in the street, and bid me kill her; and because I would not, he beat me about the head and back.
In what Shape or Colour was he?
In black, like a Bullock.
How do you know you did it? how went you in, through the Key-hole, or the Door?
At the Door.
Had you no discourse with the Devil?
Never but this day six weeks.
You were charged about 12 years since, and did you never see the Devil but this time?
Yes, once before: I was going for Brooms, and he came to me and said,; and would help ease me of my Burthen: and I said,.
Did the Devil never promise you any thing?
No, never.
Then you have served a very bad Master, who gave you nothing. Well, consider you are just departing this world: do you believe there is a God?
Yes.
Do you believe in Jesus Christ?
Yes; and I pray Jesus Christ to pardon all my sins.<|endoftext|>Mr., What do you know concerning this Plot?
I know nothing of it, neither one way, nor another.
Do you know of any Contrivance of Mrs., to kill the King?
No; rather the contrary.
Do you know of any attempts to:
I will tell your Lordship what I do know, if thesewill not be too nimble for me. I have suffered aof late in relation to a Plot, as if I had known of a Plot; but God is my Witness, I know of none, unless it were a Plot to bring Sirover to theInterest. That Plot I had some Concern in, and had some knowledge of Mrs.Concern in it; but she was so far from doing any thing, that she was willing to bring over with him the three Gentlemen turn'd out of Commission when Sirwas. So that how she could be acting for the, and against theat the same time, I do not understand.
Mr., You are a man of Learning, pray will you give yourof the things that you know in relation to Mrs..
Mrs.was not committed upon my Accusation; therefore, I hoped she might have been tryed without my. But when I was in danger of myLife, when I lay in the, Mrs.was reported to be a third Witness against me, and then I raked up every trifle: but if I had thought it Treason, I would have discovered it before. And as to that particular Business concerning Mr., thatsometime since did come to me, being my old Acquaintance, to ask my advice in his Affairs, and he had then an Affair of so great moment, that it was necessary to, which was to go to the Lords in the Tower. I asked him what to do? saith he, I can say enough against Dr.to serve them, and take off his Evidence, and asked me if he should do it. By no means, Mr., said I. Mrs.afterwards told me, this, and onewere willing to tell some Stories or other of Mr.and Mr., and I told her this very Story; saith she, you being acquainted with him, it is possible you may do some good upon him, and saith she, I had as lieve as ten Guineys, that you could do it.
That is, when that you advised Mr.not to meddle with any thing against Dr..
She said, she did not care if she had been at the Charge of ten Guineys, if he would be honest and discover the Truth. And, my Lord, she did say she had heard Mr.talk of aPlot that would off thePlot.
Did she say, that she had heardsay there was aPlot, and that he was to have a Commission among them? and did she say, that she had heard him say, that he hoped under the colour of that, thePlot would go on? or did she say it of her own accord, that she hoped that would carry on thePlot?
My Lord, I cannot remember particulars.
There is a great deal of difference betweensaying it, and her saying it.
I have no reason to spare her: but I am unwilling to speak any thing that is contrary to truth, though she hath done me the greatest Injury in the World.
How came you to talk of aPlot?
It was only common Discourse as it was at Coffee-Houses.
Had you heard of it before she spake of it, that you say it was common?
No, not till she spake of it.
Did Mrs.tell you of anyPriests or Jesuits coming hither from beyond the Seas?
Upon the going over of one, I think she did say she heard there were some more coming over.
What to do?
God knows what.
Did she speak of any Plot or Contrivance to kill the King?
No, she was always an Enemy to Plots, or else I would not have kept her Company.
Did she say there were, or that she heard there were several Priests and Jesuits coming over?
My Lord, I think she said she heard it. And I have said several times to her, thewould be destroyed: but she answered, she was afraid the Nation would be destroyed first.
Did she say she was afraid of it, or, that the Nation would be destroyed first? I ask you once more, we must try People according to their Oaths. By the Oath you have taken, when you said you thought thewould be destroyed, what Answer did she make?
She said she was afraid the Nation would be so; because, she said, abundance of the best of the Nation went into other Nations, to weaken our Nation, and spend their Mony, and therefore she was afraid the Nation would be destroyed before them.
What Discourse had you with Mrs.passing through?
My Lord, my memory hath been exceedingly bruised; but I remember, my Lord, as I was going through the Abby in a rainy afternoon, she said, this Abby was formerly filled with, or something to that purpose, and, saith she, what if it should be so again?
Are you aor a?
A, my Lord.
He talks as like aas can be, was it, what if it should be filled?
She said, what if it should be again.
What did you say to that?
I only smiled to hear a Womans Discourse, my Lord.
You make all the Company laugh, What did she say of the Temple?
That thehad been filled withtoo.
And what then? Did she talk of filling it again?
Saith she, this Place was filled with, and thewith.
This may do well enough: but what did she say else concerning the?
Nothing, my Lord.
Mr., I was none of the Tribe of forty one.
Now tell me what she said: Mr, keep it in your Hand.
My Lord, she put it by way of Interrogation to feel my Pulse.
What did she say else?
There was nothing but transient Discourse, my Lord.
We must ask you what the truth is, and you have looked upon your Paper. Now, consider what you say, and consider that you are upon a solemn Occasion, and are to testify it in the presence of God Almighty. I would have you tell plainly what it is, and neither to make it more, nor stifle it.
It was only transient discourse.
Say what it was. Was it, this Place was once filled with?
She said that thehad been filled with, as thehad with.
Look upon your Paper.
You have looked upon the Paper, and pray tellus what she said. Did she say she hoped to see this Place filled with?
My Lord, I do not remember that word hope.
How long have you been acquainted with Mrs.?
Ten or a dozen Years.
Did she never ask you any Questions about the Life of the King?
My Lord, when the King was very ill at, and all People were fearful that he would die, she did move the Question to me.
What Question?
To know whether I thought his Majesty would live or die: but it was her fear that he would die.
Had you seen the King?
No, my Lord.
How then did she expect you should give her an Answer? from your Art?
From my Art, my Lord.
Did she desire you to consult your Art, how long the King would live?
She did as I said.
What did you say to that?
I would not tell her, becausehe was my Soveraign.
VVhat Answer did you make?
I told her I would not meddle with it.
She would have had you consult your Art or Scheme, or whatever it is, to know whether the King would live or die?
It was something of that.
And you said you would not meddle nor make with it?
Yes, my Lord.
She desired you to make a Scheme?
No, my Lord, I can't say she mentioned a Scheme; but she asked the Question.
What did she ask else?
Only that Question.
How often do you believe she spake of it?
Never, my Lord, but when he was ill. I will not baffle any thing that may conduce to the safety of the King, and Kingdom.
Indeed it is very conducible to the safety of the King and Kingdom, if any go about to destroy him, and with evil Intentions to ask how long he will live, and you ought in Duty to God, and your Soveraign, to declare it. Did she ever make any enquiries about the Kings Death more than what you have said?
No more, my Lord, and then she was fearful he would die.
Did she say she would go to some Body else?
My Lord, when she perceived me shy, saith she, I see you are afraid of me, I will go to some other.
For what?
To satisfy her Curiosity, as a great many do.
What Curiosities did she ask besides this?
She would ask me sometimes about the Condition of Bodies, whether they would be prosperous in the World, and several other Questions
Were you nice in these Curiosities?
Truely, my Lord, I was shy of meddling with any thing, when I heard there was a talk about Plots.
Was you nice to give her satisfaction according to her hopes concerning these things you call Curiosities, questioning whether one should be well wedd, how many Children she should have,VVere you scrupulous in that?
I think I might not be nice in that very particular.
How came it then, that she would go to another?
She asked me something about Mr..
For what?
How to get him out of Prison.
Pray how came she to say she would go to another? You were not shy to give her an answer to these Questions.
It was something about Mr., My Lord, she asked me something about some Deeds or Papers which he was to search for or seize, which concerned Mr..
She had better have gone to one of the Clerks than to afor them. But why would she go to another?
Because I was shy.
You were not shy in these things about. Did she not say when you refused to meddle vvith the death of the King, that she vvould go to another?
Yes, my Lord.
Didyou any thing for her at that time?
My Lord, I did calculate a Scheme, vvhich since I found to be for, but I knevv not forwhom it vvas vvhen I did it.
How! Can you apply one Scheme to any Body?
My Lord, when Mrs.came to me, she gave me the time of a Persons Nativity, and I set the Figure of the Heavens to that Sign, to know whether he were a Person fit to be trusted, her Husband being ato get in Money.
For ought you know,was a Woman, and the question was, whetherwas with Child, and he happens to be a Man. -- How did it fall out?
I have forgotten, my Lord.
When did you know it was for?
My Lord, never before I came before the King and Councel, neither did I know his Name before; for he went by the Name ofbefore.
What other Discourse had you with her? Did she not at any time talk of Mr.?
She did say, she had heard of some People that were to discourse with Mr.: she had heard such a thing; but I don't know whether she knew any thing of it or no.
What discourse had you about that?
She told me, there was a Woman to go down toto beg Mr.Pardon; for he was penitent for what he had said in some Tryal or other.
Call another Witness.
Mr., pray give the Court an account of what you know of Mrs., the Prisoner at the Bar.
My Lord, I accept against that Witness.
Why so? You must show some reason, and then we will do you Justice in God's Name.
If I can prove he was whipt, and transported, pilloryed, perjured,he is no Witness. The last time I was upon my Tryal, he threatned some of my VVitnesses, that if they would not Swear as he would have them, he would kill them.
If you can shew any Record whereby he is convicted of any thing, that can by Law take away hisTestimony, do it.
He has been Indicted for Burglary.
VVas you Indicted for Burglary?
I will take it at their Proof.
Do you know?
I remember one. I saw him burnt in the Hand at the.
Is this the same Man?
I do believe it is the same Man: but I have not seen him these several Years.
Let every Body have their right in God's Name. Have you any more?
My Lord, I can prove him perjured.
Have you any Records to shew he was perjured? is he convinced?
No.
Then you can't do it.
My Lord, I can prove him guilty of Forgery.
If you don't produce the Record, you do nothing.
That which she calls Forgery, is not that which the Law calls Forgery: it is counterfeiting Guineys.
Can you shew he forged any Deeds. If you can prove that he hath committed Forgery, and be not convicted, it is no Errour.
Have you your Pardon? She hath proved the Conviction of Felony, prove your Pardon.
I have the Copies of several Records here in Court, which will be sworn to.
Did you ever seeand Mrs.in company?
No, my Lord, but I have been imployed for Mrs.in several Businesses of Charity to get Prisoners out. VVhen Mr.was in Newgate, she imployed me to get him out.
VVhy was she so kind to?
My Lord, I don't know that: but she bid me get him out, whosoever staid behind.
VVhy should she get him out? Did she tell you what she would do with him when she had him out?
No, my Lord.
VVe bring him for a VVitness, that she had a great kindness for.
VVhat discourse have you heard betweenand?
I never saw them together but twice. It is a Year since I came from them.
When you saw them at Dinner or Supper together, what other Company was there?
Her Husband was with her one time.
What did they talk about?
They were talking about the Prisoners that were Condemned.
Where was it? at her House?
No, at my LadyHouse.
How came you there?
I carried Notes backwards and forwards.
Did you never hear no discourse about the Plot?
No.
What Intimacy have you known betweenand Mrs.?
Did you ever see them together?
Yes, very often, my Lord. She said that thewould turn to a.
Who did she say that to? to?
No, my Lord, but I have heard him say those words, and that he would make it his Interest it should be so.
What did you say to him, when he said he must turn Rogue, and discover all their Plots?
I said he would be no greater Rogue than he was before.
You were pritty nimble with him.
He thought he should be hanged.
For what?
If he did not turn Rogue, he thought he should be hanged.
You were very often together in your Chamber.
Who gave you your Cloaths?
Her Husband was gone to Church one Morning, and he was with her in her Chamber.
I can't see why you should prove this matter too far.
is a civil young Woman.
She said she would do my business for me, and I go in danger of my Life.
What do you know of any Intimacy betweenand Mrs.?
I have seen them together.
What did they talk about?
Mrs.proposed a match between Mrs.and I, and they used to talk of that when I was with them.
Did they talk of the Plot at any time?
No.
Did you ever hear them talk of the King?
No.
Have you any more?
Not till Mr.comes.
Have you any Record to shew he was put in the Pillory.
Yes, my Lord.
What say you to this Outlawry?
It is not the same Person.
We ought to be very careful in these Concerns, else we may do a work this day, may make all the Kingdom rue it. It is a sad thing that People of a vitious profligate Life, both before they came to Newgate, and all along in their Life time, should be suffered to be VVitnesses to take away the Life of a worm. I question whether he will come again, or no, he hath been gone a great while. Such are fit to be imployed to find out: but hard to be believed when they find out.
Captain, is this the Man that broke?
My Lord, I can say nothing to that; but he was brought by anfrom thence to me.
was he burnt in the hand for Fellony?
Yes, my Lord, I believe he was.
He made me believe as though he would flie, I believe he is. VVe will not hood-wink our selves against such a Fellow as this, that is guilty of so notorious Crimes. A man of Modesty after he hath been in the Pillory, would not look a Man in the Face. It appears that after he hath been burnt in the Hand, he hath been outlawed for Fellony, and so it doth appear by Record.
Such Fellows as you are, Sirrah, shall know we are not afraid of you. He produces us here a Pardon by the Name ofof, and says, his Father and Kinsman are both of that Name and Place. VVill you have him Sworn whether his Father or Cozenwas ever convicted of Felony. It is notorious enough what a Fellow this is, he was in. I will shake all such Fellows before I have done with them. Have you any more to say? Are there anyhere?
My Lord, this is enough to discourage a man from ever entring into an honest Principle.
What? Do you with all the mischief that Hell hath in you think to brave it in a Courtof Justice? I wonder at your Impudence, that you dare look a Court of Justice in the Face, after having been made appear so notorious a Villain.
Indeed, if he be the same Man, he is not fit for a.
And that he is the same Man is very notorious. Come Mrs., What have you more to say?
Enough, my Lord.
You have said enough already. Come Gentlemen of the Jury, this is a plain Case, here is but one Witness in a Case of Treason, and that not direct, therefore lay your heads together.
VVhere is? Is he gone? Call him.
No, my Lord, but with the leave of the Court, will fetch some.
Let ago with him, and return before the Court rises.
My Lord, that cannot be, for I can't return so soon.
Then let him be committed.<|endoftext|>Mr.I would know one thing, will you undertake to Swear positively that this Person was one of the Persons who stept before you? Will you take it upon your Oath, That the Person, the Prisoner at the Bar, went before you?
I will take it upon my Oath as far as a Man can do, for one Man, 'tis possible, may be like another both by his Voice and his Face; I can Swear I believe he is the man.
You are Satisfied upon the first Sightthat you had of him in the Countrey, that he was the Man.
Yes Sir, and he can tell you that by a very good token, for I had like to have run him through.
We must not expect that there can be exact and positive Proof, for men that commit Offences of this Impudent Nature, don't usually call Witnesses to be present to see them done; therefore we would come as near as we can to Circumstances, whereby a Fact of such a Nature is to be proved. Mr., Do you believe that the Prisoner at the Bar was one of the Persons that went before you in.
Upon my Conscience I do believe he was the Man.
What a Clock was it?
About Eleven a Clock, or between Ten and Eleven.
When the Link came there, was there Three, and do you believe by the Light you had by the Link that that was one of the Persons that was there.
I saw his Face and Habit, and believe he was.
What Habit had he on?
He had a Grey Cloak, a Compaign Cloak and a Coat, I think Lin'd with Red. It is impossible to give an Account of every particular under those Circumstances I was in.
It is not to be expected that a man under your Circumstances, should be extraordinary precise in Circumstances; therefore it is I asked you, that according to the best of your Apprehension, you might acquaint the Court with those Circumstances that may be remembred by the Jury, that they may see there be no Injury done to the Prisoner at the Bar; but that Right be done on both sides, and that in every Circumstance.
Now Sir we will call Mr., with whom he had this Discourse the next day.
Will the Prisoner ask him any Questions?
Truly Mr.knew me in, and knew me as well as any man in the City.
Did you not very well know him?
It is very possible I might see him, and often at Assizes and Sessions, but not to know him, nor did ever know whether his Name were, or what it was. Your Lordship sees many Persons here and often, and it's possible do not know them; he lives I think a Dozen Miles from me.
That's a wonder; If it please you, Sir, my Wife is a near Relation to you, both by Father and Mother, and I have spoken with you in your Chamber.
'Tis possible she may, but I do not know it.
Pray Mr.give an Account of what Discourse you had withthe day after the business was done.
We went to the Tavern, and drank Two or Three Bottles of Wine, and we had some Discourse concerning Mr.; it was about Eight or Nine a Clock in the Evening the next day. Some Discourse happen'd concerning his miserable Condition, and how he was hurt, and of that Nature.
How many was there in Company?
One or Two more.
What House?
At theinin, and among the rest Mr.was talking of it, and said he,, the word was,, or,.
What time of Night was that?
As near as I can remember, it was about Eight or Nine the next day in the Evening.
The very words that Mr.Swears when they went to Cut his Throat.
My Lord, If you please, there was Mr., and another, and I spake nothing but what I heard as News, that they had killed him if he had not on Armour.
For that matter Mr., you shall have your time, and you may call up other Witnesses, but the Gentleman positively Swears you said these words; and if so, I'll assure you, it does not look as if you were a Kin to him, or your Wife either.
Mr,. What did you hear thatshould say inabout this Business?
What said he about this business of Mr.?
My Lord, All I can say is this, I being at the Stating some Accounts between Mr.and Mr.: I asked Mr.for some Horse-hair to make a Fishing-line. Mrreplyed,Glocester,Herbert JonesGlocester. I asked Mr.what was the occasion of his haste? Said he,Arnold's.
What time was that?
About the 5th of.
Mr., What can you say concerning this thing?
I desired Mr.to meet me, that we might even our Accounts, and upon the 5th oflast he met me, and I desired Mr.to be present as a Witness.
Where was it.?
At, And as we were making up the Account, said Mr.to Mr.,?replyed, He left very good Horse-hair at a Farriers in: And he asked him why he left it? He said he made hast for fear of being taken and stopt for Mr.business. I cannot say whether he call'd him Esq;, or Mr., or what; he seldom used to give him so good words.
What do you know concerningbeing at the Cutlers?
If it please you, Sir,was at the Cutlers.
Name the time when, and the place where.
The 5th of, at a place calledin, Mr.and, we came there, and Mr.asked, Whether he would mend him that Sword or no? But Mr.had some business that he could not get time to mend it that morning, but would do it in the afternoon. Says, Where have you been, you have been hot at it? What have you been Fighting with the Devil? No, said he, with damn'd.
What did you say when the Cutler asked him, Whether he had been fighting with the Devil? and he said again no, not with the Devil, but with damn'd?
said he must not speak such words, andWife pluckt him by the Coat and bid him hold his Tongue.
Who was by?
There was one.
Was onethere?
I think there was another indeed by the Apprentice.
There was the Apprentice, but he does not know his Name, and, and, and his Wife.
What did you hearsay about the Rapier?
He asked me in the Afternoon before Mr.was hurt, Where he might buy a very good Rapier?told himcould not tell, He had then a good Back-Sword in the House.
Tell the Court what Acquaintancehad with Fatherthe Jesuite since Executed.
My Lord he told me he wou'd go to the Executioner and perswade him not to Execute Mr., buthad the Executioner lockt up, andwould not suffer him; butdid see him very active at the Execution, a dipping cloaths inhis Blood.
What do you say as to his coming to his Lodging?
We went to several places that day, and at Eight or Nine, or between Eight and Nine, we came to thein St., andleft him at the Kitchin Fire, and went up into the Chamber, and drank a considerable quantity of drink; and as near as I can guess, it was between Twelve and One a Clock before he came to his Bed: for after I was going to Bed, about One of the Clock, I heardcome up the Stairs, and bid me Good-night; he called at my door just as I was pulling off my Breeches to go into Bed.
What time was this?
As near as I can guess it was between Twelve and One, or very near One.
At what House was it?
Thein St..
What did you say when the Maid was making the Bed.
I asked her who it was for? Andshe said for a Man that was not willing to lie with any Body.
What time did you come to the House?
About Nine.
Did you stay in that House till that time?
I lay in the House Sir.
You were not out of the House all the while?
No Sir, I was not out of it.
And you are sure that you did not see him again till he came to your door going to Bed?
Yes Sir.
What time was that?
Nigh One.
You see the Contradiction between this, and what this Fellow says upon his Examination, where he says he was a-bed at Nine a Clock.
Where did you go at that time?
We went toto one, and she told us her Husband was gone to Exercise at the next Church; I do not know the Churche's Name, and there we went and looked upon the Souldiers, but did not see him. We came back to his House again, and the Gentlewoman gave us a Tankard of Beer, or Ale. And after that we went back, and we had a mind to make sport with a Countrey Fellow we had with us, and went into, from thence we went to thein.
You went to, and what did you spend there?
Six Pence and he paid it.
Whether did you go from thence?
Into.
How long did you stay in?
It was not long Sir, about an hour.
Where after that?
From thence to theand staid till Eight or Nine.
Who did you meet withall between yourgoing from theinto the?
We met with oneand another, and one.
What did you drink there?
We did drink both Ale and Brandy.
Well said, how long did you stay there?
We staid there a pretty while, an hour or more, or two hours.
What time of Night was it that you went from thence?
About Eight or Nine.
And then you went to your Lodgings?
Yes.
Did you Drink at the?
No, we drank not all together.
And there you stay'd till Twelve or One a Clock?
Yes.
But can you remember, as near as you can guess what time was it you saw this Maid making of the Bed?
I cannot say positively, but I judge it was about Twelve a Clock.
As to that Circumstance of his coming home at Twelve at Night, desire Mr.to give an Account of his Examination, what time of Night he came to his Lodging.
Do you believe that ishand?
That is a Copy.
He did confess before a Justice of the Peace that he was at his Lodging at Ten a Clock: This I heard him say, and I believe he won't deny it; and I heard him own this Examination; my Man will prove it.
Deny it? Yes I will deny it, there was no such word said: I did say, Mr., I went to Bed then.
The Jury must take notice of this, That upon his Examination, he says, he came home byNine; which is before the thing was done: but by proof he did not come in till Twelve, which was after the thing was done.
We will give you now Gentlemen an Account of this Mans Principles.
This is the business,says, They came together to their Lodging before Night, but he left him at the Kitchin-Fire, and went into another Room to drink with some company; and this Mr.says his Bed was not made till Twelve a Clock, and that he himself went to Bed about One of the Clock, and that he heard the Prisoner at the Bar while he was pulling off his Breeches, call to him, and therefore he took notice of that as a Circumstance; that he does particularly remember he did not go to Bed till that time; and he says he did not stir from that place after Nine a Clock.
There is a Contradiction in that.
There is no Contradiction: The other Witness says that he came along with him at Nine a Clock.
I will tell you where this is a Contradiction.
He says he came to the House at Nine a Clock, but he came not to Bed till after One.
The Evidence does not go so far:says they came to the, and left him in the Kitchin at Nine a Clock, and he went into his Chamber and staid up till One, and all that time he did not come to Bed.
So far it lies upon him to give an Account where he was between Nine and Twelve.
Heark you Sir, have you had any Discourse withconcerning the Plot, and concerning the Lords in the Tower? And what did he say to you?
I had some Discourse with him concerning the Papists, he said that it was the best Religion, and that those that were not of that Religion should be Damn'd: I alledged against him, and told him the contrary: I thought not. Can it be such a Religion said I, that will Act such things against the King and the Government? Says he, If any says there is such a Plot against the King or the Government, he is a Rogue, and a Thief.
What did he say of the Lords in the?
Nothing more.
How long ago was this?
When was this?
This was, my Lord, about a Twelve Month ago.
Did he speak any thing to you further concerning the Plot?
Not further.
My Lord, I beseech you I may speak to this man, Do you hear, Sir, Were not these the words that I said when you charged me to be a Papist, That I knew of no Popish Plot, and they that said I was a Papist, or knew any of the Plot, were Rogues or Whores, or worse.
You said thus, That the Papists were the best Religion, and that those that were not of that Religion were Damn'd.
Have not you been a Papist Sir?
I am not now.
Will you say that I am a Papist?
I say you defended it so much I thought you were. Said I, I wonder it being such a good Religion, that they vvould offer to Act such a thing against the King and Government. Said he, He that says this Plot is Acted by the Papists, is a Rogue and a Thief.
How long ago is this?
A Twelve Month ago; you remember it well enough; you remember when you sent for me to the.
What discourse have you had with him concerning the Plot.
What has he said about it?
He said, If the Lords in the Tower were Executed, there would be a greater War than ever was in; and swore that if these Lords were put to death, it would cost more Blood then ever was spilt. And I asked him again, Why they should not be put to death if they should deserve it? For if a poor Man had done such a Fault, he would be hanged out of the way presently. He said again, They did not deserve it, for there was no Plot at all.
Pray Sir, Who was with you when you say I said these words?
I was atHouse.
Did not you say thatdiscoursed this with you?
Is this the man that spake it, upon your Oath?
Yes this was the man.
What didsay to you? Do you think my Lord, I would say such a thing to such a man as this is?
Do you hear Mr., for that matter it is not the question, the man has sworn it, except the Jury know of their own knowledge that the man is perjured, he is not so as to me.
It is the first time that I ever took an Oath.
Mr., What have you heardsay concerning Mr.?
Sir I vvas in Company vvithand another, and vve had discourse concerning one, andsaid --
What was that?
I being in company with him, we fell in Discourse about Justice, how he was Wounded.
Where was it?
In, at, the second day of:answered us, That he could not see but he wounded himself.
What day do you say?
The Second day of.
He did Discourse the 5th day ofat, I would faign know when he came through.
What did he say about Mr.?
He thought that he wounded himself, says his Wife, How could he wound himself in his Arms? Said he, It was himself or some of his Friends.
Or some of his Relations.
Some of his Friends.
Mr., Pray tell how you found Mr.when he was Wounded.
I found Mr.Bleeding.
Tell what Wounds there were.
Two in his Arm, Two others upon the Face, another upon the Throat, which bled very much; another two upon the Breast, and one in the Belly.
What depth might that be?
Two Inches and an half long.
Where else?
There was another upon his Breast.
What depth?
They were not very deep, but there was one upon the Belly Six Inches and an half; there was Two through his Arm, and a Wound and several Bruises in his Head.
This is likely to be a fine Contrivance, that he should do it himself, as likely as that Sirput his own Sword through his Body after his Neck was broke.
Do you believe a man could wound himself so?
No Sir.
I believe a man could do it, but I believe a man would not do it to himself.
Mr., Pray do you Acquaint my Lord and the Jury, what Discourse past between you andat theTavern in.
We drank one Bottle of, Mr.came in when the Bottle was almost ended. But by and by some Friends came in, and they asked him, What News, Sir? Said he, I hear of no News but a cruel Assassination upon Mr., but for my part I am sorry for it: But, said he, if any thing should be upon Mr., it is a very strange thing.
Were you there all the time Sir?
Yes Sir, all the time.
And you heard no other Discourse?
No he did not say Dam him, nor Sink him, for I hate such Company.
Mr.where do you live?
In.
What Sign do you live at?
At the.
What Trade are you?
A.
Now we will go on to the Discourse at, about their passing with such speed through.
Mr., They do not pretend you were in great fear, but they say you said so. It is not the Question, Whether you did stay long ator no? But the Question is, Whether you told this man so? Because the man asked you, Why you would leave the Hair at the Farriers in order to a Fishing-line? Truly I was in great haste, for fear I should be taken up about the business of Mr..
It is very true, and therefore we bring this Evidence to shew the Improbability that weshould say any such thing when it was false, and especially when it was to accuse our selves of a Crime.
Mr., Pray give an Account to the Jury of your passing through, and how long you staid there.
My Lord, I came with the Prisoner.
What day did you come through?
I cannot positively tell you the day, we went out of Town upon Friday, we came to, either Wednesday or Friday, and there we went to thein, and there staid an hour before we went to Dinner, it was a publick time, the Quarterly Sessions, and several People came to us to hear the News, we told them, and were as sorry for it as any Persons could be, and did confess it a very ill thing. We went from theafter we had Din'd to the, and drank several Pints of Cyder. I believe by the Oath I have taken, we were several hours in the Town.
Do you know Mr.is acquainted with Mr.?
I do believe Mr.has great reason to be acquainted with.
Yes now he has.
Was he chief Constable?
Yes he was, and certainly Mr.in Reason would take notice of the Chief Constable.
Mr., I am informed that you know this Gentleman goes to Church, and receives the Sacrament. Give an account what Religion he is of.
Always a Protestant, I saw him at Church within this half year.
I can shew a Certificate of my going to Church, since I came to Town.
There are many people that can go to Church to serve their turn.
And my Lord I have taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.
An excellent Protestant to Discourse so of the Plot, I must needs say that.
How old are you?
Between 15, and 16.
Hark you, do you know the danger of forswearing your self?
Yes Sir.
What is it?
I am in danger of Everlasting Fire.
Very well.
My Lord this is the Apprentice to the Cutler, in whose Shopsays we had such Discourse:pray tell my Lord, and the Jury whether you were by, when onecame into your Masters Shop, when he andwere talking abouthis Sword.
Sir,, came in the morning, and brought a Sword, my Master was not within, and he told me, give this Sword to your Master to be mended; so I took the Sword, and laid it up till my Master came in; when he came in, I told my Master of it, and when he came again thiswas in the Shop, saidto my Master,? says he; says my Master,Giles,, says he,Arnold.
Hiss 'm Hiss.
It does not become the Decency and Gravity of a Court of Justice, to be humming and hissing, when Facts are Trying of this great Concernment.
It was the common discourse there, That Mr.had been Assaulted.
You have been in a great Combat, have you been fighting with the Devil? What did he say to that?
He never met with, my Master asked him, Mr.,, Sir,Arnold.
You did not hear his Wife bid him hold his Tongue.
No Sir.
Did he tell you how he did break his Sword?
No Sir.
My Lord, here is Mr.can tell, that I was sitting down in a Chair, and broke off a piece of the Guard.
You will do well to prove it Sir.
Was there any Discourse in the Countrey about Mr.?
Did they not talk any thing about Killing the Devil?
No Sir.
If your Lordship pleases we will call Witnesses to give an Account when we came to Town, and where we were all that day; and we will call the Maid that Lockt the Chamber door after we were in bed, on the same Night when this Fact was committed.
, Pray tell my Lord and the Jury whencame to Town?
If it please you my Lord, I came to Town andtogether.
What time of day was it?
It was Twelve a Clock.
Who is thy Master?
What time of Night was it Friend, when you heard him call to your Master, and bid him good Night.
About 11, or 12 a Clock.
You say about Nine, you were at your Lodging with him, did your party company with him?
Yes Sir, we did.
Where did you go at that time?
We went into the Chamber, and drank Two Pints of Brandy.
What time of Night was that?
After Two Pints of Brandy, I wonder how he can remember any thing.
Tell what time of the Nightcame in, where you were in his company; what time of Night it was?
Speak as loud as thou would'st do if thou wer't at home: When was this?
The Thursday after.
The Thursday inWeek, or the Thursday in the next Week?
The Thursday inWeek; we were never out of Company; when he came home to his Lodging I believe it was near Ten a Clock.
Where was your Lodging at the?
At the.
Good Woman, did you go with him to?
No not I.
Were you with him at the?
No not I.
Were you with him in?
No Not I.
He did not go out of your Company at all?
Yes about Ten a Clock.
Woman you must be mistaken, he came to Town at Twelve or One, and might be in thy company, but it is plain he went to a Brokers in, and so to theat, for I guess it might be so: Then they went to, and spent Six-Pence, and after that they went into.
My Lord, she don't say she was with us all the while, but we came to an House where she was, and several other People our Neighbours.
She says you did go out sometime: Now see whether I mistake you.
Yes you do mistake me.
He went out, did he?
Yes he went out after we came into the City, he and some others, and then they came back to me again in two or three hours.
Then you were two or three hours at Dinner. Now I ask you, After they came back, was you with him all the while?
Yes that I was.
Where was it?
At the.
That is the place in.
No, indeed, it is in.
When did he go to Bed, do you know that upon your Oath?
We were in the Inn between Nine and Ten a Clock, nearer Ten then Nine, and I saw him sitting taking a Pipe of Tobacco.
What time was that?
A little after Ten I believe.
He sat there till he was call'd away to do his business.
, Pray do you tell my Lord and the Jury about what timewent to Bed?
Indeed Sir, he went to Bed between Ten and Eleven.
How long was it that he came to his Lodging before that? Can you say how long he was in the House before he went to Bed?
I asked him if I should take away his Candle, he said he would put his Candle out, but I might Lock him in, and take the Key; but I did not do it.
Did he go to Bed as soon as he came in?
No, I think he did not.
You made the Bed, did not you?
I did.
Upon your Oath, what time of Night was it?
I think it was nearer Eleven than Ten.
Did you make the Bed after he went into it? What time did you make the Bed upon your Oath?
I made the Bed about Ten a Clock.
I ask you, do you remembercame into you and asked you any thing about making the Bed? Do you remember he was in the Chamber?
In whose Chamber?
Didcome in when you were making the Bed?
He was not there that I knew of.
Was not I in the Chamber when you made the Bed?
No, I don't remember you.
My Lord, when this Maid went to make the Bed, I went into the Room after her, and had some discourse with her, we lean'd together upon theWindow, and I told her I was in Love with her, I told her, if she liked of it, I would Marry her the next Morning: I did it to make merry, for indeed I am a Married Man.
What time a Night was it?
About Twelve a Clock.
If you forget your other Sweet-Hearts, can you remember this? Do you remember now he was there?
I remember he was there.
Mr., Pray do not laugh at my Witnesses and make May-Games at them, it is not the part of a Gentleman.
And she told me that he would lie by himself though the house was very full.
Do you remember any such Discourse?
I do remember that Mr.did come in.
What time of Night was it that he was making love to you?
I think about Ten a Clock.
Time passed merrily away with you then.
It was Twelve a Clock.
Why do you say so? Our house was all quiet presently after Eleven.
Why will you say so? Were not we Singing and Roaring together?
Come don't be angry, you were not angry when you were making love together?
I am not angry indeed Sir.
Tell my Lord what time of Nightcame into his Lodging, and where it was?
It was inWeek he came in, and so were drinking at thein St., and from Dinner, and from Nine a Clock.
How? You did not dine there, you din'd at the.
Yes we din'd there, but from Nine a Clock, we were there till Twelve.
How do you know?
I was there with him.
After Twelve a Clock you say you left him?
Yes.
Where did you leave him.
In the Kitchin.
Are you sure?
Yes my Lord, I am sure of it.
I ask you, because I have an unhappy Memory, you are sure it was Twelve a Clock when you saw him in the Kitchin, and here is a Maid saw him go to Bed at Eleven.
Have you any more? You know the matter that was the occasion of the dispute t'other day I would not by any means, that in a Cause of this publick Concern, there should be any pretence for any to say they were surprized; therefore call as many Witnesses as you please.
What can you say when Mr.came into his Lodging?
It was about Ten a Clock. I gave his Horse half a Peck of Oats.
Where?
At thein
Do you know how long he staid before he went to Bed?
No Sir, I cannot tell.
He speaks honestly, this Man.
Have you any more?
There is another, a Translator, my Council knows his Name.
What is your Name Sir?
Go on.
I say thiswas at my House between Eight and Nine a Clock.
Where is your House?
My House is --
Can you say any more to it?
No.
What have you to say?
Sir I went with mr.home, and it was between Nine and Ten a Clock, and I saw him in his Lodging, and I saw him in the Morning.
Are you sure he went to Bed when you made it?
It was between Ten and Eleven a Clock.
You see how they Contradict one another.
Is your name?
Yes Sir.
You say you are certain you left him in the Kitchin at Twelve?
Yes Sir.
But here is one that says he went to Bed by Eleven.
O Lord no Sir.
These are your own Witnesses Mr..
You see how they contradict one another.
My Lord, I met some of my Countrey-men about an hour before Night.
What day?
About Thursday Sir.
What Week was it in?
I believe in, and I heard them say that Mr.was come to Town, and Mr.and he was to have an Hearing the next day.
How long was you in his Company?
I had been in my Friends company about an hour before he came, and we staid till near Nine or thereabouts, and then we parted, and I never saw him afterwards, till last Munday was Seven-night.
What say you?
Mr.was in my company, and staid till about Nine a Clock, or thereabouts, and then we went away, and I saw him no more for that Night.
Have you any more?
No.<|endoftext|>Pray, my Lord, give me your Favour, I would notinterrupt you; but to make things clear as we go, I desire to ask you, when you came first to Mr.House, who spake first, when you were all met together?
Every body discoursed what they pleased.
But who gave an Account of the Reason of the Meeting? Will you please to recollect, and tell what you know who began the Discourse?
Something introductive to it was said by Mr., we being at his House, as 'tis natural to conceive for any Gentleman at whose House People are met, to say, Pray let us sit down, and talk of our Business. Something leading and introductive was said by him.
Pray, my Lord, as near as you can remember, will you give an Account what was the thing he began to discourse of? Did he seem to take any Notice, or have any Knowledge of your Meeting, and other things before?
It was a general Hint and Intimation to us of the Ends of our Meeting, that we were there come to consult and advise one with another how to put things into a better Method and Posture than formerly: And he desired that we would sit down and discourse of these things. My Lord, I would not charge my self with Particulars positively.
Upon what Questions did you debate and consult, my Lord?
Those were started severally. Some would speak of the Time when it should be, whether it were not convenient now or when? Others offered something concerning the Places, whether it should be begun in the City or in the Country, or both together. Others took it into Consideration what Persons were to be prepared in the several Countreys to be assisting in it that were probable to carry it on. And then some discoursed concerning the raising of Money, and then what summ should be raised, and I think that was started by the Duke of; but I am sure the summ that he named was 20 or 30000The last thing that was talked of, but which was concluded to be the thing principally to be taken care of, was the setling such a Concurrence and Correspondence withthat they might chime in at the same time, that so we might give as many diversions both from home and abroad as could be at one and the same time.
My Lord, Did Mr.discourse of this matter?
I cannot speak to the Discourse of any one in particular; for I cannot say it was put to the Vote as we formerly express it, but it may be said we were all consenting and concurring.
Did any of you dissent from the Riseing?
No, no my Lord.
Did any of you oppose it at all?
No, no, That was discoursed of as a thing resolved.
I ask you this Question, my Lord, Was there any sort of Complaint made of the Government, That it was uneasie and that occasioned you to enter into these debates?
There was I cannot say a Complaint, because there was no Person to complain to; but it was spoken of as a matter of greatgrievance, that such a Force and Violence should be put upon the City in their Election of Officers, and the tendency of that as to all Juryes tho' I cannot distinctly remember the particular things.
You say you were talking of a Messenger to be sent intoto my Lord ofand others to chime in with you in this matter as you say, pray did you come to any Resolution about that, and what did you resolve upon?
That there should be one only at that time. And afterwards it was the matter of the debate at the next Meeting, which was that Meeting at my Lord, which was about this time twelve-month insometime.
How long after the first Meeting at Mr.was that?
My Lord, I think it was about a fortnight.
Who was there?
The same Persons that met before. But then there was little spoken of but the Business of.
Was Mr.there at the second Meeting?
He was there.
At my Lordyou say it was?
Yes.
What Resolution did you come to then?
Then we came to a Resolution that some Body should be sent, and we began to discourse who was fit, and Col.he propounded, to some of the Company he was known, to others not; but those that did know him did approve of him as a fit Person.
To whose Province was that comitted of sending this Person into?
Col.undertook it himself.
Did the rest consent to it?
Yes, no body did oppose it; but left it to him.
Did you Name the Person then that was to go?
He was not so named as to be with any solemnity approved or disproved; but it was left to Col.to manage it, and he namingas a fit Person (he told us that by the by not to put it to the Question for our Approbation) and some of us knew the Person, others did not. I was one that did know him, and did think him a very fit Man to send.
Pray, my Lord, who was the Person? Be pleased to tell the Jury so as they may know it.
Had you any discourse with Col., my Lord, afterwards that he was sent?
Yes, my Lord.
Pray give an account of that?
About three or four days after this Meeting at my Lord, I went to Visit Col.at his House, and while I was there in the Room, he went to his Cabinet, and out of a Drawer where there was five or six hundred pound in Gold as I could guess, he took a good many pieces, I do not know directly how many; but he took out so many as he said was threescore Guineys that he was going to carry to, I went not in my own Coach, and therefore went away with him in his Coach, and he set me down atat my own Lodging. I went no further, but he did, and he told me afterwards it was conveyed to him, and that he did go.
How long was that after your second Meeting at my Lordwhere you say you intrusted Col.to send one into?
I think it may be less then a Week, four or five days, that I saw him carry the Money. After this he said, he had given him this Money, and was gone: And when he was dispatched, in a Week after I was making enquiries after him, and Col.said, he had not heard of him since he went away; but about a fortnight or three Weeks Col.said he had heard of him, That he was atand stay'd there; but he wondered he could hear no more of him. I then went into, and when I came back from thence, he told me, he was come, but I had never seen him, not to this day, indeed I had once appointed a Meeting with him at Mr.Chamber; but something or other happened, we did not meet.
We have done with my Lord, if they will ask him any Questions they may.
They know their time, when the Kings Attorney has done with any Witness then they may examine him, if they please. If they will not call your other Witnesses.
Will you ask him any Questions?
No, no, by advice they are to ask him nothing.
We shall give your Lordship and the Jury an account in the next place, that we have tracedinto. And for that we shall call some Witnesses which indeed we did not produce before at any Tryal, because we had not then discovered so much. We shall bring you the Person at whose House he lay at, and the very Messenger that was sent with him to conduct him a by-way into. Calland.
Look you Gentlemen, You that are at the Bar, there you must let the Jury stand by themselves. I see there are a great many others intermingled with them, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, If any whisperer talk to you, we expect that you should tell us who they are; for we will suffer no remarks to be made but what are openly made to the Court, and the Jury by the Counsel of both sides.
Swearand.
What is this Man's Name Mr.? Friend what is your Name?
My Name is,
Pray give my Lord and the Jury an account What you know of any Person that lay at your house some time since and whether you have seen him since? My Lord this Gentleman did not knowbefore, and therefore I desire Mr.may be called and examined again. Mr., do you know?
Yes, I know him very well.
Had this Gentleman a view of?
Yes, he had. He was brought wherewas, and this other Person was by before him too, and I was by when they had a view of him.
Now pray give an accompt what you know of the man you saw?
Where is?
He is in the Kings Bench Prison, and he was brought bytobefore the King. where these two persons were brought likewise, and there this mandid own thatwas the man that was at his house; and the otherowned that he travelled towardswith him, and that he was hired to shew him the way into.
Didsay any thing?
He would not Answer any thing at all, nor say a word.
Pray give an account Mr., who it was that lay at your House, and when it was, and what he said was his Business, and by what name he went?
Indeed his Business I did not know; but he was at our House about the middle of, it was thereabouts.
When was it? what?
The last.
You say he was at your House last, pray tell the Court where that is?
At.
Do you keep any Inn there?
Yes.
What Sign?
The Sign of the.
And what did he do there?
He stayed there one Night and went away, and returned again in twelve days or thereabouts, and came to my House again.
Whither did he go from you?
He wentas I suppose, I know no further.
But when he first came to your House, which way went he?
He wenttowards, as he himself said, And desired to have one to shew him the way: And I sent for this Man, and when he came to him he hired him to go with him, and I was by.
When he first came to your house about the middle ofwas twelve month, Whither was he bound then,or?
He was going to, that is.
And you say after he came back again, and lay another Night at your house.
Yes, ten or twelve days after he did.
And which way went he then?
Then he cametowards.
Did you take exact notice of the Man?
Yes, I saw him before his Majesty and the Council.
And upon your Oath that same man you saw there was the same man that lodged at your house inwas 12 month?
Yes, it is.
What name did he go by at your house?
He went under the name of Mr., but what his Sirname was I can't tell.
Had he a servant with him?
He had a man with him that stay'd at our house during the time of his going?
What did he call his name.
Did he desire you to furnish him with a guide?
He told me his Servant did not know the way, and his horse was a little lamish, and desired me to get a guide for him. For after he had dined at our house it happened to be a rainy day, and he could not go further that night, and therefore desired me to get him a man that knew that Countrey, and I sent for this same man, and he hired him; and he went along with him next morning, my Lord.
Whither was he to go?
Truly I did not know; but he told me he did not know the way into, and I directed him to a Gentlemans house atin the way.
Is that the Road to?
Yes, the high Road to one part of.
Did he tell you to what part or place ofhe was to go?
He named the West of, I think he named, but I do not know what place certainly he designed for.
Then where is?
Here.
Had you a view of this man they call?
Yes, I had.
Give an accompt, whether you saw him in the North and when and where.
This man, Mr., sent for me. I live atand there I keep Hackney Horses to serve any Gentlemen, or be a Guide to them as there is occasion, and Mr.sent for me, and when I came he told me the Gentleman wanted a Guide into. We immediately agreed, it was upon Thursday night before that we call.
When was it say you?
It was the Thursday before, so they call it with us, that is.
Ay, they call it so in those places, because 'tis the Even of the Fast of, the beginning of Lent -- Well go on.
We went away on Friday the next morning on our Journey towords, and the 2d day which was Saturday in the afternoon my horse tired, whereupon he left me with my horse and took the Mans man of the house where he left me to guide him, for my horse would not ride up with him being tired, and he resolving to go on, and he bid me follow him on the Sunday morning toTown, which I did, and we stayed there all Sunday. And on Monday morning I saw him take horse and another man that was his guide, and away they went, as I think, he said towardshe was going. And he pay'd me, and I returned again from him toand left him.
Pray how far was this, you say you went with him to, how far distant is that from?
Tomy Lord?
Yes.
'TisMiles my Lord.
How nearis it?
'Tis within someMiles of theBorder.
Did you see him at any time after that?
I saw him at his coming back again; being athouse, his Wife asked me if I would go up and see the Gentleman that I went with towards: So I went up, and he made me eat and drink at the Table with him.
What Name did he go by?
He went by the name of.
Was there any Servant with him?
There was a Man that came with him as a Servant there, and was all the time at, that he was gone towards, till he came back again.
Mr., Did this Man seeat the time the other saw him?
Yes, I did.
And is that the Man that went by the name ofat, and that you went with towards?
Yes, It is.
And when they charged him with it,did not deny it.
Did you go any by-Road to get into?
No, 'tis the Road Gentlemen usually go to, and so on; because 'tis something the nearer way to that part of, as we judge it to be, therefore Gentlemen use it.
Is it an high-open-Road?
Yes, 'tis the high-open Way to that part of the Country.
My Lord, Pray were the Names of any of thementioned at your Meeting, that were to be sent for?
Yes; There was my Lord, Sir, and one.
Now, my Lord, We will give you an account, That aswent into, so these persons soon after came into.
My Lord, We desire that my Lordwould name thosethat were to come.
There was my Lord, Sir, and one, one that was of my LordName and Family; and there was another Name, but I can't remember what that Name was.
We shall give you an Account, my Lord, That they came immediately after this to Town; and at the breaking out of the Plot, they Absconded.
Mr., Has my Lordhis Pardon?
Yes, my Lord, he has.
Then your Lordship may be covered.
I can't tell, but they may ask me some Questions.
Then you may be uncovered when they ask them, in the mean time your Lordship may be covered. Swear Sir
Pray Sir, will you tell my Lord and the Jury what you know about the, and Sirbeing in Town? Or any otherthat you know of?
My Lord, I did see those Gentlemen in the beginning of last Summer. Sir, and Mr., andthe Son, I did see; but the Father I did not, but I do know he was in Town, tho I saw him not.
How do you know it?
I had Messages from them.
Sir, You say, you saw Sir, and?
Yes.
Did you see any body else?
I saw Sirthe Son.
What became of them upon the Discovery of the Plot?
Sirdid Abscond, and Mr.was taken into Custody.
What became of the others?
Thewere both in Custody.
Did you see any Commission they had?
I did see a Commission that Sirhad.
What was it for?
To make a Purchase of some Plantations beyond Sea, I think it was.
Ay, where my Lordhad an Interest.
It was some of the.
I did omit that passage my Lord --
Pray was it discoursed then, what should be the Blind for these Gentlemen that were notorious Dissenters, that they should come to Town fromabout?
It was to carry on a Plantation in. TheGentlemen were personally known to my Lordonly; and my Lordwas to write the Letter to them, and, I suppose, did.
Mr., What do you know of thesecoming to Town; and what became of them afterwards?
My Lord, about the beginning of, or, or thereabouts, I had some Information, That there were someGentlemen that had been shifting up and down, and at that time were about, lodged there secretly. I immediately went with the King's Proclamation, and some Warrants that I had to apprehend some Traytors that were fled: And when I came, I found that Mr.having Notice of them, had beat up their Quarters, and they were endeavouring to escape by Water; but there they were catched. There was Sir, and, and Sir, and some others, I know not the Names of them all; truly I can't tell whetherwas not another, but SirI had in my Custody, andwas immediately committed to the; and the rest of the Gentlemen I afterwards took in a cunning Hole by, in a back house. And when I came there, I found them lyeing on the Bed in the middle of the Day; and had them Prisoners in my Custody two or three Months; and then they were all sent out of my hands intoPrisoners. Six of them there were, my Lord, that I saw.
We have done my Lord, only we desire that a word of a Record may be read.
What Record is it Sir?
Of CollonelAttainder.
My Lord, We shall desire your Judgment, whether that Record ought to be read against Mr.; I perceive by Mr., that 'tis a Record of the Conviction of Mr., which ought not to be given in Evidence against Mr.upon this Indictment.
We make use of it, to shew how upon former Tryals, upon this Evidence, Verdicts have gone.
We are in your Judgment, my Lord, if by Law it may be given in Evidence against Mr., who is neither Party nor Privy to it, nor Indicted for the same Offence.
Let it alone then.
Well, Mr.does not press it. What say you to it, Gentlemen, for the Defendant?
What do you mean by that, Mr.?
By being a Witness against the Defendant and others, he has procured his own Pardon.
That is a little harsh Expression --
My Lord, I explain my self thus --
'Tis an harsh Word, and too roundly expressed; You had need to explain your self; 'Tis a little too rank, as though the King's Pardon were to be procured by Blood.
And consented to it?
I would not strain any thing my Lord, further than the Evidence is.
Nor do not Misrepeat it neither.
I design not any such thing, my Lord.
But you do though: For he Swears it, every one of them consented.
By silence it must be then. For he does not say, That he said any thing. He Swears only Collonelundertook to manage it, to send a Person; and my Lordto write the Letter.
And all the rest Consented to it.
My Lord, and Gentlemen of the Jury, I desire to make one Observation, before we call our Witnesses.
Pray do not take up our time altogether in Speeches, but go on to your Evidence.
I desire to observe but one thing, my Lord.
Make your Observations at last, but spend not our time in Speeches. I know you will expect to be heard at last, and so you shall whatever you will say.
Call the Earl of, the Lord of, and Lord. Mr..
Now we have him here we must begin with him, my Lord. Mr., Pray what did you hear my Lordsay at any time concerning this Conspiracy, and who were concerned in it, and who were not?
My Lordcame once to the house of Colonel, I believe it was about 8 days after the Imprisonment of Colonel, and when he was in the house, I ask't him, What is the matter my Lord? he did answer me, he was told there was a Plot against the King and the Duke, and one general Insurrection to be made, and that Colonelsent a man into, to which thing my Lordsware laying his hand on his breast, saying,Sidney; and I said, what is the matter, my Lord? are you afraid? and he made answer to me,. And he asked me about the Goods of Colonel, because of the Plot and such things, and he desired to have them removed to his house; and he said, rather then go to the Tower he would do any thing.
Speak again to the Jury that did not hear you, what said my Lordto you?
He said, rather then to be a Prisoner again he would do any thing.
Who to be a Prisoner again?
My Lord.
What things were spoken of?
He said he would do any thing.
Were you speaking of the Conspiracy? Of the Plot?
He spake of the Plot, and said he knew nothing of it.
What did he say Sir?
He said to me and swore, he knew nothing of it, and called God to witness.
Pray did he then say he would do any thing rather then go to the, when you were talking of the Plot and Conspiracy?
Yes, he would do any thing rather then be a Prisoner again.
Pray what did he say?
He raised up his hands on high, and said, he knew nothing of the Plot, or of the Insurrection, or that Colonelhad sent any man into.
When was this?
I believe it was 8 or 9 days after the Imprisonment of Colonel.
What day of the Month, and what Month was it?
He was Imprisoned about the end of.
My Lord, It would be necessary that I should make an answer to this, and I know not whether I should make a particular answer to every one: for here is a whole set of Witnesses, I see.
No, let them alone. You must not interrupt them, they must go on with their Evidence; and when 'tis a fit time for you to answer them, the Council for the King will call you.
Pray sware Mr.
Pray Sir,will you please to acquaint my Lord and the Jury what you know, of what my Lordhas said of the Plot, and who were concerned in it?
My Lord, what I have said is in the Paper of Mr.Tryal, and truly I can say no more than what I said there.
pray speak out Sir, and tell it again to this Jury.
I was told I spake it very loud then.
Pray Sir speak as you please, We wont direct you in what Key you shall speak. Speak in what Key you will.
Then if you will have me speak it, I will speak it as loud again. My Lord, is Mr.here?
Yes, there he is.
In the first place I do not know Mr., My Lord, I cannot promise to speak the very words that I spake the last time, I cannot make them so fit as one tally fits another.
Consider, Sir, you were not Sworn then, you are Sworn now, That is the difference, and therefore pray consider of it.
My Lord, As near as I can, I will repeat the same words again, I had little Acquaintance with my Lord; But meeting him often at my Brothers House, (and being he was extraordinary pleasant Company, I must needs say that he was so, and a Man of great Wit) and I coming from, he asked me what news of the Plot? I told him there were some People that were in the Proclamation, or would be, and I named their Names. Says he, I know none of them except, I think; and by chance I met him passing through the Old Exchange, and he saluted me very kindly. After this my Lordwas taken, and when my Lordheard that, says he, then we are all undone. And I very much fear it is a Sham Plot, since they have seized upon my Lord, and I doubt he is a lost man. After that, I think as near as I can remember -- The next thing was this -- If you look upon the Book, you will see what I said there.
We are not to look upon the Book, man. You must give your Evidence your self Mr., I hope you do not Swear by Book? Let the truth come out in Gods Name, whatever it be.
Ay, my Lord, We desire to have truth come out.
Ay, whether it be of one side, or the other, God forbid but truth should be spoken. Mr.go on.
Then my Lord Colonel,was taken, and says my Lord, I am extremely troubled for Colonel, for he is my very good Friend. said I, why are you not concerned for my Lord? He is of your Blood, says he, he is a man without exceptions. There is no man of such honor as he, but I am concerned for Colonelas that particular man that has obliged me above all the World, but I never heard my Lordname Mr.in all my life.
I'legive you a reason for it My Lord, if you please, why I said so.
My Lord, This is Evidence for the Defendant. If the Kings Counsel will call you afterwards to make Answer to any of these things, then is your time to speak. We will not let them interrupt you when you come to speak, nor must you interrupt them now. We are bound to hear both sides, and so by the grace of God we will do.
My Lord, I desire both he and his Brother may stay in Court, for I have something to say to them.
Pray what did you hear my Lordsay concerning the Plot?
He did deny it possitively, and said they acted nothing but what was Legal, and he said it 500 times over.
Did he deny it?
Yes he did.
But when he said they acted nothing but legally, what did he mean? Was this Plot legal?
I had former Discourses with my Lordat other times, and I asked him; My Lord, what tends all this to? Your going up into the City and making these meetings? says he, we intend nothing but what is legal. There is not one man in the Company that I know of, intends any thing else.
What was my Lord's Opinion of the Plot inor, or?
He said he knew nothing of it, nor could he believe there was any such thing. When those Persons were named that were to kill the King,, said he,.
When was this?
Whenand those other People were put into the Proclamation.
Mr., Then I will ask you your Opinion, whether in your Judgment, every man that was in the Plot could not have said so much?
I suppose every man in the Plot would have defended himself as well as he could, but I cannot tell what way.
Sir, did he barely affirm it, or with Asseverations and Imprecations?
My Lord, was not upon his Oath before me.
Mr.. Don't you believe a great many that were concerned in this Plot would deny it?
I am to give my Opinion only for my self, not for other People.
Have you done with him?
Yes my Lord.
Then go over Sir.
My Lord, I am troubled with Fumes, and cannot well endure a Crowd, therefore I desire I may have leave to be gone.
You may go if you please.
Call Mr.,
Then Swear my Lord ofand my Lord,
Well what do you ask my Lord of?
My Lord of, Will your Lordship please to acquaint the Court and the Jury, what you heard my Lordsay concerning the late Conspiracy?
My Lord, Some indisposition I have had of late, together with the great rigour of the season has confined me to my House this six Weeks, so that I should not come here but upon this Summons of a, which I thought I ought not to refuse. I suppose I need not repeat much of what was said at ColonelTryal.
My Lord, You must give what Evidence you have to give now,
My Lord, The Gentlemen of this Jury have not heard it, therefore you must say it all over again to them.
Sometime after Mr.was taken, my Lordcame to see me, and complaining of the Times, said, That all things were very sad and dangerous, and if ever he was questioned again, he would not Plead, but desire them only to count Noses, for the quickest dispatch he thought was best: I replyed, sure his Lordship was in jest. He said, No, he was in earnest, for he was confident if he came to Tryal, they would have his Life, let him appear never so innocent. I said, I hoped not so, it was only his Lordships fear, and because of that, I thought it might be presumed he would venture much, rather then be Tryed. And discoursing of the late Primate ofProphecy; He said, for his part, he thought the Persecution was already begun, and he did believe it would be very sharp, but withal, he hoped it would be but short; and then he began to wish himself beyond Sea till the Troubles were over; and in complyance with his Lordship I did wish so too. But as to, he did with great asseverations very much assert his innocency. He said, he thought he was not guilty of any of the things laid to his Charge; and spake with large Encomiums in his praise, as he had obligation to do, and seemed to bemoan his misfortunes; which I said I had then reason to believe he was real in, for I believe never any man was more engaged to another then he to Colonel. I told him there was a discourse of some Writings of Mr.that were taken; he said he was confident they could make nothing of any Writing of his; I told him, I supposed he meant legally they could not do it, This was the most he said, as to Mr., he mentioned nothing that I know of.
Did he seem to declare any Opinion about the Plot or Conspiracy in general, That there was any such thing or not?
I do not remember it.
My Lord of, Did you never hear my Lordbefore this complain of the Government that it was amiss, and was to be rectified?
Yes, he often did complain. Every body knows my Lord's way of discourse.
Pray will you ask him, if my Lord ofused to fall out with me upon those discourses.
My Lord was always good Company.
You mean, My Lord.
I understand what you mean by, you are a Learned man, I know.
My Lord of, if I apprehend your Lordship aright, my Lordwas discoursing of the Primate ofProphecy, and said he thought the Persecution was already begun, and would be sharp, tho' he hoped it would be short, and he wished himself beyond Sea till the Troubles were over, and your Lordship wished your self so too?
No, I said in compliance with his Lordship, since he wished himself beyond Sea, till the Troubles were over, I wished he were there too.
But I perceive all these discourses concerning the Government are reckoned but jests and matter of Laughter, but 'tis a very rank way of jesting I assure you.
My Lord, We call our Witnesses seriously, they are the Kings Council that jest.
Was this before my Lordwas taken?
Yes, but after Mr.was taken.
Well, who do you call next?
My Lord, Pray what have you heard my Lordsay concerning the Plot, and when?
My Lord sits there, and I believe he may remember it was about the 7th of, thebefore my Lord went into the Country, to the best of my memory, which was, I take it, the 9th of. Uponthe 7th at Night my Lord came to see me, I told him I was glad to see him abroad, and not concerned in the Disorders that were then so general; My Lord told me he had been wished joy by several, and he took it ill, because it looked as if he were guilty. 'Tis true, my Lord was a man of great finess and readiness in discourse, and came easily into all Company, my Lord said that was true, but he had so carefully behaved himself, that he was sure they could not touch him with any thing, nor did he know any thing of any body else that he could charge them withal.
When was this my Lord?
This was the 7th of.
Pray good my Lord, Why did you joy my Lord, had you any reason to mistrust my Lord?
No other reason, then because I knew he was a man of great freedom in discourse, and might be concerned upon that account.
And he would frequently discourse against the Government I suppose?
No, I never heard my Lord discourse against the Government in my life.
Sware Dr.
Pray will you Doctor acquaint the Court, what you heard my Lordsay concerning the late Plot, and when?
My Lordcame to see me the day after the discourse of the Plot broke out,I think it was, onit began to be talked of. The thing was little understood then, but in general a Plot was discovered, and my Lord with a great many Protestations, lifting up his hands and eyes to Heaven, protested he knew of none, and believed there was none, and spake of the whole thing as a Contrivance.
This was the day after the Discovery broke out?
Yes, the day after that I first heard of it.
Had you any other discourse with my Lord about it?
I had not seen my Lord before of some Months. And then he spake a great deal to me. He told me he had been in, and after that he went to the, and went so early and came away before the Company came, because he would avoid all danger. And he expressed great apprehensions of fear of Sham-Plots, and spake of False Witnesses and former designs of that Nature. The truth of it was, one had possessed me much with a belief of the thing, it being then but a secret, but he strove to dispossess me of that belief, and his whole discourse ran upon that for an whole hour, and expressed, as I said, great fear of some Sham-Contrivance, and spake much of false Witnesses, wishing that he were beyond Sea.
What, he spake as if there were like to be great heats and stirs, I suppose?
No, the talk was about the Discovery, which he said he believed was a Contrivance.
Did my Lorduse to come to you some times?
Yes, he used to come frequently to see me.
Dr., Pray let me ask you one Question, you spake of solemn Declarations and Protestations made by my Lord, what gave the occasion to such a Solemnity?
I will tell you the occasion truly, tho it was never asked me before. It was thus, I being possessed with the belief of the thing by one that assured me it was true, and would soon appear to be so, I argued upon that belief to convince my Lord, that it was true, and he argued a great deal to dispossess me of that belief. And I said, if there be any such thing I pray God forgive them that are concerned, but certainly it is one of the monstrousest ill things that ever wasdone; for hereby they have done all that could be done to ruine the Protestant Religion. He was smoaking a Pipe of, and he laid down his Pipe, and lifted up his hands and eyes to Heaven, and protested to me, he neither knew of any such thing, nor believed it, but it was all a Contrivance.
By his discourse, you possibly might understand what he meant, did he mean being privy to the Murder of the King or the raising of Rebellion?
There was not a word then of the Assassination, but it was all of the Plot in general.
Did he make no distinction?
We talked of nothing but Plot in general. For the particulars were not then known. It was only about the general notion of a Plot.
Pray what was the reason you had to believe it?
There was a Gentleman fromthat came to see me, and he did assure me it was true, as being one that had it from a Privy-Councellor. This was on thewhen the Council sate long about it; and nothing of particulars was then let out, but only a discourse in general of such a thing, and he said it would be found to be a certain truth.
But Doctor did not you a little wonder at the carriage of my Lord? That a man that was not accused, that you heard of, should make such solemn Protestations?
My Lord, he said just in this manner as I have told you, when I said,, he laid down his Pipe, and lift up his hands and eyes. Whether he thought I suspected him or no, I can't tell, he best knows his own thoughts.
Did he say a word of Mr.?
No, there was not any particular person named.
Doctor, he would not make you his Confessor.
His whole hours discourse was to dispossess me of the opinion and belief I had entertained of the Plot.
This was aboutyou say?
I cannot remember the very day of the Month, I believe it was the latter end of, but I am sure it was before any body was Committed, that we heard of.
Dr., you say you did believe there was a Plot then?
Yes, I did so, and he laboured to dispossess me of that belief.
Pray do you believe it now?
What a question is that, Mr?
I make no doubt of it, Sir, as to the Assassination.
My Lord, Why do you lift up your hands? you don't do well; for it is a very proper question.
Well call your next Witness Gentlemen?
Swear Mr.
Pray Sir, will you acquaint the Court and the Jury what you have heard my Lordsay about the late Conspiracy?
My Lord only said he knew nothing of the Plot; that is all I can say.
When was this?
Thebefore he was taken into Custody; then it was that your honour did say so, my Lord.
Ay, and 100 more I believe would say so, that might be concerned in it for all that.
Swear Mr.
Pray acquaint my Lord and the Jury, what discourse you had with my Lordabout his Pardon, and what he said to you?
My Lord, About the Month oflast my Lordsent to me to know how I did, and desired me to come and make him a Visit. The next day I went and waited upon my Lord at his Lodging at, and after the Complements passed, my Lord began a discourse of the Plot, and I told him, That I heard none of the Witnesses had their Pardons, but onlythe first discoverer. My Lord told me no, but he had a Warrant for his Pardon, and with that he plucked it out and shewed it me, and I read it. And then I told him Ithought it was of no avail without he had his Pardon actually under Seal. He said no, but he had their word and honour; But, said he, when I first received the Warrant, they said I should not meddle in it till I heard from them again, which I have not yet, and I ascribe it to no other reason but only this, That I must not have it till the drudgery of swearing is over.
When was this?
Inlast some time. So I then took my leave of my Lord; and my Lord desired me to come and see him at Night about 6 a Clock in the Evening, for he had a great many came to him, but then he should be at leisure, and had many things to say to me.
At that time did my Lord express himself as discontented, and that it was irksome to him to be brought as a Witness?
He only said those words that I have told you, and looked up and turned up his eyes towards Heaven when he said so.
Pray where is Mr.? sware him.
What do you ask him?
We bring him to prove that my Lordwas served with a, but is so ill of the Gout he can't come.
If that be all, there is no question of it, but that he was.
If your Lordship please, We will prove in what condition my Lordis, and then we hope your Lordship will give us leave to prove what my Lord has said concerning my Lorddiscourses with him.
No certainly, Mr., and I am sure you ask it not as expecting it should be granted.
I lay it before your Lordship and the Court.
Ay, you lay it before us, but you are a Lawyer, do you your self think fit it should be done?
My Lord, I must submit it to you.
Come, will you consent, that what the Duke ofhas said, shall be given in Evidence, and then I presume the King's Council will consent to your request.
I consent? Here is my Clyent, My Lord, in Court, I can consent to nothing.
But if so be there be leave given on one side to tell what another person has said, why should not it be consented to on the other side, that it be proved what a 3d person that is absent has said for them?
Ay, will you consent that we prove what the Duke ofhas said?
We don't know what the Duke ofhas said.
But you do know 'tis not Evidence, nor fit to be granted what you ask.
You know that 'tis not for your purpose what he has said.
My Lord, We must go according to our Instructions.
But you know the Law, why should you offer any such thing? your offering it will make thethat know not the Law, think that the Court put hardships upon people, in denying things which you that understand the Law know can't be granted.
I do not press it my Lord, but leave it with you.
Why do you spend our time in urging things that are nothing to the purpose, and cannot be allowed?
Now my Lord, We will go on to another part of our defence, and that is, to call Witnesses to the Reputation of Mr., and his behaviour, to satisfie you, that he cannot be such a person as the Indictment says, and as he must be if it be true what this Gentleman my Lordhas sworn.
We will first examine my Lord.
My Lord, We ask you to that question. Have you known this Gentleman Mr., and what a sort of a man is he?
I have good reason to know him. I have known him a great while, and have always believed him an Honest and a Prudent man, a man of Honor and Vertue and Integrity, my Lord; and I have had no reason to have other Opinion of him. I know he has been always ever since he came abroad into the World a man that hath loved his Study, and Books and a contemplative life. And therefore I should not be apt to believe, That he could apply himself to a thing so contrary to his own nature, and to that way that he delighted in, and had alwayshitherto applied himself unto, I mean to ingage in a design of so much Malice and Wickedness.
My Lord, You have had a long Conversation with the knowledge of Mr., you say. What say you as to his Disposition; Because this Indictment says he is a Person of a Turbulent, Factious, Seditious Spirit?
I have always known him a quiet peaceable man, not medling in Business, very Friendly, free from all Turbulency, not of much acquaintance nor desirous to make much.
Pray my Lord, upon the same Oath you have taken, have you not at any time heard him express dissatisfaction as to the Male-administration of the Government?
No, never to me in the least.
Not at the time of the lastParliament?
No, I never heard him then, nor at any time 
else.<|endoftext|>Pray call your Witnesses together, and let me know who you begin with.
My Lords, We do not know what Place is designed for the Witnesses; but if they are to be on the other side, and this Croud do interpose between us and them, it will be impossible for us, who are the King's Council, to hear what they say, or know how to proceed.
There must be Room made there for the Witnesses; where are your Witnesses Mr.?
If you please to name them Sir, we will call them.
Call Mr., and Mr..
I know not how this is ordered, but way must be made there by the Bar, that the Prisoner may see the Witnesses, and they him.
Yes my Lord, by all means.
If your Lordships please, the Witnesses will be most Conveniently heard, if they come and stand here by us.
If your Lordships please, it will not be possible either for my Lord at the Bar, or for us to hear what the Witnesses say: Unless they be brought into this place to stand between us.
My Lord Great Chamberlain, be pleased to give order for them to be brought in thither.
The Witnesses must be brought to this place.
Give me the Name of him that you begin with.
We begin my Lords, with Mr.,
Hearken to your Oath Sir, the Evidence that you shall give on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queens Majesties, againstLordthe Prisoner at the Bar, shall be Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth: So help you God.
Mr., Do you give my Lords an account what you know of any Applications of Courtship made to Mrs.by Mr., and what became of it; and what you heardsay about her, or about any one else Relating to that matter.
My Lord, I had the Honour to be invited to Supper with my Lord, at thein, where I found Captainwith his Lordship.
When was this Sir, tell the time.
This was three Nights before this unfortunate Accident hapned, there I found Captain, and we supped together; and after Supper, Captainraised a Discourse of Mrs.and Mr.; says He, I should not doubt the Success of my Amour with Mrs., if I were not obstructed by, whom I design to be the Death of: This is Truth upon my Oath. My Lordwas in the Company; but I cannot say that my Lord made any Reply to the thing, or took any notice of it: But this Captaindid say, not only then, but several times before.
Did he say it at any other time in your Hearing.
Yes, several times before
Do you know any thing more of this matter.
No more, than that my Lordthat very Night that Mr.was killed, and Captaincame into the Scene-Room of the Play-House, and my Lordhad Captain,Coat on, and Captainhad my LordCoat on, and they changed their Cloaths in the Play-House. I saw them change their Cloaths; but what their Design was, I cannot tell.
When was that Sir.
That very Night that the Gentleman that is Dead, Mr., was killed.
You say, that my Lordwas present, when that Discourse ofwas, aboutat the Tavern.
Yes, but I cannot say my Lord took any notice of it, for he made no Reply that I heard.
Have you done with this Witness.
Yes, my Lord,
This is all that I know of the matter.
My Lord, have you any thing to say to this Witness.
No my Lord.
Then our next Witnesses Name is.
Mr., you have heard the Questions that have been asked, Mr., Pray will you make Answers to them; and give my Lords an Account what you know of this matter.
May it please Your Lordships, about 5 or 6 days before Mr.was Wounded, I was in Company with Captain, and he began Mrs.Health, I told him I would Pledge it. Says he, I am sure there is no Bar between me and Mrs., but; and I am Resolved to be Revenged on him, one way or another. About 3 Days afterwards I was at Supper with my Lordand Captain, and another Gentleman, and the same Discourse arose again, and CaptainWhispered me in the Ear, says he, I am resolved to have the Blood of. I told him I did not think it fit for him to speak so behind a Gentleman's back, and to me who was his Friend. I said I would acquaint Mr.with what he said, and I did not doubt but he would give him the satisfaction of a Gentleman for any Injury he did him. I heard no further Discourse at that time, nor do I know more of that matter, till the Night that Mr.was Wounded, when I saw him lying upon the Parlor Floor, and afterward saw him laid to Bed, and sate up all Night with him, and about four a Clock in the Morning I asked Mr.how the thing happened. He told me Captainkilled him basely; I asked him if his Sword was drawn; Yes, says he, but it was after I had received my Wound, for whilst my Lordtalked to merun me through.
At that time, when those Words were spoken at Supper, That he designed to be the Death of, was my Lord present?
Yes my Lordwas present, but he was Talking to Colonel.
Did my Lordsay any thing to whatsaid?
I did not hear him make any Answer to it at all.
Do you know any thing else in Relation to this Fact?
Nothing else but that Captaindid give a Letter to be delivered to Mrs., but I know not whether it was delivered or not, and he often told me he would Marry her with all his Heart.
You say you had that Discourse with, when he lay a Dying.
It was about four a Clock, and he died about One.
Was there any thing said about my Lordat that time?
Nothing but that my Lordwas Talking to him, whilst the other ran him through.
If I understand you aright, you say nothing against my Lord, but his being by one time at Supper whensaid some Words about; and then the other thing you say is whattold you after he was Wounded. That my Lord was Talking to him, whengave him the Wound.
Yes, My Lord, That is all that I heard.
Has your Lordship any thing to say to this Witness?
No, My Lord.
The next Witness that we shall desire to call is Mrs..
I have nothing to say to my Lord; but what I have to say, is to Mr.. About 4 days before Mr.was Killed, Mr.came to me, and spoke to me about Mrs.: He told me he was satisfied she hated him, I told him I did not believe she hated any body, or loved any Body: Yes, he said, she did love some body, but he had thought of a way to be even with that Body. Upon theNight before Mr.was killed, he came to me as I was coming out of the Dressing Room; sayeth he, Mrs.let me speak a Word with you, says he, you are very great with Mrs., and I desire you to be so kind, as to speak to her for me, and I would beg of you if you would give me leave to give her this Letter from me: No, said I, Mr., I beg your Pardon; you say she hateth you, and if she hateth you, she will not love any body that speaketh for you; and I am not fond of creating my self Enemies in the House, knowing I have some already. What Enemies, saith Mr.,do you mean? And then repeating a great Oath, I shall find a way with him speedily.
A way, with what?
A way with him speedily,said it of Mr..
What do you call this Witness for, Mr.what use do you make of her Evidence against my Lord?
My Lord, the use that we would make of these Witnesses is to give an Account of the whole Fact from the Beginning to the End,Malice, and what was the Occasion of it, his Design in coming there that Night, and what he did, and to leave it to your Lordships, to Judge what influence this will have, how far it will affect my Lord. The next Witness is Mrs..
What is this Womans Name?
Mrs..
Mrs., give my Lords an Account, whether you were present with my Lordand Mr.at the Tavern that day that Mr.was killed, and what passed there.
I Dined with my Lordand Captain, at thein, and there arose a Discourse about Mrs.and, and my Lordasked me, if I thoughthad lay with her or no. I said I could not tell; presently after says my Lord, it will cost50 Guineas this Design. Saith Mr., if the Villain offers to resist I will Stab him; saith my Lord, I will stand by my Friend. When this was done, Mr.desired Mr.to borrow a Case of Pistols of Captain, and he said he would not borrow them himself, for he doubted, if he knew of the Design he would not lend them. When that was done, Captaintold me he had a Coach and Six Horses in, to seize Mrs., and carry her away into the Country; and my Lordsaid, he would stand by his Friend: And when my Lordwent away,said to him; my Lord if you be not there by Six a Clock, I am Ruined. Saith my Lord, upon my Word and Honour I will be at the Play House by Six.
My Lord, have you any thing to say to that Witness?
Yes, My Lord, I desire to have her asked, whether she is a Maid or a Married Woman.
You hear the Question, but I do not know what use my Lord will make of it.
You can easily answer, whether you are Married or Unmarried.
That Question is very fair; are you a Married Woman, or a single Woman?
I am a single Woman, my Lord.
Pray Mrs.Repeat the Words that my Lordsaid, whensaid if the Villain resisted, he would Stab him.
My Lordsaid nothing in the World, but that he would stand by his Friend.
Have you any further Questions,to ask this Witness?
I have nothing more to ask her my Lord.
What say you my Lord; would you ask her any thing else?
No, my Lord.
Then withdraw.
The next Witness we call is.
What is this Witnesses Name?
, my Lord.
What is his Christian Name?
If your Lordships please to remember, that the last Witness Mrs.said, Thatdesired my Lord, not to fail of being at the Play-House by Six a Clock, and that he was undone if he did not come; and my Lord promised upon his Word and Honour that he would come: Now we call this Witness to prove, that they met at the Play-House according to the Appointment on the 9th of.
My Lord, All that I know of this matter was, That my Lordand Captainwere at the Play-House that Night, and that which made me take particular Notice of their being then at the Play-House, tho' they had been frequently there before together, was that Captainhad my LordCoat on, and my Lordhad CaptainCoat on.
Did you observe any thing else, when they were at the Play-House?
Nothing but only some Words that passed between Captainand my Lord, when I went to ask them for the overplus of the mony for coming in, because they came out of the Pit upon the Stage; he said he would not give it me, but if I brought any of our Masters, he would slit their Noses or something to that Effect.
Speak that over again.
I asked them for mony, that they ought to pay more than the rest that were in the Pit, because they came upon the Stage, and they would not give it me, but he said if I brought any of our Masters, he would Slit their Noses, or cut their Faces, or to that Effect.
My Lord, will your Lordship ask him any Questions?
No my Lord.
Call another Witness then.
My Lords, with your Lordships Favour, the next Witness that we shall call, is the Coach-Man,.
Mr., do you remember the Day when Mr.was killed?
Yes Sir.
Pray acquaint my Lords, what Persons you carryed in your Coach that Day, whether you carryed my Lordand Mr., and to what place, and where you waited for them.
If it please your Lordships, Captainand my Lordcame in a Hackney Coach to my Gate, where I live, and I was just a going to set my Coaches into the Street for Hyre: They Bargained with me for six Horses, and I was to have thirty Shillings to set them down aton this side. I asked them whether they would have me bring all the six Horses with the Coach, No they said, a pair would serve to the Play-House, and the other four should stand at the Pounds end. So I went accordingly to the place appointed, over against thein, and a Foot-Man came, and Mr.and he bid me drive down lower. So I drove to my Lord ofDoor, or thereabouts; and there was some Souldiers that would have had me go in, and Smoak and Drink with them: I told them, I did never Smoak, and I did not care for Drinking any thing at that time. With that, my Lordand Mr.came into the Coach, and as they bid me, I carryed them into, below the Watch-House that stood there; they bid me turn about, and stand there; and then they went for a little time to the, so I did turn about, and staid as they bid me, and they tarryed a pretty while before they came again, and then they bid me drive back to the place from whence I came, so I Drove into, and they bid me stop next to my LordHouse, this was about Ten a Clock, and it being so late, I went Home, and sent a Postillion down, to take care of the Coach, so that what passed afterwards, I cannot tell.
What Day or Night, was all this you speak of?
Truly my Lord, I cannot tell what Day it was, it was in, as I take it, theand it wasI believe, I do not know justly.
Did you hear of the Death of Mr.?
Yes, I did.
Was it the same Day that you heard Mr.was killed.
No, I did not hear it till the next Morning.
You say, you went with my Lordand Mr.into, and there you stayed for them, whilst they went elsewhere.
Yes, I did so.
Do you know to what Houses they went?
They went to the, to the hithermost House on this side the, and they went below to a Door on this side of a House that is not finished yet.
Did you hear them use any Expressions there.
I heardsay to my Lord, I think there is a Man and a Maid talking, it was at the Corner House; saith, we are Betrayed, Damme saith he, my Lord, let us go and Thresh him.
What did they do then?
I did see them do nothing.
Whither did you carry them from thence?
To the place from whence they came, in.
Will your Lordship say any thing to this man?
I desire he may be asked, whether he had not Orders to go out of Town with us, as soon as Mrs.was put into the Coach.
If it please you Sir, I had Order thus, that when we were to go out of Town, I must Drive down into the, and then round about any way that was readiest and clearest to get to the Pound, that Order I had, and no other Order I had.
Who is your next Witness?
My Lords, the next Witness we shall call, will give you an Account what was done in, upon their endeavouring to carry her away, and for that we have here Mrs.her self.
What is this Gentlewomans Name?
Mrs..
Mrs., Pray give my Lords an Account of the whole of your Knowledge of the Attempt that was made upon you in, and what followed upon it.
My Lord, I was inat Supper at Mr., and at ten a Clock at Night,went Home with me; and coming down, there stood a Coach by my LordDoor, and the Boot of the Coach was down, and a great many men stood by it; and just as I came to the Place where the Coach stood, two Soldiers came and pulled me from, and four or five more came up to them, and they knocked my Mother down almost, for my Mother and my Brother were with me. My Mother recovered, and came and hung about my Neck, so that they could not get me into the Coach, andwent to call Company to rescue me. Thencame with his Sword drawn, and struck atand my Mother; and when they could not get me into the Coach, because Company came in, he said he would see me Home, and he led me by one Hand, and my Mother by the other. And when we came Home, he pulledby the Sleeve, and said, Sir, I would speak with you.
Pray, did you see any Body in the Coach when they pulled you to it?
Yes, my Lordwas in the Coach; when they pulled me to the Coach, I saw my Lordin the Coach. And when we came Home,pulledby the Sleeve, and said he would speak with him. As they led me along, my Lordcame out of the Coach, and followed us, and all the Soldiers followed them, but they were dismissed, and, as I said, when we came to our Lodging, thenpulledby the Sleeve, and said, he would speak with him. Saith,, another time will do, to Morrow will serve; with that, when I was within Doors,was pulled into the House, andwalked up and down in the Street with his Sword drawn. He had his Sword drawn when he came along with me.
Did you observe him to say any thing whilst he was with you?
As I was going down the Hill, he said, as he led me, he would be revenged.
Did he name of whom he would be revenged?
He did not name of whom then, but when I was in the House, several Persons went to the Door, and afterwardswent to the Door, and spoke to them, and asked them what they staid and walked there for; at last, they said, they staid to be revenged of, and thencame in to me, and told me of it.
Who said that?
Mr..
Were my Lordandboth together when that was said, that they staid to be revenged of?
Yes they were. And whencame in and told me, I sent my Brother and the Maid, and all the People we could, out of the House to, to desire her to send, if she knew where her Husband was, to tell him of it, and she did. And when they came in a Doors again, I went to the Door, and the Doors were shut, and I listened to hear if they were there still, and my Lordandwere walking up and down the Street; and by and by, the Watch came up to them, and when the Watch came, they said, Gentlemen, Why do you walk with your Swords drawn? Says my Lord, I am a Peer of, touch me if you dare.
Repeat that again, for I could not well hear you: Do you speak of what you heard from, or what you observed your self?
My Lord, I was within Doors, but I was listening at the Door, and heard this my self; they came up to them, and said, Gentlemen, Why do you walk with your Swords drawn?
Who asked that Question?
The Watch; and, says my Lord, I am a Peer of, touch me if you dare. Then the Watch left them, and they went away, and a little after, there was a Cry of Murder, and that is all that I know, my Lord.
My Lord, I desire this Witness may be asked, how long after this Passage that she speaketh of, was it that she heard Murder cryed in the Street.
You hear the Question,, What say you to it?
My Lord, I believe it was about a quarter of an Hour after, to the best of my Memory.
What do you mean, a quarter of an Hour after the Watch asked the Question?
Yes, my Lord.
My Lord.
My Lord, I desire to ask this Witness a question. If I heard her aright, I think she said, they threaten'd to be Revenged of Mr., I desire to know of her, whether my Lorddid threaten him.
I do not know indeed; but when Mrs.asked them what they staid there for? They said to be Revenged of Mr.. I did not hear them my self, but Mrs.came in and told me so.
Mrs., I think, if I did not mistake, you said, when the Watch came up, they asked them, why their Swords were drawn?
Yes, and my Lordmade answer, he was a Peer of, and bid them touch him if they durst, and they went away.
My Lord, the next Witness that we call, shall be Mr., at whose House Mrs.Supped that Night.
Mr., I suppose you remember the Night, when Mrs.Supped at your House.
Yes, my Lord.
I pray give an account of your whole Knowledge about this Matter, What happen'd that Night.
About Ten a Clock at Night, onthe Ninth oflast, going downwith Mrs., whom I Led just against my LordHouse.
Pray Sir, speak out, and tell us what time it was.
About Ten a Clock at Night, onthe Ninth oflast, going down, and leading Mrs., right against my LordDoor, stood a Coach, where two Soldiers pressed in between me and Mrs., and parted us: I asked what that was for? But they took hold of Mrs., and immediately they would have forced her into the Coach; Capt., whom I saw there with his Sword drawn, made several Blows at me.
Who would have forced her into the Coach?
The Soldiers would.
Pray go on Sir, what follow'd after that?
I say, Capt.made several Blows at me, and Cry'd you Villain, Stand. I received several of them upon my Cane, but there was none that hurt me; then I got Help, and they were prevented of carrying Mrs.away. My Lordwas in the Coach; I saw him in the Coach.
Did you see any Arms in the Coach?
I saw no Arms, but I saw a Bundle in the Coach, tho I could not tell what it was; and there was one in the Coach, that I saw was my Lord. So when we had got Help, we went down the Lane to Convey her home, and Capt.was with us, and my Lordfollowed at a distance. Capt.said to the Soldiers,. When we came to the House and Mrs.was entring in, Captainpull'd me by the Sleeve, and said he would speak with me. Said I, to Night is not a fit time, to Morrow is better, therefore pray stay till to Morrow Morning. But said he,.
You speak so low, that I cannot tell what you say; I did not hear that last that you said.
My Lord, I say, when Captain Hill pull'd me by the Sleeve, and said he would speak with me, I told him, that Night was not a fit time, to Morrow would do better: Well, saith he,I went in a Doors, and there my Lordand he staid for an Hour and a half, as I was told; I saw them not my self: But Mrs.came in and said, that they said, they waited to be Revenged.
Whom did they mean, your self that they would be Revenged of?
Mrs.said, they waited for Mr..
Did you continue in that House till after the Murder was committed?
Yes Sir, I did.
How long after you came into the House was the Fact done?
About an Hour and an half.
Did you your self hear or observe any thing to be said or done, from the time you came into the House, to the time the Fact was committed?
No, my Lord, I was in the Back Room of the House,
Pray, Mr., did you see Mr.after he was Wounded?
Yes, I did.
Then give my Lords an account what passed at that Visit.
Upon the outcry of Murder, I came out into the Street, where I found my Lordjust Surrendring himself to the Constable; and immediately I went to Mr.House, and I found him lying all along in his Blood upon the Floor; he seeing me, desired me to lift him up, which I did, and thinking he had been Dying, I asked him whether he knew me. He said Yes. Said I to him, Had you time to draw your Sword in your Defence? He said,.
Is this all you have to say, Sir?
Yes.
Will your Lordship ask this Witness any Questions?
My Lord, I desire he may be asked whether my Sword was Drawn when I Surrendred my self to the Constable.
No my Lord, your Sword was in the Scabbard when you Surrendred your self, but I cannot say that your Sword was Drawn before, or not.
The next Witness that we desire to call, is Mrs..
What is the Name of this Witness?
Mrs.. Pray Mrs., do you remember the Night when Mrs.Supped at your House, and Mr.was Killed? Acquaint my Lords with all you did observe that Night.
Mrs.Supped at my Lodging, and my Husband went home with her, and staying something longer than ordinary, I sent my Servant to know what was the reason of it: He brought me word back, that my Husband had like to have been Murdered, and Mrs.carried away. With that I went down my self towards Mrs.Lodgings, and there I found my Lordand Mr.walking, Mr.with his Sword Drawn before Mrs.Door; my Lordnot. So I went in, into the House; and after I had staid a while there, Mrs.came out to them, and asked them why they Staid there? They made answer, they staid for Mr..
Who made that Answer?
Mr..
Who was with Mr.at that time?
My Lord.
Was there any body besides those two, that you observed?
No, there was no body else that I saw.
Were their Swords Drawn?
Mr.then was, my Lordat that present was not: But Mrs.hearing that they waited for Mr., desired me to go over to Mrs.House, and speak to her to send to her Husband, and desire him to keep where he was, or come home with a good Guard, whilst I was telling Mrs.what I was desired to tell her -- But I should have told your Lordships, that when I came out to go to Mrs., my Lordhad then his Sword Drawn.
Were they there when you went out of Mrs.Lodgings?
Yes, they were.
And are you sure, that at that time when you went out of Mrs.House, my Lordhad his Sword Drawn?
I am sure of it, that when I went out, my Lordhad then his Sword Drawn; that was the Second time.
Out of whose House was that you went?
Out of Mrs.Lodgings.
Where were they when you saw his Sword Drawn?
They were walking before Mrs.Door, from one end of the Streetto the other.
What Street is that?
Howard-Street.
Pray describe to my Lords that Street.
They that stand in that Street, can see who goeth down to Mr.House, and who goeth up.
Well now go on.
Whilst I was desiring Mrs.to send away to her Husband, I heard Murder cry'd out; immediately I open'd Mr.Door, and he came in, and fell with his Arms round about my Neck to support himself, I suppose, and he said,had Murder'd him. I helped him as far as the Parlor Door, and there down he fell. I went up the Street and called out, and my Lordcame to me, and bid me take notice, he had no hand in the Murder, for his Sword was not Drawn. I told him, I could not tell that, for to my knowledge he had been in Mr.Company with his naked Sword just before.
Call Mrs..
You have nothing so say to that Witness my Lord, have you?
No, my Lord.
Is this all you have to say, Mrs.?
After this, my Lordresign'd himself up to the Constable, the Constable standing by me, I bid him Secure my Lord, which he did.
My Lord, I desire to ask this Witness, whether I Surrendred my self, or made Opposition, or offered to run away?
No my Lord, the Constable laid hold on you.
What Answer do you make to my Lord's Question?
I say, my Lord, the Constable laid hold upon my Lord.
I desire to ask her, whether I did not Surrender my self?
Not till I had desired the Constable to Secure your Lordship.
Did I make any Opposition, or offer to run away?
No, for the Constable presently took hold of your Lordship.
I desire she may be asked whetherRun away.
That I know not; I suppose he was gone away out of the Street before I came forth.
Swear Mrs..
Mrs., you are upon your Oath, pray declare to my Lords what you know happen'd upon that Night that Mr.was Killed.
If it please your Lordships, when Mrs.came Home, I found her Crying? I asked her what was the matter? She said, my Lord, and Mr., had run her into a Coach, with six or seven Soldiers, and lifted her into the Coach, and she said they were at the Door. Upon which, I went to the Door, and saw my Lordand Mr.walking along. Said I, are you the Gentlemen that have used Mrs.in this manner? My Lordanswered, Madam, said he,.
I do not hear what this Witness saith, she speaketh so low.
My Lordsaid, they had Six or Seven Pistols in the Coach, and could easily have suppressed the Rabble, if they would have carried her away; but he had no Design upon her for his own part, but only to serve his Friend; and that Mr.design was to take her out of Town, and keep her a Week, and see if he could perswade her to Marry him; and saith Mr.,Mountford. Why, said I to him, What hurt hath Mr.done you? Saith he,.
That wasthat said so.
Yes. So I went and told Mrs.of it.
Pray acquaint my Lords what my Lordsaid to you about this Matter.
My Lordsaid, he protected her, for if it had not been for him, thehad torn her in pieces; but if they had had a mind to carry her off, they could easily have suppressed the, for they had six or seven Pistols in the Coach: But saith my Lord,. So saith Mr.,. Why, said I, what hurt hath Mr.done you? Saith he,. So I went and told Mrs.of it. About half an Hour after, or more,came down, and when he came down, I saw him a little before he came to them, and went to him, and would fain have spoke to him, but he would not stay to let me speak what I had to say to him, but going on, presently he met my Lord. Saith he,. Saith my Lord again,Mr. Mountford. Saith my Lord,, Mr. Mountford,HillBracegirdle. Saith Mr.,Mrs. Bracegirdle,Mr. HillMr. HillMr. Mountford, Mr. Mountford.
Speak that last again.
Mr.and my Lord met; saith Mr., your Servant, my Lord; saith my Lord, Your Servant, Mr., I have a great respect for you, and would have no difference be between us; but here has been a thing fallen out between Mrs.and Mr.; saith Mr.presently again, Has my Wife disobliged your Lordship? If she has, she shall ask your Pardon. But Mrs.is no concern of mine: I know nothing of this matter, I come here by accident.
Who said they came there by accident?
Mr.said, I know nothing of this matter, I come here by accident. But, I hope, your Lordship will not vindicatein such Actions as these are: Upon that, I heard Mr.bid Mr.draw, Mr.said he would, and drew his Sword; but whether he receiv'd his Wound before or after, I cannot tell; it was in the Night.
My Lord.
My Lord, I desire this Witness may be asked, whether my LordSword was drawn when he talked with, because the Council opened it before, that the Watch came to them, and saw them with their Swords drawn when they were walking in the Street.
Mrs. you heard my Lord's Question: Was my LordSword drawn whilst he talked with, or no?
I do not remember I did see my LordSword drawn.
Were they near together?
They were near together.
I desire she may be asked whether I went up the Street to meet Mr., or he came down to me?
You heard the Question, Mistress, what say you?
Mr.came down to him.
I desire she may be asked whether she did not go to hinder Mr.from coming that way?
Yes, I did go to speak to him, but he did not hear me speak, or did not hearken to me; I took him by the Hand, and told him I would speak with him, but he did not hear me, but went on.
You did not tell him upon what account you would have spoke with him?
No, I had not time.
I desire she may be asked, whether Mr.Sword was within his Arm, or by his Side.
I believe it was by his Side.
I desire she may be asked one Question more, whether he could not have went home, without coming to Mr.and me?
He did come out of his way, his way was not by my House; he did come down the Street towards them.
I desire your Lordships to take notice, that he came out of his way to me. I desire to aske her: Did he come as if he was going to his own House or yours?
As if he was coming to mine.
I desire to ask her, whether I had any hand in killing Mr., or went to hold him, or meddled with him?
Not that I did see.
Have you any more to say to this Witness?
No, my Lord.
Nor your Lordship?
No, my Lord.
Then the next Witness we desire to call, is,.
, where do you live?
In.
Where doth he Live saith he?
In, my Lord. Pray how near is that to the Place where Mr.was Killed?
About ten or twelve Pole.
Did you observe my Lordand Mr.that Night, and where were they?
All that I can say to the matter in that Case is, I was in my own House about a quarter after Ten a Clock, and I heard a noise in the Street, and I went out, and saw two Gentlemen and two Lads about the middle of the Channel; one of the Lads had one of the Gentlemen by the Arm, just by the Channel, and said,. There was an Answer made, that they would be Revenged that Night, or to Morrow.
Do you know who the Boy was that used that Expression?
No, my Lord, it was very Dark.
Do you not know neither who returned the Answer?
No indeed.
But you are sure you heard those words pass?
Yes indeed, and I went to the Door afterwards, whilst they went to the upper end of the Street and returned again; and I saw CaptainBoy following him. My Lord, I knew Capt., tho he was not in the Cloaths he formerly used to come to my House in, and the Boy I knew to be his Boy.
Were those Persons together that you heard speaking so?
Yes, all four together, in a Confusion they seemed to be, for they were Pushing to and agen, and the Boy had hold of one of the Gentlemen's Arms when he bid him alter his Resolution.
Repeat those Words again that you heard him say.
Has your Lordship any thing to ask this Witness?
No, my Lord.
I spoke of this same afterwards, and so they have brought me here to give Evidence: That is all that I can say. I cannot Swear to my Lord, that he was one, I do not know that ever I saw him to my knowledge in my Life.
My Lord Steward, I desire he may be asked, whether he knoweth who that Boy was that made that Answer.
There was no answer made by any Boy, but begging and praying,.
Do you know who that Boy was?
No, I do not know what Boy it was. But when I heard Mr.was Killed, and my Lordwas concerned, I told what I had heard and seen, and so they bring me here to Evidence it. That is all I can say to the matter.
My Lord, we desire next to call some of the Watch, and shall begin with.
What is his Name?
. Mr., I think you are Beadle of the Parish.
Yes, I am.
Pray acquaint my Lords what you observed that Night Mr.was Killed, when you saw my Lordand Mr., the first time and the second time, when my Lordwas Taken.
When I first came down the Street, walking the Rounds between Eleven and Twelve a Clock, as I turned at the Corner out ofinto, I saw my Lordand Capt.Walking, that is, upon the Paved Stones; my Lord was walking towards me, and I asked, Who comes there? Saith my Lord, a Friend. Said I, What is the meaning of your Swords being Drawn? Return your Swords, and stand off. With that, he returned his Sword immediately. Saith he,? and he profered me his Sword; but the Constable was not there then, and I did not take his Sword; but, said I, God Bless your Honor my Lord, I know not what you are, but I hope you are doing no harm; No, saith he. With that, the Constable came immediately, and he profered the same to him; there were two Candles in some Maids, or Womans hands at a Door hard by, and I went to ask them if they knew the meaning of it; and there being a Neighbours Man leaning with a Bottle and a Glass against the Wall, whom I knew. I think they told me one of them had a Sweet-heart there; and my Lord said, he was drinking a Lady's Health, and as soon as his Bottle was out, he would be gone. That is all I heard of the matter.
Was Mr.there?
Yes, he was.
Was his Sword Drawn?
Yes, his Sword was drawn, and I asked what made that Gentleman with his Sword Drawn? and my Lordsaid, he had lost his Scabbard; but seeing this Neighbour's Man stand there, I went to the House.
Were both their Swords drawn at first?
Both their Swords were Drawn when I came first into the Street; but my Lord put up his Sword, and the other continued Drawn, by reason as they said, he had lost his Scabbard. And so seeing, as I said, my Neighbour's Man standing there, we went to that House to enquire if they knew what their Business was; we were not got into the House, I am sure not a Stone's cast within the House, but Murder was cry'd out, and we came back again, and my Master being nimbler of Foot than I, because he was a younger Man, came first into the Place, and Seized My Lord before I came; how the Seizing was I do not know.
Our next Witness is.
, you was one of the Watch that night when Mr.was Killed.
Yes, Sir.
Give my Lords an account what you observed that Night, in relation to my Lordand Mr..
The Constable and his Watch going the Rounds, divided themselves into two parts; I went downwith one Party; the Constable he went downwith the other Party. We were four or five that came down, and when we came down, my Lordand Capt.Swords were both Drawn; my Lordput up his Sword just as we came down.
Speak out Man, that my Lords may all hear you.
I say, the Constable and his Party went down, and another Party down, four or five of us, and my Lordand Capt.had both their Swords Drawn: When we came down, my Lord put up his Sword just as we came down, but the Constable not being come, I went and called him.
You say both their Swords were Drawn when you came down.
Yes, but my Lord put up his Sword just as we came down.
What time of Night was that?
It was between Eleven and Twelve.
How long before the Murder was committed?
A quarter of an Hour.
Do you not say, they put up their Swords as soon as you came down?
My Lordput up his Sword, butsaid he had never a Scabbard.
Did you ask them why they had their Swords drawn at that time of Night?
No, I went to call the Constable.
Have you any more to ask of this Witness?
I have not my Lord.
Nor you my Lord?
No, my Lord.
Pray go on then; whom do you produce next?
Our next Witness is
Were you one of the Watch that Night Mr.was Killed?
Yes.
Did you see my Lordand Capt.that Night?
Yes.
Acquaint my Lords where it was, and in what manner you found them.
In; I came along with the Constable, and I walked before them that went downwith my Lanthorn, and there was my Lordwith his Sword Drawn, and Captwith his the like: We asked them, whatthey did there? They said they were drinking of a Bottle of Wine:said to me, you may knock me down if you please: Nay, said I, we never use to knock any Gentlemen down, unless there be occasion; and then we went intoto the Tavern to examine what they were, and what they were doing; and in the mean time the Murder was done.
Did you not ask them why their Swords were drawn?
Yes, I did.
What did they say?
made answer that he had lost his Scabbard.
What said my Lord?
My Lordhad put up his Sword by that time we came up to him: That is all I can say to it.
If you have nothing more to ask him, call another.
My Lord, I desire he may be asked whether he came with the Constable when I surrendred my self?
Yes, and I took hold of your Sleeve, and you shook and quak'd and trembled, as if you would tear it to pieces.
I desire he may be asked whether my Sword was in the Scabbard when I surrendred my self.
Yes, it was, he surrendred it.
That was after the Murder was done.
With your Lordship's Favour, I desire he may answer my Lordfirst Question again, so as to be heard by your Lordships; What was that you were saying when my Lord surrendred himself?
I took him by the Arm when he surrendred himself up.
What then?
Then he quaked, and I had him away to the.
Hear my Question, you say you took him by the Sleeve, when he surrendred himself; what do you mean by that? is it that he had surrendred himself before you laid hold on him, or afterwards?
I took hold of his Arm, when he surrendred himself.
But was it before he surrendred himself to the Constable?
No, it was afterwards, my Lord; to have him away.
Then you did see him surrender himself to the Constable?
Yes, my Lord.
Then call Mr.:
Whom do you call next, Sir?
My Lords, we call'd Mr.; but they say, he is not come, therefore with your Lordships favour, we will call Mrs..
Mrs., I think, you live at the next Door to Mrs.Lodging?
Yes, I do so.
Pray give my Lords an account what you saw and heard that Night Mr.was kill'd.
I was at Mrs.House, and I went to the Door with them; and just as I went to the Door, my Lordcame up to me; and just as he came to the Door, Mr.came down the Street, and my Lord went to him, and imbraced him, and said, Mr., Your humble Servant, I am glad to see you; Who is this said Mr., my Lord? Yes said my Lord. What makes your Lordship here at this time a night, saith Mr.? Saith my Lord again, I suppose Mr.you was sent for; sent for, for what saith he? You have heard of the business of Mrs., I suppose, saith my Lord: No my Lord, saith he, I come by chance.
Who said that?
Mr., Sir.
Well, go on and speak aloud.
My Lord, Mr.. --
She is not used to such publick Examinations: If your Lordships will please to allow her to begin again, because she is in some Confusion, she will be the better able to give you what account she can of this matter.
Let her recollect her self, and begin again.
When Mr.came down the Street, I stood at the Door, and my Lordwas come to the Door, and my Lordwent to him and said, Mr.,, and Embraced him. Saith Mr.,Mohun?, saith he,? saith my Lord,Mr. Mountford., said he, I. Saith my Lord,Bracegirdle. With that, after he had said this, Mr.cometh up, and saith,, and would have drawn my Lord away. Saith Mr.,Hill. Upon this, as soon as he had said so, Mr.came up and struck Mr.a Box on the Ear. Saith Mr.,? And with that, he whipped out his Sword and made a Pass at him, and I turned about and cry'd out.
But you say, you sawdraw his Sword, and make a Pass at him.
No, his Sword was drawn before; but he immediately after the Box on Ear, made a Pass at him, and I turned about and cry'd.
Had Mr.his Sword drawn at that time?
No, he had not.
Are you sure he had not?
Yes, I am sure he had not, for as soon as he struck the Blow, he made a Pass at him.
Was my Lord present at that time?
He stood just by on the Right-hand.
How near to them?
They were all close together as well as I could discern.
My Lord, have you any mind to ask this Witness any Questions?
No, my Lord.
Have you done with her?
Yes, my Lord. The next Witness we desire 
to call is Mr., the
Constable.<|endoftext|>Mr., Pray give an account to the Jury and the Court of the manner of Election and chusing of a Common Hall, and the manner of it.
My Lord, I have been almost 25 Years an Attorney, I always took it that the Serjeant of the Chamber had order to go down to the Clerks or Beadles of the Companies, to summon a Common Hall by such a day.
By whose Command?
By my Lord Mayor's.
In all your time did the Sheriffs ever summon any?
O no.
Pray Mr.thus, When they were met, what was the usual Method?
Before theandwere set, the People walked up and down the Hall till thedid come, but as soon as mycame, themade Proclamation,.
Whose Officer was the?
MyOfficer.
A Corporation Officer.
Now for the dissolving them.
When they have done the business,, as I take it, takes his direction from the, and he bids the Officer make Proclamation,.
Did theever dissolve them?
Never.
Did thedo it?
No, there was no such thing.
Mr., After myhad dismist the Hall, did you ever hear thekeep them together?
All the People went away, till within this three or four Years.
Since when?
Since Mr., about that time.
Ay, inandtime, then began the Bustle.
You say you have been an Attorney 25 Years, I would ask you, in all that time, Mr., in all that time did you ever know the Lord Mayor adjourn the Common Hall to a certain day?
There was never any occasion.
Answer my Question.
I never did.
I would ask you another Question, Mr., Did you ever know before the Election was over, when the Electors were chusing Sheriffs, or polling or debating it, did you ever know in the middle of it, the Mayor against the will of the Sheriffs adjourn it?
No, no.
Did ever the Sheriffs undertake to keep them together before these late times?
No, never.
Pray, Sir, this, Though it is usual, after the Sheriffs have taken the Poll, to acquaint my Lord Mayor; Did you ever know that the Sheriffs have adjourn'd the Common Hall, without acquainting my Lord Mayor?
No.
I ask you one Question more, Do you remember when there was a Poll between Sirand another?
No, I did not charge my Memory with it.
Do you remember when there was a Poll between Sirand Mr.?
I was about the Hall.
Do you remember when there was a Poll between Sir, and Mr.? Who did manage that Poll?
I did.
Are you upon your Oath?
Yes, I am.
When they were gone to the Poll, I went out of the Hall.
Did you ever look upon it that the Sheriffs had any thing more to do than others?
No.
Who were induced to take the Poll? Was it by the Sheriffs, or the Lord Mayor?
I have been appointed by my Lord Mayor. I do know that the Sheriffs have taken upon them to appoint a Poll, and then my Lord appointed his Clerks in the House to be assistant to the Common Serjeant, and the Town-Clerk; I never was but in two Polls, one for Mr., and another for my Lord Mayor. One went on with the Poll in one place, and the other in another.
But before that time, Sir.
I know nothing of that Sir, I was never concerned before.
Pray, Sir, Who used to manage the Poll before this time?
Mr., I would ask you a Question, Who managed the Poll before?
I have been in a Common Hall when they have been choosing Sheriffs, when several have fined. And it hath been upon the question when the Hall hath divided, and they have Polled in the Hall.
Who Polled them?
The Sheriffs and the Officers stood and saw them go out, and this is within these few years.
, I ask you thus now in all your Observations when there was any Contest, who was Sheriff upon the Election and the Divisions during the time of Election, and before it were at an end, who did manage it, the Sheriffs, or the Lord Mayor?
When the Court had been proclaimed, and the Recorder had spoken to them, my Lord Mayor and the Aldermen withdrew from the Hustings, and the Sheriffs and other Officers stood there with them; then the Commons proposed who they would have put in nomination, and they were put up; then the Sheriffs have turned back to the Gentlemen upon the Hustings to ask their opinions, how are your opinions concerning the Hands? We do think it goes so; then it hath been declared.
By whom?
The Common Cryer, or the Common Serjeant.
You say, as soon as my Lord Mayor withdrew, during the time of Election, the two Sheriffs managed the Hall.
In that manner with others.
, Do you remember who Adjourned the Hall, whenandwere Chose?
I can't tell.
Are you Sworn?
Yes.
Pray will you tell my Lord and the Jury what you have observed in particular, because I mentioned it in the time of Sir; mention how that was.
My Lord, when the Common Cryer hath made Proclamation, the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen being set upon the Hustings, Mr. Recorder makes a Speech; as soon as that is done, my Lord Mayor and the Aldermen retire into this Court, leaving the Sheriffs and me, and the rest of the Officers upon the Hustings, and I there manage the Election, and when the Election is made, I go up to the Court of Aldermen, and make Report of what hath been done in the Hall. I declare the Election, and I manage the Election, and do it as the duty of my Place.
Who manages the Election?
I manage the Election; I declare what is my opinion of the Election in the Hall; and I come and make Report to my Lord Mayor in this Court; then my Lord Mayor and the Aldermen, and the Recorder come down again. I remember particularly when Sirwas Lord Mayor, it was about the Choice of, and Alderman, and there was a great disturbance in the Hall; then I came into the Court, and after I had made my Report, I offer'd to give the Paper to the Recorder that then was: Sir, he told me that the people wou'd not hear him, and therefore he wou'd not take the Paper. Upon that Sirsaid to me, Prethee, do thou speak to them, they will hear thee if they will hear any body; for the Hall was in a great uproar, and they call'd to throw me off the Hustings, and then I made Answer to Sir; Sir, It is not the duty of my Office, and when I do any thing that is not my Office, Ishall expect particular Directions. Then, saith he, You must tell them, I must Adjourn them till, because I go to theto try the Assassinates of. Thereupon the Hall was Adjourned, and Proclamation made to depart; and my Lord Mayor attempting to go, was beat back twice or thrice, but at last they let him and the Aldermen go, and kept the Sheriffs and me till Evening. At last Mr.came up to me,says I, I am glad to see you, you will hear Reason, says he, why do not you go on with the Poll? I told him, my Lord Mayor had Adjourned the Hall: Says he, I did not hear it before; but now you tell me so, I will go out of the Hall: Says I, Sir, you will do very well to tell the Hall so; which he did, and some went away; and further Adjournments were made by the direction of my Lord Mayor.
I would ask you a Question or two; Who do you look upon to be the Chief Magistrate of the City?
My Lord Mayor, Sir.
Pray, in all your time till this, was there no Uproar? Did ever any Sheriff undertake to Control the Mayor in the business of putting Questions, or taking Votes?
Sir, there was never any dispute till Mr. Sheriffwas upon the Hustings, and then there was.
As whose Officer did you do it?
My Lord Mayor's, and the City of; I have nothing to do with the Sheriffs, for when there is a Writ comes for the Choice of Parliament men, directed to the Sheriffs, I never do it, but.
I speak of later Disturbances.
The first Dispute about Sheriffs, since I was Common Serjeant, was about, and that Poll was taken by the direction of the Lord Mayor, by the Town Clerk and my self; and our Books say, If there be a Dispute in the Common Hall, it must be decided as in the Common Council. It is in.
No,.
It is, they turn the white Book into a black Book now.
At that time, Sir, when my Lord Mayor was willing to go to the, Did the Sheriffs do any thing farther?
The Sheriffs did not meddle in the matter.
Mr, Pray give my Lord and the Jury an account of what you know of this matter.
I have been at a Court of Common Hall 28 years, my Lord, and have been concerned, I never looked upon the Sheriffs to have any concern there. And I do very well remember, Sir, I do remember and know; they did always in ancient times take advice of the Officers by, and they never did esteem themselves in those days, to be any more concerned than as the best Officers to be preferred before the rest: When my Lord says, Come up, they come in order, the Masters and Wardens of the Companies.
Who did do the business upon the Hustings?
All of them, Sir, altogether.
Was there never any difference about the Votes?
Sometimes they have stood upon it.
When there was a Question made to know who had the most, who decided it?
They generally asked one another, What do you think, and what do you think? I speak for 20 years together since the King came in.
I hope in God there hath been a King infor 20 years, though perhaps some of the Sheriffs that were then in Debate, would have had none.
Mr., I only desire to know this of you, because I know you know Questions; I desire, my Lord, to know whether he speaks it to be a matter of Right, or his Opinion; for we know Mr.Opinion will go a great way in this matter. Do you speak it as a thing of Right, or as your Conceptions?
Sir, it would be a thing very confident in me to determine of the Right, but only as I always esteem'd it.
Mr., I would ask you this Question; Pray do you tell your belief upon the Observation that you have made from time to time of the Practice there?
An hundred and a hundred Common Halls I believe I have been at.
That's good store.
That may be when there are many Fines; when I was Common Serjeant there were 5000 pounds Fines one year.
I desire you to give your opinion, you say they are all equal that are there.
Every Officer in his degree; for if 20 men go together, he that is best speaks first.
Were the Sheriffs allowed to be there, or no?
The Sheriffs are always bound to attend my Lord Mayor by their Oaths, unless they have lawful excuse.
Mr., Did the Sheriffs ever continue the Assembly after it was dissolved?
No, Sir.
Or could they do it?
I can't say that.
Did you ever know my Lord Mayor Adjourn the Court till the Hall had done?
I can't tell.
I tell you, Sir, Sirdid.
But the Sheriffs could not do it.
Nor he neither, for he paid for it.
Mr., I ask this Question; Who declares the Poll in the Hall?
The Common Serjeant.
Who directs him usually?
His Office directs it self.
I ask if the Sheriffs don't agree, who is elected before the Common Serjeant make Proclamation?
They always agree, unless it be very clear; I have known the Common Serjeant do it several times without disputing.
When Persons are put in Nomination, and the hands are held up; I generally ask the People about me, who have most, and particularly the Sheriffs, and so make Declaration.
The Officers ask one another, who they think has most? that doth not give them the Jurisdiction, that they chuse Officers without the Lord Mayor or Sheriffs: but, for ought that I see, these Officers have had more to do about the Choice than the Sheriffs have. These Officers consult one with another commonly, and conclude which side have most; and then report it to my Lord Mayor.
First of all, when they put any Question for any Officer in the Common Hall, the ususal way of putting the Question is,: And if the Election be clear, Proclamation is made presently: If not, the Common Serjeant asks,? Which being declared, they acquiesce. But sincecame in, there have been very hot disputes in the World; but before his time there were attempts made to keep Sheriffs off, but never before to get Sheriffs on. And after the Election is declared below, immediately they go to my Lord Mayor and report it to him: and then comes down the Mayor and Aldermen to the, and the Recorder says,. And then the Lord Mayor commands the Assembly to be dissolved., When the Common Hall is first met together, are not the Lord Mayor and Aldermen generally present?
At the first meeting.
When they are there set, give an Account what Proclamation is there made.
How long have you known it?
I have been in this place almost seventeen years; I always come with my Lord Mayor; I do make Proclamation by Order of my Lord Mayor, dictated by the Town-Clerk; and I take the words from the Town Clerk, and his words I say;LondonMiddlesex. I never adjourned the Court in my life, but by Order from my Lord Mayor; nor never dissolved the Court, but by Order from my Lord Mayor.
, I would fain know this; When my Lord Mayor is gone, and the Aldermen, during the Election, do you ever dismiss the Court before my Lord comes down again; and do not you take the very words of Dissolution from the Town-Clerk?
I do so.
And what is usual in your time when Sheriffs have fined off, who gives directions for a Common-Hall?
My Lord Mayor, Sir.
Who is it puts the Question, the Common Serjeant or the Cryer?
The Common Serjeant dictates the words to me, and I never take them from any other; I have taken the Paper into my own hands, but never but one year neither, when they were in a confusion; the time whenwas chosen there was some difference, I did read the Names that time, and never but that one time. I always take the words from the Common Serjeant; I never put any Vote, but what I have from the Common Serjeant.
Do the Sheriffs put any Vote?
Never, Sir.
I do not understand him; I think he did mean, whenwas chosen he put the Question by some body else.
No, no, he took the Paper in his hand. Before he used to take Dictates from the Common Serjeant; but there was a confusion whenwas chosen, and then he took the Paper from the Common Serjeant, and read it.
He gave me the Paper into my hand.
My Lord, they made such a noise that he could not hear me.
, how long have you been Common Cryer?
about seventeen years.
In all that time did you ever hear the Lord Mayor adjourn the Court to a certain day?
Yes.
To a certain day?
My Lord Mayor adjourned this Common Hall to a certain day.
I ask you upon your Oath again, Did you ever know the Lord Mayor adjourn a Common Hall to a day certain?
Do you remember that of?
If so be they be adjourned, to meet upon a new Summons, if there be occasion, no question but he may to a certain day.
Now we are upon matter of fact.
Did you ever know my Lord Mayor adjourn them before the Election of Sheriffs was over? Here is my Question, observe it. When after once my Lord Mayor is gone out of the Hall, when the Election begins, did you ever know my Lord come and disturb the Election, or adjourn it before it was done?
I never knew any thing of it before now.
, do you remember that instance intime?
No, Sir.
Have not you known my Lord Mayor dissolve the Court before the business hath been done; take up his Sword, and be gone?
When he hath a mind to adjourn the Court, and declare it, I adjourn it by his Order.
But have you not known him take up his Sword, and be gone before the Election is over?
did do that before the business was done.
, do not you remember, inCafe, that he did adjourn the Hall?
He dissolved the Hall.
Very well.
He did dissolve the Hall, and so hath every Lord Mayor since. My Lord, if your Lordship please, I perceive this Gentleman makes a Question, whether ever there was an Adjournment of a Common Hall before such a time as the Election of Sheriffs was over. I will give you an Answer to that Question, and a very fair one, and a plain one: I say, till the time of, inMayoralty, there was never such a thing as a Poll for Sheriffs.
Silence, that we may hear.
My Lord, we only ask a Question; we ask a Question, and take our Answer.
Will you give us leave to go on, Sir?
Sir, Pray how long it is since you were Sheriff of?
About 16 or 17 years ago.
You have been Sheriff and Lord Mayor of, I would only know, whether you looked upon it as your right when you were Sheriff?
No, nor never durst presume to think it: In those days it was not thought upon.
When you were Lord Mayor, did you order Summons for Common Halls?
Always.
Did you ever use to consult with your Sheriffs when to call a Common Hall?
Never, and I think no such thing was ever heard of under the Sun, till of late.
Sir, Did you ever Adjourn the Court before the business was done?
I never saw any such occasion, Rebellion was not ripe then.
Sir, Pray thus; Have you ever in a Common Council, or Common Hall, known my Lord Mayor rise before the business was done, and take his Sword?
I confess I must own it, That when things grew to a greater height, I was forced once in this place to cause the Sword to be taken up and go out, and the Court was dissolved, and durst not go on after I was gone.
Now my Lord, if your Lordship please, I desire to call the Sword-Bearer.
Sir, If I may without offence ask you, how old are you?
Seventy years of age, Sir.
You say, you never knew Rebellion ripe?
Good Sir, I perceive you are very apt to mistake I lived in 41 and 42.
Sir, Can you remember the Meeting in 48?
Ay, very well.
Then they usurped the very same Power, and an Act of Parliament to confirm it.
My Lord, I desire Mr. Sword-Bearer may be Sworn.
Pray Sir, in all the time that you have been acquainted with the Customs of, did you ever know when there was an Election for Sheriffs, that the Lord Mayor did interpose or meddle till the Election was over?
Sir, of late years I have not appeared, because of an Infirmity, I cannot be long in; but in all that time I used to appear, I never did observe any such thing.
That the Mayor ever meddled?
Nay, Sir, that the Sheriffs ever meddled: When I was Sheriff ofI durst not presume to meddle, but left the whole to my Lord Mayor.
Did you ever know when the Election of Sheriffs was in a Common Hall, that the Lord Mayor offered to disturb them till the Election was over?
Truly I do not remember any such thing. Sir, I would give you a full Answer, I do tell you, as it hath been declared; My Lord Mayor and the Aldermen came into the Court, and a Report is made; when this is done, they leave the management of the Affair to others, we come and sit down till it is done.
To whom do you leave the Concernment?
To the Officers that it belongs to.
Who are those Officers?
I never heard it disputed till just now.
Sir, you have been an ancient Citizen, do you remember that ever the Sheriffs presumed to hold this Court?
No, never in my life. -- You may confound any man at this rate.
Pray, Sir, in your time was there a Poll for Sheriffs in?
Truly not as I remember.
Do you remember any Poll in your time? If you don't remember a Poll, you can't remember who took it.
Pray, Sir, do you ever remember the Sheriffs appointed the Common Serjeant to take the Poll?
Never in my life.
Mr. Sword-Bearer, I won't ask you how old you are; I desire to know how long you have been an Officer in this City?
Three and twenty years.
I desire to know in all your time, who ordered Common Halls? Who gave direction for the summoning Common Halls?
My Lord Mayor always.
Did my Lord Mayor use to send for the Sheriffs, to know of them when they would be pleased to have a Common Hall?
I never knew that the Sheriffs did interpose in calling a Common Hall in my life.
, at such time as the business was done, when the Common Cryer had Directions for dissolving the Common Hall, pray who used to give these Directions all along?
It was done by the Town Clerk and my Lord Mayor's Officers.
Did ever the Sheriffs continue the Hall after my Lord Mayor had Adjourned it?
Truly I know no such thing.
, I would ask you one Question; If in case the Common Serjeant, or the Common Cryer, or any other Officers do put a Question that the Commons would not have put, who orders them to put the right Question?
I can't say any thing to that.
After the Common Serjeant comes up and reports what is done, then what doth my Lord Mayor do?
Myand thego down to the, and it is declared by the Recorder, or the Common Serjeant, by the order of my. -- I think mywent once down to give them some satisfaction upon a dispute.
Mr., during the Election did you ever hear them Adjourn'd before it was over?
No, Sir, nor never heard any occasion for it.
Theaffirms himself to be ato the, and not to theand; have you known a Common Serjeant say, he was a Servant to the, and not to theand?
I never was in a Common Hall upon any such dispute, I am with my Lord Mayor.
I have known a Recorder reprehended by a very learned Lawyer, for saying,.
I ask you who hath the management of the Common Hall in the absence of the Mayor?
I am always here waiting upon my Lord Mayor.
My Lord, if your Lordship please, we will rest here as to point of Right: Now, my Lord in the next place we will come to that which is a more immediate Question before you, and we will prove the manner of it, and the persons that are guilty; for that is the next step we are to go. -- Mr..
My Lord, they have laid in the Information, That the Sheriffs are duly Elected for one year next following, from the Eve of St.; now prove your Election to be for that year you have laid in your Information.
My Lord, they have certainly in Fact mistaken their Information. My Lord, They do declare that the Common Hall was held, according to Custom, For the Election of Sheriffs, to hold that Office from the Eve of St., for the year next ensuing: Now, my Lord, that is not so in Fact, nor never was, for the Election is for a year to commence onDay. They take on the Eve the Office upon them, but they do absolutely exercise the Office for a Year from that time, from the Eve. Now, my Lord, we say, that Day is excluded; we are sure it is a Common Case, it is known very well; as in a Lease, thefrom any Date, the Day of the Date is no part of that Lease, it is exclusive and no part of the Term, and therefore, my Lord, if they do not prove it as they have laid it, we hope they will be non-suited.
That is another piece of Law.
The Eve ofDay, we make this Objection, and put you to prove it.
Give us leave to go on: Gentlemen, let us prove what we think fit, and if we have not made it out, then make your Exceptions.
Mr. Serjeant, I think it is proper to put it now, for if there be no such Election, there can be no such Riot; for they have made it a Riot in a special manner.
, under your favour, it is not a time for it now.
This is the oddest way these Gentlemen take upon them so: I will not prove it; and pray be quiet till I come to my time.
Pray, Mr. Attorney, if we have an Objection to make, if the Court pleases we may be heard.
Certainly it was never known, that when Mr. Attorney exhibited an Information, to tell us how to prove it. Surely, Gentlemen, you will give us leave to go on with our Proof, won't yee?
Mr., How long have you been a Servant of the City? By whose Order was the Hall summoned?
By my Lord Mayor's.
Who hath Dissolved them?
My Lord Mayor.
Did you ever know the Sheriffs give any Order for the dissolving of it?
No.
Did you ever know it dissolved before the business was done for which they were call'd? Did myin your time either dissolve them, or send them going, till the Election was over?
I can say nothing to that.
Mr., I would ask you this, Sir, Did the Sheriffs ever continue the Hall after my Lord Mayor had dissolved it?
No, I never knew that in my life.
Mr., I would ask you a Question, I don't ask you who calls them, or bids them go home, during the time of the Election, did my Lord Mayor ever meddle?
My Lord Mayor withdraws.
Who are those among the Commons that manage the business when my Lord Mayor withdraws?
The Sheriffs, and the Common Serjeant, and the.
Who manages the Election? Who declares the Election? Who declares who is chosen?
When the Election is made below, then the Sheriffs come up, and the, and thealong with them, and acquaint my, and he goes down, and there doth confirm the Election, and withal, when the work is done he dissolves the Court.
Did you ever know a Poll for Sheriffs?
Do you take theto be an Officer of the, or an Officer of my Lord Mayor's?
I cannot be certain what he is.
If in case the Common Serjeant differ from them in declaring the Poll, is it not usual for the Common Hall to order him to put it up again?
Who does make a Judgment of Election, the Common Serjeant, or the Sheriffs?
The Sheriffs.
Do not the Common Serjeant make Observation as well as the?
The Sheriffs give their Opinions in it.
Now, my Lord, if your Lordship please, if they had done, we would desire to go on to our Fact, for otherwise for ought I perceive, we shall be in here till this time to morrow, and they say, we must not adjourn till the Cause is over. -- Mr. Common Cryer; heark you, Mr. Common Cryer, Were you present atDay when this business happened? Give my Lord and the Jury an account of the carriage then.
I was there at the beginning of the Election, I did make Proclamation, afterwards there was a Poll demanded, and the Poll was begun, and I went home with my Lord Mayor, afterwards my Lord Mayor came back again, and there was a Hubburb; but about 5 or 6 a Clock, my Lord Mayor came down upon the, and I adjourn'd the Court till another day; I did Adjourn it by his order, according as I used to do, and then I went away with my Lord Mayor.
But what usage had you in going out?
I went before my, I was not with him.
Where was the Adjournment?
Upon the.
Were the Sheriffs Polling the People then?
I don't know that, Sir.
Were the Sheriffs near the Hustings?
I don't know, I saw them not.
Upon the Election of them, when mycame to Adjourn the Court; were the Sheriffs acquainted with it: Where were the Sheriffs?
My Lord Mayor sent to them.
Mr., Pray will you tell my Lord and the Jury, what Directions you had from my Lord Mayor, and how he was used when he came out of the Hall?
Mysent me, my Lord, to the Sheriffs under thetwice to come up to the Council-Chamber, and they told me: One told me, he was upon the King's Business; and the other said, he could not come; and about half an hour after, my Lord, Sheriffcame up to my Lord Mayor into the Council-Chamber, and then immediately came down to the Court of Hustings, and Mr. Common Cryer by my Lord Mayor's order, did Adjourn the Court fromtillfollowing, and as we were coming out of the Hall, when Mr. Common Cryer had Adjourn'd the Court, and said,, a great part of the Hall hiss'd; and but that there were so many honest Gentlemen about my Lord, I was afraid my Lord would have come to some mischief; but coming to go into the Porch-yard, I saw his Hat off, and I went to catch his Hat, and caught one of his Officers by the head, that was knocked down, or fell down, that held uphis Train. My Lord, the Sword was at that distance, farther then it is between your Honour, and where I stand, and crouded far away, and when my Lord came out into the Yard; Gentlemen, says he, I desire you would go home to your Lodgings, and commanded them in theto depart: and says he to me, Pray go you back, and let the Sheriffs know, and tell them I have Adjourn'd the Court to. Upon my Lord's Command I went back to let the Sheriffs know that my Lord had Adjourned the Court till.
Both of them, bothand?
No,, t'other was by.
It was in his hearing, was it not?
It was in his hearing.
Did you see my Lord Mayor down, and his Hat off?
I saw his Hat off, Sir, but I can't tell how it came off.
You say, you saw my Lord's Hat off, can you tell whether my Lord was so courteous to take his Hat off or no?
I dare say, my Lord did not.
Did he, or no? I ask you upon your Oath.
I can't tell that, Sir.
I can't think that those Gentlemen were so extraordinary civil to my Lord Mayor, that when themade Proclamation,, that there should be hissing; those that hissed were not extraordinary civil to my Lord Mayor, and I believe you don't think so neither.
I ask you a Question, My Lord Mayor's Hat was off --
Ay, and it must be supposed it was to Complement those fine men that hiss'd at.
My Lord, if your Lordship pleases, I would desire to know what account any of them can give of the opinion they had of the King, to be sure they had a great opinion of his Representative: But my Lord Mayor I find was so extraordinary civil, that to this Rabble he must not only pull off his Hat, but fling his Hat on the ground to them.
I ask you whether you know that any of the Defendants in this Information did throw my Lord Mayor's Hat off, or no?
I can't say that.
It is not a farthing matter.
Here is a mighty Riot upon the Hat.
Now I desired them to keep back; my Lord Mayor's Friends did press back as much as they could to preserve my Lord Mayor; they prest more forward, as the other kept back, and I desired them to forbear; nay, commanded them in the, and upon their Peril and took my Cane to strike at some of them.
Did you?
He served them well enough.
He did so. Do you think a Magistrate is to be crouded and prest upon?
I struck at them, and said, Gentlemen, keep back, and entreated them and commanded them, and all would not do.
I would only say this,; What did you hear when Proclamation was made to depart?
My Lord, I was not in the Hall when Proclamation was made, but I heard them cry out, No; and I heard them cry out,.
Can you name any Person that said this?
My Lord, I laid hold on one man that cryed,; and the Rabble got him from me, one that I heard say so.
Mr. Common Serjeant, you say, you heard this; can you name any person?
I tell you I caught hold of him, and the Rabble got him from me.
Can you name any one?
I tell you I cannot.
My Lord, I hope that will not much prevail in this place, but I hope it doth justifie my Lord Mayor, for endeavouring to disperse the Rabble that came together to that height when the King was, to cry out,. And we don't give this in Evidence against any one person, for it was done in a tumultuous manner; but they were so fond of this man, as that they rescued him from him; and to fix it upon them, we will prove they were every one of them concerned in the Riot. -- Mr., What account can you give of this matter?
I was standing at the place where they Poll'd, and my Lord Mayor was coming towards it to protest against the manner of proceeding; and Sheriffcame to me, and said, Resist him, (I think) he hath nothing to do here.
That was,.
It was either,, or.
He says, he thinks he said,; but he is sure it was either, or.
Did you seethere?
I can't say I did: I sawjust as My Lord Mayor came down, not after.
Did you seethere?
I did not see.
How did they use my Lord Mayor?
I was not very near my Lord; I stood at the place where the Poll was taking.
, We desire to ask you this Question, that you speak particularly to, Was it before my Lord Mayor had Adjourn'd the Poll, or after?
It was just as my Lord Mayor came to Protest against the manner of Polling.
Was the Poll adjourn'd before or after?
It was after.
, you say, he said,, or; did he say it before the Poll was adjourn'd?
Yes, Sir, it was before.
Can you say what the words were?
It was either, or.
Which is?, Pray will you tell us what you did observe done at this time by, or, or any person else?
I came about 4 or 5 a Clock to the Polling-place where the Coaches use to stand, and I saw the Sword up, I suppose my Lord Mayor was there, and came to stop their Proceedings in Polling; and there was a great Contest among them; some saying, he had nothing to do there: He hath no more to do than I, says one; Another cryed, Stop the Sword, stop the Sword; and I laid hold of him, and got him a little way, and made account to have carried him to the Sheriffs, and the Lord Mayor, but some body got him away.
What did you observeanddo?
They encouraged the People to Poll.
After my Lord Mayor was gone?
Yes.
Pray you, Sir, did you observe either, orencourage the People to Hollow or Shout, or those things?
No, Sir.
Heark you Friend, heark you; How do you know thatorwere Polling? Are you sure they were Polling after my Lord was gone?
They were at the Polling-places, and they did not go away a great while after that.
From the People that were about them?
No.
We agree it in Fact it was so.
, Pray will you give the Court an account of what they did.
, What did you observe there?
About 5 a Clock, my Lord Mayor came to the Hall, there was with him then Sir, and Sir, now Lord Mayor, to the best of my memory; and he told them he disliked their Polling any more: and there came a tall black man; says he,Sheriff go on, it is your business, we will stand by you; about a quarter of an Hour after my Lord came out of the Hall to the great Croud, some of the People hissing, and some making a noise; and one came to the Sheriffs, and says he, Gentleman, why do not you make Proclamation with, and they continued there till towards 8 a Clock.
Did you hear no Officer Adjourn the Court?
My Lord Mayor went home, I saw him within doors, and I came back again.
Was there no Proclamation made afterwards?
By some of the Officers, but I did not take particular notice.
Who did you see here after you went home with my Lord Mayor, and came back again?
I saw here Mr.for one, and I sawcome in between 8 and 9 here in the Hall, and my Lordcame in, and several other Gentlemen.
What did they do when they came?
Heark you,, Was my Lordand Mr., and Mr., were they among the People?
After the Sheriffs came up, they went into theCourt,came in and out, and my Lordwent in to them.
Did they appear among the People up and down in the Hall?
They went through the Hall to and fro.
What was the Christian Name of that?
I know him, he that was Under-Sheriff last year: I know him well enough, and he knows me; yes, that is Mr..
I desire to ask this Witness a Question, my Lord.
Let your Counsel ask, my Lord.
I desire to know another Question; Did you see Mr.?
I saw Mr. Aldermanwalk in the Hall, but I can't tell whether he went into the Room, or no. After my Lord was gone, he did come up into the Mayor's Court, and came thorough among the People.
, you speak of my Lord; upon your Oath did you see my Lordwalk to and fro in the Hall, or only came thorough?
My Lordcame in at that Gate, and went thorough the Hall, and went in to the Sheriffs.
I would ask you this upon your Oath, Did you see him do any thing more?
No, I was there to discharge my Office.
My Lord, I own my being there; but only desire to ask a Question that will clear this matter.
I saw my Lordcome up those Stairs, and he went into the.
How long might that be after the Poll?
After the Sheriffs came up I believe it might be half an Hour, or a quarter of an Hour, near an Hour.
Did you see my Lorddo any thing more than walk?
I saw him come to the, and they would not open the Door at first; but they said, it is my Lord, and then they let him in.
Your own Councel is asking my Lord; I am willing you should ask a Question if your own Councel will let you. Gentlemen, my Lord would ask a Question himself, and you won't let him.
My Lord, Though I do not know this Gentleman at all, yet I will venture to ask him a Question: Pray Sir, did you see me speak to any one man?
I have answered that already, I say not.
Were the Books brought from the Polling-place by the Sheriffs before I came, before that I went in there? -- My Lord, I was there, and shall give you an account of it.
It had been better, my Lord, if you had kept away.
, pray will you tell my Lord and the Jury what you observed that day here after my Lord Mayor was gone and had adjourned the Court.
On theofI was here by order of Sheriffafter my Lord Mayor had adjourned the Court, and it was to call all men that were to Poll to come forward, for the Books were to be shut up, and I went away immediately, I was very hot and went away to the Three-Tun Tavern.
Did you see Mr.there?
Mr.was there and Mr.too.
Can you name any body else?
No, I can name no body else.
What did Mr.?
He ordered me to make Proclamation for all men them that had a right to Poll, to come and poll, for the Books were to be shut up.
Captain, pray will you give an account of what you observed?
I came down into the Hall, and did hear a whispering, whereupon I went to guard my Lord Mayor, my Lord Mayor came down upon the, and Proclamation was made for the adjournment of the Court; whereupon when proclamation,, was made, an hundred,I believe more, hist at that, I laid hold of one of them,, cryed they;, said I, and laid fast hold on him; but there was a very great crowd, and sayes one or two,Clark,; There was Mr.and Major; my Lord, said they, is in danger; said I,. My Lord Mayor was down upon his Knee, I can't tell how he came down,, this was the Cry, and. After coming down the steps, I pressed as near as I could to my Lord Mayor to keep them off;, said I,; I had my Sword in my hand, and with the pommel of my Sword kept them off;, said I,; and so I waited on my Lord home, and went and drank a glass of Sack. About an hour or two hours afterwards I came down to the Hall and found the People shouting,, said I,?, said I,. I saw the Sheriffsandwere concerned in carrying on the Poll, and this they continued to do for some time, at last,, said I,; and this was between 8. and 9. a Clock.
Can you remember any body else besides the Sheriffs?
No, Sir, I cannot.
Can you remember Sir.?
Captain, Did you know never a one of them that cryed out so?
No, my Lord, I was before Sir.
Major, pray will you give my Lord and the Jury an Account of what you saw onday.
My Lord, when my Lord came out of the Court I went after, and some cryed; but I got between them and some of my Lord's Friends kept them off; but when we came just to the going out, they gave a shout, and I saw my Lord Mayor's Hatt upon his Back,and I can't tell whether he touched the ground with his hand, but I was e'en almost down; said I,?
Who did you see there?
Indeed, Sir, I was almost down, and did not see their Faces.
Mr., I would only ask you, Who did you see, who did you observe to be there?
About 9. a clock at Night, or something before, I stood at the Door that leads to the, and there came in Aldermanand, and Old, an old white-hair'd man, and by and by my Master Sheriffcame out and told me,;, said I; and he went again, and there I staid till they came out, and then he went upon the, and I went along with him when he came out.
Who went with him out to go to the?
Sirand several other men, there is never a name in the Indictment more.
None of them that are in the Indictment? name them.
I have named them.
Prethee name them.
Mr. Alderman, both the Sheriffs, my Lord, Mr., and old Mr..
Which?
Thatthat stands there.
There is such a noise that I did not very well hear that word.
, not thatthat looks upon me, but he that stands behind.
He falls behind now, but he ran up and down then, and Aldermanwas there too.
You witness, you have named all these men, what diddo, or what did he say?
When he came upon the, he made proclamation himself, because one or two refused it, he did it himself; and after a while he adjourned the Court upon the; this was onday.
What did he say?
As the Common Cryer usually sayes at such times.
You say you saw Mr., and you saw my Lord, upon your Oath, can you say they did any thing, or was any thing done in abuse to my Lord Mayor?
They did not tell me, my Lord, what they did.
I ask you what did they do?
Mighty busie they were.
How long was it after my Lord Mayor adjourned the Court?
About two hours.
So much the worse.
You must understand it was some time before Mr. Sheriff had made his adjournment, they were busie till that time.
My Lord, if your Lordship pleases, I do agree with Mr., that the Jury should remember that this was two hours after my Lord Mayor had adjourned the Court.
I desire, my Lord, I may ask him some Questions. You say you saw me go to the Council Chamber, at what time, and who went with me?
A little before Candle-light.
You say all the Company went out with the Sheriffs, and went away.
My Lord, I did not say you came out.
My Lord was of the Upper House.
Yes, and may be there again.
I hope I shall be there, Mr..
It had better you had been so then, my Lord.
It will be the worse for you, I shan't lie Perdue for you.
If you threaten me, my Lord, I shall take notice of it. My Lord, I have done you a kindness, but if you come under my hands again, I shall not do it.
They would not have it said,, and my Lord you were with some of those that abused him.
After it was over, my Lord.
You were not within your duty here.
My Lord, it was after the Poll was closed.
My Lord, I desire if you please, what is usual in all causes, that we might go on without any interruption. Let us go on for the King, and then make all the defence you can. Don't think either to hiss us or threaten us out of our cause. Mr., give my Lord and the Jury an account of what you saw or heard.
My Lord, I attended with several of our Company by my Lord Mayor's Coach to, and was in the Council Chamber, and he sent for the Sheriff, after that he went away; and whenwas said, said they,.
I desire to know Mr.this, what they said?
They cryed,.
is making a Speech to us, I don't know what he hath said.
I don't think Mr.thinks you worth a Speech. Mr., I desire you to ask you a Question, I ask you this Question upon your Oath, after the adjournment of the Court, and after this very insolent behaviour of some of the Rabble that were there, for I can call them no better, who did you see there?
After I went home, I went to see my Lord safe home, and came back again, I saw onethat they call the, calling,.
Pray who else did you see?
I saw Mr. Aldermancome up towards the Sheriffs. Gentlemen, said he, you are doing right.
Did you hear Mr. Aldermansay so? What this Gentleman? Do you know him?
Says he to Sheriff, You shall have all right done to you.
Who else did you see there?
I saw Mr..
Did you see Mr., did you see Mr.?
I did not see Mr., I saw.
Did you see Mr.?
Yes.
Which of them do you mean?
The Elder man.
There isthe Elder, Gentlemen, andthe Younger.
I was disputing with a Fellow that his Toes came out of his Shooes, and had a green Apron, said,?, said he., said I,. Saies Mr.. That was about half an hour after my Lord Mayor went home.
What time was the Adjournment?
About 5. or 6. I was speaking something,., saies Mr.to me; I can never meet you but you are railing against the King's Evidence.
The Kings Evidence, what was that?
What was done by Mr.?
He was talking among the People.
He did encourage among the rest.
You are in a Passion now.
No Sir, I am not.
He seconded Mr.when he said,.
Who did so?
, my Lord, that they call the.
A very pretty word indeed.
Ay so it is, he is so called, you will give us leave to hear what the Witnesses speak.
Another Epithet would do a great deal better.
, what was done upon the spot, was there any hurt?
Do you say, upon your Oath, that Gentleman was there?
I have seen him in the Balcony.
He saies he uses to be there upon publick daies in the Coffee-house. --, I would desire to know of you, whether you are able to give an account after my Lord Mayor's Adjournment, who was there; name as many persons as you can.
Mr., and I saw Mr.go through the little Gate into the Yard.
Who else?
That is all, Sir. Sheriffdelivered two Poll-Books into my hand.
Mr., will you tell my Lord and the Jury what you saw?
It happened thus, Mr.had taken a man upon Execution, who was Bail for a Client of mine who had paid the moneys long before; upon that I came to know who imployed him, and coming here, I found Mr.in that place, and the crowd was so great, said he,. Whilst I staid there, I asked him what was the meaning; Saies he,; and whilst I staid, there came in Mr.to and fro from them, and before they would admit any, they would know their names; there was Mr., my Lord, and Sir.
What afterwards?
Yes, Mr.was there, he and Sheriffcame out together, and they went upon those Stairs under the Clock.
Who came out with Sheriff?
What?
Alderman.
Very mannerly.
His name wasbefore he was Alderman.
And Sherifftold the People,. Upon that, Mr.went through the Company, and when they came to the, Mr.ordered Proclamation to be made, and told them,LondonMiddlesex,Tuesday. Upon that an Antient Gentleman desired they might proclaim the Election. Then saies, that. Had it not been for Mr., I had been, I believe, trod under foot sufficiently.
Mr., who did you see?
I saw Sirand Mr..
Where did you see them pray?
In the Yard. I went home with my Lord Mayor, and then I saw them. I had a kind of a glance, but I can't swear positively to Mr..
Sirand Mr., what did you see them do?
Heark you, Friend, where was it you saw them?
In the Yard.
What did you see them do?
Nothing at all.
How many People might be there then? two or three hundred?
Above a Thousand.
What did you hear Sirsay?
Nothing.
How far was he from his own Door?
On t'other side the Hall.
A mighty way indeed, a mighty thing. What said Mr.?
I can't say, Sir, that I heard him speak a word, only in the Tumult.
Friend, I ask you this, I think I heard you say you saw Sirand Mr.in the Yard; but you did not see them do any thing at all?
No.
Pray Mr.will you tell my Lord and the Jury what you saw after my Lord Mayor had adjourned the Court.
I saw there Sheriff,, Sir, Mr.the Scrivener in, Mr.,, onean Upholsterer.
Siryou say in the first place?
Yes, and, my Lord, a Scrivener in.
Who then?
Sheriffand, and Mr., Alderman.
Did you see onethere?
No, Sir.
you saw there?
Ay, Sir, I know him very well.
What isChristian Name?
, he goes by that name, it may be he was not Christ'ned. Wasthere, do you know him?
The Linnen-Draper?
Ay, very well, he goes by the name of. Did you seethere?
I don't know the name, I saw a great many I knew by sight, but not their names.
What did these Gentlemen do?
I'le tell you, Sir, there was Sheriffand Sheriff, I went in where they were taking the Poll; said I,.
You argued thus?
Pray give us leave to go on.
There was Mr., and saies he,, said I,; and they fell about me, and had it not been for Mr.and Mr., I believe they had done me a mischief; for they trod upon my Toes; who did it I can't tell.
But you say Sirandand Aldermanwere amongst them.
Yes, Sir.
That's enough. -- Pray Mr., will you tell my Lord and the Jury what you observed there, and who was there.
I know the names of no persons that were there, all that I can say was this. As soon as my Lord Mayor adjourned the Court upon the, he came down, and going out of the Hall, he had like to have been thrown down, had it not been for Mr.; and going to save my Lord Mayor, I wrenched my back, and I spit blood for seven daies after.
Tell that Mr.over again.
My back was wrenched in saving my Lord Mayor, and I spit Blood 7 days after.
Endeavouring to save my Lord Mayor his back was so wrenched that he spit blood 6 or 7 days after. Heark you Mr.ever since that time, have you found any indisposition?
I have not been my own man since.
He took a Surfeit.
He took a Surfeit of ill Company I am sure.
Mr., give my Lord and the Jury an account of what you know.
My Lord, my Lord Mayor sent to the Sheriffs, and ordered them to forbear Polling and come up to the Chamber, and sent 2 or 3 times; but they denied coming to him, and went on and ordered the Common Cryer to make Proclamation for them to depart; and if they stayed that he would look upon them as Rioters; and there was hissing and a great deal of crowd, and there was Sirin the Court, they hunched him with their Elbows, and as his Lordship came down going down the Steps there was such a croud, that if I had not catched his Lordship in my arms he had fallen upon his forehead, and his hat was off.
Who did you see so misbehave themselves?
My Lord, I can't tell.
I think we have now proved it against every body we design, save only against Mr., for we do not now proceed againstand. Now, my Lord, we will only prove against, and then we shall have done. Mr.will you tell my Lord and the Jury who you saw here. Did you observe any particulars after the Court was adjourned?
I don't remember I observed any one man.
You don't? Had you any discourse with Mr.at any time?
Yes, I had.
What did he tell you?
He did confess he was there about 7 a clock at Night.
He did own he was among them?
Yes, with Alderman.
What say you, Mr.?
I saw him about 7 aclock.
Was he in the crowd?
Yes, amongst the People.
Here is all now, Gentlemen, but, and, and we don't go against them now. After they had done this, and hist at the King, and cried,, what acclamations went these People off with?
When the Court was broke up by the Sheriffs, they cryed,, and in that manner they followed us.
What say you?
They hollowed us home, Sir, as far as fishmonger's Hall.
They began with a hiss, and ended 
with a hollow.<|endoftext|>My Lord, All that we say in answer to this Objection, is, That Mr.is not nam'd in that Proclamation.
What say you to that, Sir? He is not named in the Proclamation: And so if he hath Discovered and Apprehended the Prisoner, he has earn'd his Money, whether he be Convicted or not, becauseName is in the Proclamation, tho' his is not.
Then, My Lord, with humble Submission, here is another Proclamation wherein he is nam'd, we desire that may be read.
And when it is read, it will be as little to your Purpose as the other.
Let them read what they please, we need say nothing at all to it.
Certainly upon this Proclamation there's no Objection; for he is intitled to his One thousand Pound already, tho'be never convicted.
But is he not by this Proclamation which mentions his Accomplices, intitled to his Pardon? If so, he swears to secure himself.
By the Apprehending and Discovering, he's intitled to his Pardon.
But not without he be brought to Justice; that is to say, till he be convicted; therefore he cannot be an Evidence to convict him.
That is, as to any that are there named, if any of them Discover and Apprehend one another, it must be so as that they be brought to Justice: But if any Person that is not named there does Apprehend any that is, he is intitled to the One Thousand Pound, barely by the Apprehension.
Then there is another Proclamation where they are both named, as Mr.tells me.
My Lord, We will set this Matter right; we will show the other Proclamation, in which, if I am rightly inform'd, for I have not read it, Mr.is nam'd.
If you have not read it, I would advise you not to trouble the Court with it; for you will find the latter part is restrain'd to Three or Four particular Persons, of which he is none.
I am named in the Proclamation.
Ay, but read the latter part of it, and you will find you are not nam'd in that Clause that they referr'd to: You need not read the former part of the Proclamation, we agree the Prisoner is named there; but only look towards the bottom, which is the Clause that they refer to.
They have not considered the Proclamation, and therefore make an Objection of they don't know what.
We are in your Lordship's Judgment.
For what? See if you can make or state a Case for our Judgment.
Mr.is mention'd in the first Proclamation, andis not, but there are the Word Accomplices: He is likewise mentioned in the last Proclamation, but not in the last Clause of it. I confess, if he had, it had been plain it would have taken off his Testimony; but now we must submit it to you, whether he is not an Interested Person, and consequently no good Witness.
Truly I do not see any colour for the Objection. Is he not as well intituled to his One thousand Pound, tho' Mr.had never been try'd, by the bare Apprehending of Mr., as if he was Convicted?
No, my Lord; because the Words are so as he may be brought to Justice.
That is not so, as to any Person that apprehends one mentioned in the Proclamation, if the Person that apprehends be not mention'd in it, and named himself; if any one that is not mention'd apprehend one that is mention'd, he is intituled, by the Apprehension, to the One thousand Pound. If any one that is mention'd apprehend another, then he is to bring him to Justice; now Mr.is not named in this Proclamation, and so, as to the One thousand Pound, he stands in the same Condition as any other Person that Discovered or Apprehended one of the Persons there nam'd.
But it seems he was one of the Conspirators, because he is himself described in another Proclamation.
If it were so, it would not be material, nor any manner of Objection; but as they have made their Objection upon these Proclamations, we think there is nothing for us to give an Answer to.
Nay, my Lord, if it were so, will Sirsay his Client is not brought to Justice, unless he be Convicted? I am sure the Words, or, are not in the Proclamation.
There is nothing in it; you must swear Mr.,
Will you give an Account to my Lord and the Jury, what you know of this Conspiracy against the King's Life, from thefirst time you were acquainted with it, and what hand the Prisoner at the Bar had in it.
Pray give an Account of the whole thing, your coming over, and who sent you, and upon what Errant, and the whole that you know of this Conspiracy.
Upon the 14th. oflast, the French Stile, New Stile, I was at St., where I was sent for by King, and was ordered to wait his Dinner till it was over, and accordingly I did wait till his Dinner was over, and then I came in, and Col.was with him, and one Mr.who is also mentioned in the Proclamation, was there also: the King told me he was sensible I had served him well, and now he had an Opportunity of doing something for me; he told me he would send me into, where I should be subsisted, and I was to follow the Orders of Sir, and accordingly he ordered me Ten Lewidores to be paid by Mr., who is Secretary to the late Queen, and Col.went along with me, and Mr., to, and told him he came from the King, and we had the Lewidores, and we went to, in order to our coming over hither: but we were told if we were Wind-bound, that the Money we received would not bear our Charges; there was Orders given for our further Subsistance at, to the President there. Accordingly we came to, and the Wind did not serve us for 8 or 9 days; and while I stay'd there, the Money that I spent atwas paid by the President of, Monsieur. Afterwards I Landed in, near, as I was told, and I came to the House of one, and he provided me and my Comrade with a Couple of Horses; and coming from thence, I came in the first place to onean Apothecary in, and next from thence, we came to, to, and from thence in a Coach to, and from thence by Water to: that night we lay inat an Inn, it being night, the Night-Tyde, and something late. The next day I came to a Lodging at an Acquaintance of my Comrades, Mr., at thein, one Mr.. The next night I went to look for Sir, whom the King told me I should certainly find by such a Sign of a White Handkerchief hanging out of his Pocket, onand, in, where his walk was to be in the Evening, because he was not to appear in the day-time openly. It happen'd that uponnight after I came to Town, I went there, and did not find Siraccording to the King's Direction, which I admired at; but there was one Mr., who told my Comrade, a Day or two after, That Sirwould needs speak with me, and accordingly I met with him; and he asked me how the King, Queen, Prince, and Princess did, and I told him they were very well; I told him I was appointed to attend him, and obey his Orders. He told me he had no Money at present, but in two or three Days he would send some; and so he did, by Major. I had Five Shillings a Day for subsistance, and I had no Horse; and when I had a Horse, it was Six Shillings a Day; after which rate I had subsistance for a Month at Five Shillings a Day, Guinea's going then at Thirty Shillings. Majorpay'd me the Money by SirOrder, as he told me, and he afterwards gave me a Guinea, and that was the firstwhen the Assassination was design'd;for that we told him we wanted Money, and it was not reasonable we should take our Horses out of the Stable before we pay'd for them: And I met Sirseveral times at, and he told me it was a suspicious Place, and desired me not to come any more there; but when he had any particular Orders to give me, he wou'd give me notice of it where I shou'd meet him; and accordingly I did meet him several times.
Now Sir, will you tell what you know as to the Prisoner at the Bar.
As to Mr., thethat the Assassination was design'd to be, the first time that I knew of it, I met Mr., at one Mr.Lodging, where he was up, and I saw him in a great Hurry and some Consternation, and in came Mr.; I ask'd him the meaning of it, and what they were going about; and Mr.told me, If I wou'd go down to CaptainI shou'd know; accordingly I went, and to the best of my remembrance, he gave me a little Note to Captain, but that I am not positive in. I went to Captain, and as soon as ever I came, he told us, We must be immediately ready to go to.
Where was that?
At the, that was the Sign -- as near as I remember. Mr.and I were ordered together to come there, and there was Mr., who had been there some time, and when I came in, Sirdid declare Laughing,: And he talk'd something of bringing the Garter, and of attacking the Coach; but he went out of the Room, and afterwards he came in and declared,Orange; butcame in after that, and said,Orange. When he talk'd of attacking the Prince of, I was very much startled, not knowing any thing of it before; and I came the next Morning to Mr., and ask'd him if we were to be the Murderers of the Prince of, says Mr.to me,Germains,; and said I,. After this Mr., and Mr., and I, had a Meeting at, where we did discourse about the Matter. I did often declare against it, That it was so barbarous a thing, that no Man of Honour almost wou'd be guilty of it, but Majoranswered, That we were to obey Orders, for sure Sirwou'd not undertake a thing of that nature without Orders.
Pray what said Mr..
He own'd it was a barbarous thing; but he was sent over to obey SirOrders, which he had several times declared he was resolved to do; upon that we parted: so afterwards I came to Mr.Lodging; it was theMorning I came to him, and so went to Sir; while he was there, Mr.gave me a Note, naming so many Names, particularly Mr., Mr., Mr., and his own Name at top, not the Name that he is Arraigned by here; but a sham Name that he had, as the rest of us all had sham Names, which at that time we went by.
What was your Name?
My Name was.
Who gave you that Name?
Kingat St., and he gave Mr.the Name of, and Mr.Name was. Kingtold us in his Bed-Chamber, We were to go by those Names.
Pray Sir, what didsay to you when he gave you that List?
He told me, he was to go to, and I was to go along with him, and says he to me smiling,Aid de Camp; and get the rest of the Gentlemen ready, and accordingly I went to look for several of the Persons -- particularly for Mr.: When I came back again, I found him lying on his Bed, and that Sirhad told him the Prince ofdid not go out that Day, and from thence we went to Dinner, where Majordin'd with us, and Mr., and Majorseeing me in a heat, ask'd me, Why I was in such a Sweat, I told him I were getting those Men ready for Mr., who had made me his; says Majorto me, You may very well do it; for you have six Shillings a Day allow'd you, and I have nothing; I bring two Men at my own charge: said I, Major, I wonder you don't apply your self to Sir, and then, I believe you may be subsisted too. He answered me, He did not think it worth the while to trouble him, since he hath never spoke to him of it before, and, and, and, and my self, several times met in, and talk'd of attacking the Prince of.
Who did?
,,, and my self.
Pray Sir, let me ask you one Question. Where was your Horse at first?
At first it was at my LordStables, as they told me, in.
Where were the other Persons Horses?
There was Mr., and Mr.Horses in the same Place, at the same time, as they told me.
How came you by your Horse there?
Majordid deliver my Horse, and committed it to my care, and I carry'd it thence to another place.
Did you observe there was any more Horses there?
I believe there was Five or Six, as near as I can guess.
Do you know wherewas to have his Horse?
He had a Horse; but whence he had it I don't know.
Had you any Arms delivered you?
Yes, I had, by Capt..
Were you at no other Place together thatNight, the 22d. of, because you say you din'd together?
Yes, we were at theTavern.
What Discourse pass'd between you there?
They were talking about the Assassination; but what any particular Person said, I cannot tell.
Pray who were there?
There was Mr., Capt., and Mr.; andwent out and came in again, anddeclared, we must have a great deal of care of our selves, or we shou'd be taken up; and he whisper'd it first, and afterwards I ask'd him what it was, and he told me, and said,: Says Mr., staring this way with his Eyes,; and so we parted.
When was this?
This was the Night ofthe 22d. when it was discovered; for some of them were taken up the next Day.
Wasthere at that time at the?
I cannot possibly say whether he was or not.
What Discourse had you there?
We talk'd of Assassinating the King; but what it was in particular, I cannot tell.
Wasthere?
Yes, I believe he was; but I cannot positively say.
You say it was the lastthat the King was to go abroad, that you apprehended you were discovered?
Yes, we apprehended we were discovered before that; for Mr.told me, That Three or Four Days before, in that Week, that his Name, and one, were given into the Council, and another, and another, Two or Three of them, as he told me; I think, Three or Four; and upon that Account Majorwent from his Lodging, and did not lie at his Lodging the Night before; and I came to Major, and he told me the same thing at theTavern.
Can you Remember what Discourse you had thatNight?
You say that onthe 22d. Mr.gave you the List.
I do not say it was the 22d. for I cannot swear to the Day of the Month; but it was the Secondthat we were to have gone about this Business.
You say he gave you a List of Names: Pray, when he gave you that List, what Discourse happened in the Room, just before, or after the giving of the List?
Sir, I think I told the Court that before.
Sir, I desire you would repeat it.
My Lord, I humbly desire to know whether I am to answer that Gentlemanthat Question?
Yes, you are to answer, being upon your Oath, and to tell the whole Truth.
I ask him the Question so fairly, what Discourse introduced the giving of the List, and what followed upon it, that I perceive this Gentleman does not know which side I am off.
Mr.said we were to go to; and he told me, that I was to be one of his Party, that we were to attack the Prince of.
You say you were to be one of his Party: Pray was it there that he told you, you should be his.
Yes, he did tell me I was to be his?
Whose Hand-writing was that List?
I cannot tell, I had it from that Gentleman.
But whose Writing was it?
Indeed I know not his Hand-writing, and therefore cannot tell whose it was: He is for his Life, but I believe he cannot deny any thing that I have said, I suppose not: I shou'd be very sorry to accuse Mr.of any thing that was not true.
Pray whose Names were in that List?
I have mention'd Mr., Mr., Mr., my self; and you, Mr., had your own Name at top.
What is that?
He is aMan.
It's a very strange thing I should give you a List with a Man's Name that I don't know; I declare it, I know no such Person.
Mr., I believe you are very sensible I do not accuse you of any thing that is not true.
When did you see that List last?
He gave it into my Hands, and had it from me again, or I threw it away afterwards.
But you that were to be an Evidence, ought to have kept it to justifie your Evidence.
Truly I did not intend to have been an Evidence at that time.
If they will ask him any Questions let them.
No indeed, I will ask him no Questions.
Then, my Lord, we have another piece of Evidence which we wou'd offer to your Lordship, which is not direct Evidence against the Prisoner, but only to prove a Circumstance or two of what has already been sworn: We do acknowledge, my Lord, it does not affect Mr., but only to strengthen and confirm what they have sworn.
With submission we hope it will not be Evidence fit to be given as to the Prisoner at all; for because a Man may swear true in the particular Circumstance of a thing, that therefore he swears true what he swears against the Prisoner, I think is no Consequence in the World.
It is a thing distinct, and foreign to the Matter, as to Mr..
My Lord, we do not say it directly affects Mr.; but when your Lordship has heard it, we shall submit it to you, how far it confirms even the Evidence given against him.
My Lord, we say the Prisoner was to have his Horse from; and that there were Horses plac'd there for that purpose we are going to prove.
My Lord, It is one entire Conspiracy, in which every one had his part; one was to have his Horses and his Party in one place, and another in another: Now that there were at such time such Horses at, and those Horses were delivered out from, is certainly a Confirmation of the Truth of what the Witnesses have said.
It is so. If that be it you offer, it is very material.
We shall prove, That upon the Disappointment on the first, the 15th. of, they were to be ready against the 22d. and you will hear how the Horses were disposed of in the mean time. Call,, and.
Call any one of them, I believe it is enough.
Pray will you give my Lord, and the Jury an Account what you know of any Horses that were brought toaboutlast, and how long they stay'd there?
There was Six Horses.
Who brought them in.
They were sent in by some Persons in Mr.Name.
Had you any Direction to take care of them?
Mr.sent in a Note to take care of them for a Night or two.
Who carried them away?
I cannot tell: Some People came to see 'em that I never saw before, and they took care of them; I know not who they were, and I never saw them since.
What time was it that they came for them?
It was about the middle of the Day.
What Month was it in?
I think it was much about the latter end of, to the best of my Remembrance.
How long was it before the Plot was discovered?
It was about a Week, or a small matter, before the Plot was discovered, to the best of my knowledge.
How long stay'd the Horses there at?
Three of them staid a Night or two; but the other Three about a matter of a Week or Ten Days.
Who own'd those Horses?
They were sent in, in Mr.Name; but who own'd them I cannot tell indeed.
Then swear.
Pray tell my Lords, and the Jury, what you know concerning any Horses about the time of the Breaking-out of the Plot.
We mean inStable.
There were Seven Horses came in.
Who brought them?
There was Six in the first place; one came in afterwards, in the Evening.
By whose Order were they brought there?
By Mr.Order.
How long did they stay there?
Some of them stay'd there several Days; Three of them went away the next Day, as I think.
Do you remember about what time those Horses were brought thither?
They were brought there I believe about Seven or Eight Days before the Plot broke out.
My Lord, we only call these Witnesses to confirm the Testimony of the others, that there were such Horses there at that time, and for the present we rest it here.
Then, Gentlemen, what say you to it for the Prisoner?
Sir, I know not what Variety of Opinions you mean; there have been some Discourses in Pamphlets I agree, but it was always taken and held for Law, that Consulting and Agreeing was an Overt-Act.
Here is no Evidence of any Agreement.
Pray let us hear what you say to that.
My Lord, we humbly insist there are not two VVitnesses, such as the Law requires, to prove the Charge upon this Indictment against the Prisoner: The two Overt-Acts that touch Mr., are first Consulting and Agreeing how to Kill the King; the other is the finding Arms and Horses for that purpose: but as to this latter, the finding Arms and Horses, there is not one Evidence that comes up to it: and as to the former, the Consultations, whether there be sufficient Evidence that comes up to that, is very much a Question with us: but we say, with Submission, there are not two Witnesses in that case; for Mr.says only what he was told by Sir, that Sirproposed this Matter; but withal he tells you, that when Sirproposed it, and Mr.was inform'd what the Design was, he was so far from Conspiring, Consulting, or Agreeing to do it, that he said it was a barbarous Act, and he recoil'd at it. Then at last says Sir, You must command a Party.
Well, and what saidthen?
says, he then said, There's an End of it. Now, my Lord, what Evidence is this of a Consultation and Agreement?and this is all thatsays. As to what Mr.says, we are to consider whether the List given to him be an Overt-Act; and there the Point in question is, whether that List can be given in Evidence against Mr., upon this late Act of Parliament, as an Overt-Act, it not being laid in the Indictment? There is indeed an Overt-Act of a List laid in the Indictment, as given to, but none as given to Mr..
Pray take the Evidence right: First, What will you make an Overt-Act? What do you think when there is a Debate among divers Persons about killing the King?
With Submission that will be no Overt-Act if there be a Debate of such a matter, tho he be present.
Aye; but when there is a Consult, and upon Debate a Resolution is formed, and tho he does at first dislike it, yet when he is told he must command a Party, he says he is content, or there's an end of it; What do you make of that?
He said he did not like it, it was a barbarous desperate Design.
It's true, but when Sirsaid he shou'd command a Party, he acquiesced, and said there was an end of it: there was a Discourse about cutting off the King, and that was agreed upon in the Company at that time; and tho at first he did not like it, yet he might afterwards agree to it.
My Lord, that is it which we deny; we say there is no proof of his Agreement to it.
Capt.says, he did declare that he said he look'd upon it as a desperate Design, and was averse from being engag'd in it, but afterwards did agree to it; Whether that is not such an Overt-Act as is laid in the Indictment?
My Lord, We must beg leave for the Prisoner in a Case of this Nature, that it may be recollected what the Evidence did say. Mr.did not take upon him to affirm that Mr.consented to it, but only said there was an end of it: Now we must leave that to the Jury, what they can make of such a Doubtful Expression.
Call Mr.in again.
My Lord, the first Meeting Mr.speaks of, where the Prisoner Mr.was, is at the, where this Discourse was; the next Meeting that he speaks of, was on the Friday Night, before the first Saturday when the Businesswas to be done, and afterwards he met atLodgings, on Saturday Morning, in.
Hark ye Mr., the first time that this Matter was proposed, when Mr.was present, you say was at the.
Yes, my Lord, it was.
And you say he dislik'd it, and did not care to be concern'd in it.
Yes, my Lord, he did so.
Well, What said Sir.
Sirsaid he ought to obey his Orders, for he had such a Commission for such a thing, and he drew out a Scheme how it was to be done; and when Sirtold Mr.he shou'd Command his Party, he replyed inthere's an end of it.
This was at the, Was it not?
Yes, my Lord, it was.
Pray then, Capt., let me ask you another Question, Was he afterwards with you at any other meeting, and when and where?
He was with me upon Saturday the 15th, at my Lodging in, where was Sirand others.
What Discourse happen'd then, I pray?
They did there discourse the whole Matter, and Sirwas not for going at that time, because there was so many People that went with the King; that there wou'd not be a good Opportunity to effect the Design: but I told him they wou'd go off after the Hunting was over, and so it was agreed upon to go on with the Undertaking.
Pray, at that time did Mr.pretend to dislike the Affair, or refuse to be any way at all concern'd in it?
No, my Lord, I can't remember that he spoke one word.
VVas Mr.there?
Yes, there was Mr., Sirand Mr..
And had you discourse at that time about this Business?
Yes, my Lord, there was that Objection made of so many People going with the King, and I made that Answer that I tell you.
Why then, suppose at the, such an Expression had not dropt from the Prisoner, but a Man is present at two Consults that are held about the Death of the King, but says nothing either at the first or second, What wou'd you make of that Case?
My Lord, I confess this is a Case of a very barbarous Nature, of which I hope my Client will acquit himself: but I think we have the Authority of Parliament on our side, that this does not amount to a proof of Treason. It seems they lay a stress upon this, that Mr.came to CaptainLodgings on the Saturday Morning the 15th: but then take the Case as it is; for ought that does appear upon the Proof, he knows not upon what account the Meeting is before-hand. I think that is the Case of my Lord, upon which the Reversal of his Attainder went, that the Evidence came short, and that it was but Misprision; for the Evidence was, that he was present at the supposed Declaration's reading, but said nothing at all to it.
But I speak of two Meetings; there was but one.
My Lord, I do not know whether there were two Meetings or one then: but this is the ground we go upon, there ought to be two Witnesses: and if there be two Meetings upon such a Design, the second may be is accidental, and it does not appear to be a design'd Meeting; and there was no Appointment of Mr.to be there, nor any Negotiation by way of Message or otherwise, to that purpose.Is this, my Lord, an Overt-Act? Suppose a man be present at a Consult about Treasonable Practices, and he uses words that are indifferent; it is true, in the case of a Wager it amounts to an Assent, but it hardly will come to that when People meet by accident, or for they don't know what.
How is this by accident?
It does not appear that it was by Design or Appointment.
They were Acquaintance.
He had no acquaintance with him but in Sircompany.
But besides, there was an express Consent at the, whensaid there's an end of it.
That is as much as to say, I will not do it, I will not go with you --
Sirwas the Person whom they were to obey; andtells you, he told them what they were to do, and six Horses were first plac'd, and three of them afterwards remov'd.
That won't affect him what Sirsaid, any more thanappointing of the Horses.
Then there is another thing, Why did he give a List to Mr.? the List that was given had Mr.Name at top, as he was to command the Party, and there wasName andName as of his Party; that is, their feign'd Names; Mr.feign'd Name wasthat was at top, and they were to go to, andtold, he shou'd be his.
My Lord, for that I think we have a point of Law, that we apprehend will turn off all that Evidence, and sure we may take that Exception now: The words of the Act are, That no Evidence shall be given of any Overt-Act that is not expresly laid in the Indictment. Now cannot I shew upon this Indictment, that there is no Overt-Act in such a positive direct manner as they now urge about this List. Will not that satisfie your Lordship's Judgment to set aside all this Evidence? To make the Indictment good for Treason, there ought to be a Compassing of the Death of the King laid, and an Overt-Act laid declaring that Compassing; but no Evidence is to be given of any Overt-Act that is not laid in the Indictment.
You are not to take Exceptions to the Indictment now, but only to the Evidence.
I have this one Exception more; there is never anor a.
There does not need; but that is a Fault, if any, in the Indictment, and is not to be stirr'd now.
If there be not a Presentment by the Jury, then there is no Overt-Act alledg'd: and if there be no Overt-Act alledged, or no such Overt-Act, then we are within the Words of the Act, that no Evidence shall be given of any such Overt-Act but what is alledg'd; and it is, if not expresly alledged, as if it were not alledged at all: now here it is very loose,, and so it goes on with the rest, did so and so. There is a Presentment at first, that they did Compass and Imagine the Death of the King; and then the Indictment comes farther, and says, that 40 men shou'd do this Business, and of those 40 these 4 shou'd be some; and then thebought Horses and Arms, and so it must go to the last Antecedent, and then there is no expressalledging of any Overt-Act, and then it is as if no Overt-Act at all was alledg'd.
This Exception is not to the Evidence, but to the Indictment: it begins,; Does not that relate to all?
No, my Lord; and I can tell you a Reason why not: if it be not so well alledged as it shou'd be, it is in an Indictment as if it were never alledged at all: and so within the Words of the Act of Parliament this is not an Overt-Act alledg'd, and therefore they cannot give Evidence upon it.
Truly, my Lord, I can't imagine what they are doing, they are moving in Arrest of Judgment before a Verdict given: they say the Overt-Act is not expresly laid; Is that an Exception to the Evidence or to the Indictment?
If my Lord will please to give us the Liberty, we wou'd shew there can be no Verdict given upon this Indictment.
Certainly this is an irregular Proceeding; this is not a time of Exception to the Judgment.
Then, my Lord, we are in your Judgment, as to the Proof that has been given: If a man be present at a meeting of several Persons, and there is a Treasonable Debate about Killing the King, and this man is only present, but neither assents, nor makes the Proposal how it shall be done, whether the bare being silent, and saying nothing, is such an Overt-Act as shall Convict a man of Treason?
I tell you, Consenting to a Traiterous Design is an Overt-Act of High-Treason, if that Consent be made to appear by good Proof: Now the Question is, What is a good Proof and Evidence of this Consent? a man is two or three times at a Treasonable Consult for Killing the King, and tho perhaps at the first he did not, yet at the second he did know that the Meeting was for such a Design, (suppose for the purpose there was but two Meetings) and at the second it is determined to go on with the Design; Is not that an Overt-Act, tho it cannot be proved that the Prisoner said any thing?
If the first Meeting is not a Consent, or an Overt-Act, neither will a second or third be if there was no more done than at the first, but they are like so many Cyphers without a Figure.
The first Meeting possibly might be accidental, he might not know what it was for, tho that will go a great way if he does not dissent or discover; but then he meets again with the same Company knowing what they had in Design, Does not that prove a Consent? That was the Case of Sirin the Powder-Plot.
But where it may be uncertain, my Lord, whether it were with a good Design or a bad Design that he met with that Company, it ought to be taken most favourably for the Prisoner: this man might be present in order to a Discovery.
But besides, that is not this Case: you are mooting upon Points that are not in the Case. When Mr.came to Mr., and finding them in some Disorder, and being inquisitive what was the Occasion, he was sent to; and when he discovered what they were to go about, he afterwards meeting Mr., says to him, Are we sent over to murder the Prince of? says, If I had known of this Design before I came from, I wou'd have begg'd the King's, that is, King, Pardon, and desired to have been excused. Hereby he expresses his Knowledge of the Design, and what he was to do; and tho he disliked, yet wou'd obey Orders.
There is no doubt, my Lord, but he knew of it; but whether your Lordship will construe his Silence as a Consent, in Treason, is the Question.
A man is at frequent Consults about Killing the King, and does not reveal it, it is a great Evidence of his Consent.
But it is not prov'd that he did actually Consent to it.
My Lord, we must submit it to your Lordship, whether this is not totally improper and irregular at this time; they are arguing how far the Evidence is to be believ'd, before the time proper for such an Argument comes.
If they will call their Witnesses, let them; or if they say they have none, then they may make their Observations upon the Evidence; but else we desire we may be kept to the usual method of Proceedings.
With Submission, we thought it fit to know the Opinion of the Court first, if there be two Witnesses against the Prisoners; for if there be not two Witnesses, as the Law requites, we need not trouble the Court with our Evidence.
Then, my Lord, we must desire that the Record may be read of CaptainConviction of Manslaughter: a Man that has been guilty of doing such an Act, feloniously, maliciously, and voluntarily, as that is sure, is not a competent Witness.
It has been read already.
I thought we had been over that Objection before.
We think it is proper for us to move it now again; for tho' it is no Objection to his being a Legal Witness, yet we hope it will influence his Reputation as to his Credit; for he that has been guilty of killing a man in such a manner as the Indictment lays it, will find but little Credit, we hope, with a Jury of Countrymen. But since it has been read, and your Lordship and the Jury have taken notice of it, we will call some other Witnesses as to Mr.Reputation and Behaviour, we think they will prove things as bad as an Attainder. I shall not open them to your Lordship, but beg leave to call our Witnesses, who will acquaint you what they have to say,
Certainly, my Lord, you will not think fit to let them do so. I desire they wou'd not usher in any thing of Evidence without acquainting the Court what they call them for: for that were the way to let them in to call Witnesses to things that are not proper.
Nay, without doubt, it is not regular to produce any Evidence, without opening it.
For if it be for any Crime that a man may be presented for, and there is no Conviction, I think that ought not to be given in Evidence to take away a Witness's Credit; if it be only to his general Reputation and Behaviour, so far they may go, and we can't oppose it. Therefore I desire Sirwill open to the Court of what nature his Evidence is.
Well, I will tell you then what I call them to.
You must tell us what you call them to.
Why then, my Lord, if Robbing upon the Highway, if Clipping, if Conversing with Clippers, if Fornication, if Buggery, if any of these Irregularities, will take off the Credit of a man, I have Instructions in my Brief of Evidence, of Crimes of this nature, and to this purpose, against Mr.; and we hope that by Law, a Prisonerstanding for his Life is at liberty to give an Account of the Actions and Behaviour of the Witnesses against him. I know the Objection that Mr.makes, a Witness does not come prepared to vindicate and give an account of every Action of his Life, and it is not commonly allowed to give Evidence of particular Actions; but if those Actions be repeated, and a man lives in the Practice of them, and this Practice is continued for several Years, and this be made out by Evidence; we hope no Jury that have any Conscience, will upon their Oaths give any Credit to the Evidence of a Person against whom such a Testimony is given.
We are speaking only, my Lord, to the Credit of Mr., and if we can shew by Evidence that he is so Ill a Man as to be guiltyof those Crimes that we have open'd, according to the Instructions in our Brief; we hope the Jury will not think him fit to be a good Evidence against us in this Matter.
What say you to this, Mr. Attorney.
My Lord, they themselves know that this sort of Evidence never was admitted in any Case, nor can be, for it must tend to the Overthrow of all Justice and Legal Proceedings; for instead of trying the Prisoner at the Bar, they wou'd try Mr.. It has been always deny'd where it comes to a particular Crime that a Man may be prosecuted for, and this it seems is not one Crime or two, but so many and so long continued as they say, and so often practised that here are the whole Actions of a man's Life to be ript up, which they can never shew any President when it was permitted, because a man has no Opportunity to defend himself; any man in the World may by this means be wounded in his Reputation, and Crimes laid to his Charge that he never thought of, and he can have no Opportunity of giving an Answer to it, because he never imagined there wou'd be any such Objection: It is killing a man in his good Name by a Side-wound, against which he has no Protection or Defence. My Lord, this must tend to the preventing all manner of Justice; it is against all common Sense or Reason; and it never was offered at by any Lawyer before, as I believe, at leastwise never so openly, and therefore I wonder that these Gentlemen shou'd do it, who acknowledge, at least one of them did, that as often as it has been offered it has been over-ruled; and I know not for what end it is now offered, but to make a noise in the Court: they know that it is irregular as much as any thing that cou'd be offered.
Indeed, my Lord, if the Prisoner at the Bar had offered this matter it had been excusable; but that Gentlemen of the Long Robe, and who are so well acquainted with the Practice of the Courts of Law, shou'd pretend to do such a thing, is unaccountable. There was somewhat like this that was offered at, but that was by the Prisoner, to prove that onewho was a Witness had two Wives, and they brought a Copy of an Indictment upon which there was no Process; after that they endeavoured to prove him guilty of several Robberies: but all that sort of Evidence was refus'd. I only give them this Instance to shew, that where the Prisoner has attempted it, it has been always rejected: and I am sure they cannot shew me that ever it was allow'd even to the Prisoner himself to give any thing of this kind in Evidence; and this I must say, they can never shew me any one particular Instance when Counsel ever endeavoured to do it before this time.
My Lord, I mentioned the particular Crimes, the Faults which I had in my Instructions to object against the Credit of the Testimony of Captainin Answer to Mr. Attorney's desire, that I would open the particulars of the Evidence, that I would call my Witnesses to the truth of it; I was loth to repeat the words, I think the things themselves so abominable, but we conceive with submission, we may be admitted in this case to offer what we have offered. Suppose a man be a common Lewd disorderly fellow, one that frequently Swears to falshood for his life: We know it is a common Rule in point of Evidence, that against a Witness you shall only give an account of his Character at large, of his general Conversation; but that general Conversation arises from particular Actions, and if the Witnesses give you an account of such disorderly Actions repeated, we hope that will go to his Discredit, which is that we now are labouring for, and submit it to your Lordships opinion whether we may not do it.
Look ye, you may bring Witnesses to give an account of the General Tenour of his Conversation, but you don't think sure that we will try now at this time, whether he be guilty of Robbery or Buggery.
My Lord, we will give you an account that he us'd to have a private Lodging, and come in with his Horse tir'd and several other such things, as that he us'd to go out in Disguises, and the like.
My Lord, I cannot imagine why a man that has been Guilty of any such Crimes and is not taken should be of greater Credit then a man that has been taken and punish'd.
What is that you say, Mr.?
My Lord, I say 'tis the Crime that renders a Man infamous, and I do not know why a man that has had the good fortune not to be taken and punish'd for great Crimes by him committed, should be in a better Condition as to the Credit of his Testimony, then one that is taken and undergoes the punishment of the Law.
Mr.urg'd that as far as it wou'd go, but we are oblig'd it seems, to hear things that have been Over-ruled over and over; but I desire to know of them, whether they can show he has been Guilty of a greater Crime than he has confest himself Guilty of in Court. I mean of the intended Assassination.
No we agree we can't, but pray let us prove him Guilty of as many Crimes as we can.
But, my Lord, I hope you'l keep them to the general Question of the Common ordinary Tenour of his Conversation.
Call Mr., Mr., Mr.,.
Lay your hand on the Book. The Evidence that you shall give on behalf of the Prisoner at the Bar, shall be the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth, So help you God.
Pray will you give my Lord and the Jury an account whether you know Capt.and how long you have known him.
I have known him about 4 year.
What Reputation is he off?
I never knew any hurt by him in my life.
Pray what is your name?
Frederick Milford.
But the name in my Brief is, that is my man.
But you see this man knows him.
Call.
Do you know Capt..
Yes I do.
How long have you known him?
I believe about twenty Years.
Pray will you give my Lord and the Jury an account of his Life and Conversation.
I can say nothing, he was always Civil in my Company, but he was Lewd in his Discourse.
What do you mean by being Lewd in his Discourse?
Why he wou'd be talking very extravagantly.
What do you mean in talking, was it of what he had done himself, Sir?
No otherwise then that he had Whor'd and those kind of things.
What other things beside Whoring?
I Know no other part of it.
Where is?
Call.
Where isand?
There is not a man of them here, Sir.
, Do you know where they are for the Court stays for them.
Indeed I do not, they were summon'd to be hear.
Where is Black?
Black.
Ask him if he be a Christian.
I have ask'd him, and he says he's a Christian. Sworn.
Well what do you ask him.
, Pray give an account of your Master, and of his Life and Conversation.
You are sworn to tell the Truth, Sweet-heart.
I serv'd him almost 8 Years, and he has been a very good Master to me, my Lord.
But what do you know him to be guilty of.
Nothing at all.
I believe they have put in these Men to confirm his Reputation.
Indeed, I think the King's Councel should have called these Witnesses if there had been occasion.
We submit it to your Direction, how far this Evidence will affect him there is nothing said, as we apprehend that will amount to Treason: If the Prisoner has a mind to say any thing himself, we hope your Lordship will please to hear him.
Ay, if he will, let him.
My Lord, Mr.does not say, that I consented to Command any Party.
Is that all you have to say? Then, Gentlemen, will you sum up.
My Lord, we are agreed, we submit to the 
Court on both
sides.<|endoftext|>Pray call Mr..
I pray one word, my Lord, before Mr.be sworn, I have heard, my Lord, Mr.hath confessed many Treasons, and I desire to know whether he is pardoned, or no.
I don't know that.
My Lord, how can he be a Witness then?
Swear him: for I know no Legal Objection against him. He was a good Witness in my LordTryal.
My Lord, if another did not except against him, 'tis nothing to me.
Pray give an account to the Court of what you know of a general Insurrection intended in.
What he knows concerning me.
We will take care of that, that no Evidence be given but what ought to be.
Is it ordinary that he should say any thing, unless it be to me and my Indictment?
Mr., you remember in all the Tryals about the late Popish Plot, how there was first a general account given of the Plot inTryal, and so in, and others: I don't doubt but you remember it. And Sir, against whose Judgment, I believe, you won't object, was Attorney at that time.
Mr., What do you know of the general Insurrection lately designed?
My Lord, I have had the honor to know Collonelseveral years; but I don't remember that I ever saw him from the time I came acquainted with any part of the Conspiracy, till the Discovery that was at the Council.
Pray give an account of what you know of the Plot in general.
My Lord, inlast Captaincame to me, and told me that my Lordhad designed an Insurrection in; I used some Arguments to disswade him from it. But a little afterwards he came and told me the thing was wholly disappointed, and then it went off, and my Lordwent for. Collonelafterwards about Christmass said there were some Lords and Gentlemen intended to make an Insurrection, the persons were the Duke of, my Lord of, my Lord, my Lord, the Prisoner at the Bar, and Mr.. After some time he told me they had altered their measures, and were resolved not to venture upon an Insurrection in, till they had a concurrency in. Afterwards I was not privy to any thing else, but what I had the Report of from Mr.and Mr.. Mr.told me the Prisoner had said --
My Lord, I am very unwilling to interrupt the Gentleman --
You must not interrupt the Witness. Go on, Sir.
Mr.told me, the Prisoner at the Bar had sentinto, and given him a sum of mony to bear his Charges, and sent Letters to some Scotch Gentlemen to invite them to Town. The Letter bore a Cant of settling some business in; but the business was coming up about the Insurrection. After this Mr.returned, and some Scotch Gentlemen with him; and soon after Mr.gave an account of that Affair, and said, the Scotch proposed, if they might have thirty thousand pounds in ready money, they would undertake to make an Insurrection inwithout the concurrence of. He said this Proposal was agreed to, and money would be soon ready; and he said, thatwould return the money. That the Arms were ready bought, and my Lord ofwould go into, and head the Scots. He told mewhen things were thus settled, some difference arose about raising the money; and at last he told me, my Lorddid offer to raise ten thousand pounds out of his own Estate, if the rest would pay their proportion. Then the Scots came down to less, but that would not be complyed with. The places for the Rising were. That there had been some Debates whether they should begin at, or the other places; and at last it was resolved, they should begin atwith the rest of the places. My Lord, this was the Account I had of the matter in general of Mr.; but he said they were disappointed. Afterwards he told me the Prisoner at the Bar and Majorwere very instrumental in working of it off, because they could not agree upon the Declaration to be made upon the Insurrection. The English were for a Common-wealth; but the Scotch Gentlemen answered, Fairly it might come to it in time, but the Noblemen there would not agree to it at present. As to the Prisoner in particular I know nothing, and did never speak with him till since the Discovery.
Collonel.
Pray Sir, will you give the Court an account of what you know of any Insurrection intended, and how they designed to carry it on.
My Lord, the latter end of, or beginning of, I was desired by my Lordto go to Mr.to know of the Gentlemen that were met there, what was done about the Rising intended at; and I had their answer, that Mr.had fail'd them, and that it must cease for that time. That was all at that time.
What else do you know of any Insurrection afterwards?
After that we had several meetings at Mr.Chamber, where we had divided the City into twenty parts, and seven parts Mr.had brought an account of; the other thirteen he said nothing of; for he had not spoke with those that were to tell him how many men they would afford. There was there Captain, Mr., the two, Mr., Mr., and my self.
What was the Result of those Debates?
To see what number of men they could produce in the City for the Insurrection.
Was there a Rising designed?
Yes.
And did these people meet?
There was no time set.
When was the meeting?
There were several meetings in, and, and.
After the meeting at?
Yes, a great while. It ceased, I think, six weeks or three months?
Who did you meet with at Mr.?
There was the Duke of, my Lord, my Lord, Sir, Mr., and Mr..
Who did you expect should head this Army?
That was never said any thing of.
Who were to manage the Rising?
We that met there.
Had you no expectation of great men?
Mr.told me, and Mr., that there was a Council, which were the Duke of, my Lord, my Lord, Collonel, Mr., and my Lord, there was Six.
What did he tell you of them six?
He told me they were managing a Business with.
A Business, pray speak plain, tell all you know.
For the Insurrection.
Say so then, we know nothing of the Business you were about.
My Lord, Mr.had that Discourse with my LordI never had; he is more fit to speak to that than me.
Speak your own knowledge, and no more.
After the death of my Lord, who were the Managers, and were to carry it on?
I told you Mr.and Mr.did tell me the Duke of, my Lord--
He told you so before. Do you know there was an Insurrection then intended?
Yes, because we met towards the management of it, the company that met at Mr.Chamber, and other places.
What discourse had you with Mr.about it?
Not about those Gentlemen.
The next thing we shall shew, shall be that the Scotch men came to Town.
My Lord, I must ever put you in mind, whether it be ordinary to examine men upon Indictments of Treason concerning me that I never saw, nor heard of in my life.
I tell you, all this Evidence does not affect you, and I tell the Jury so.
But it prepossesses the Jury.
I ask you in general, what you know of the Rising to have been last Spring?
My Lord, It was some time last Summer Mr.came to me, and brought mePapers numbred on the back-side; I asked him to what end he delivered them me? he told me, One was for my self, and I was to deliver the other Two to whom I could Trust in the two Divisions. I asked him, What was the Design? he said, To Raise Men; sayes I, Do you design a general Insurrection? He said, if he did not, if the King was taken off this would do well; for then People would know how to have recourse to a formidable Body. And I have heard him say, That Collonel, whom I don't know, had a considerable part in the management of that Affair.
We Charge him with Conspiring, and there must be Confederates in the Case. Now then we come to the Prisoner, We will call my Lord, that was one of the Persons that did Consult.
Pray acquaint my Lord and the Jury of your knowledge of what Transactions there have been with the Prisoner about this Affair of the general Rising.
What was he to do?
There was no particular Deed for him, more than to carry a Letter. The Duke ofundertook to bring my Lordhither, because he had a particular dependance upon him, and I think some Relation to his Lady: But to Sirthere was a Letter to be sent under the disguise of carrying on some business of the Plantation in. This Letter I suppose was Writ by my Lord(though I know it not) for he was personally known to my Lord, and I don't know that he was known to any of us. About three Weeks after this, then he was dispatched I suppose.
To what purpose were these Gentlemen to come up?
These were to acquaint us how they foundtempered, and what Opportunites or Advantages there was or might be of putting them into a Commotion, and how Men might be Raised, and how they would fall under, and also to keep Time and Place with us. After this, I was with, when he was going into, and he did take out several, I can't tell how much 'twas, I suppose they might be about, and put them into his pocket (and set me down at my Lodging) which he said were to give; whether he gave it or no, I don't know; and after that he was sent.
Who told you so?
Col., For I was inquiring of him; and he said, he had not heard of him in three Weeks, or but once when he was about. After this, I had occasions that called me into the Country, and there I was. Some time after that, I went to the: And this is all the Account I can give.
Do you know thatdid go?
I know nothing but by hear-say. Col.told me, he was gone, and was upon the Road, and he heard from him about.
Did you understand by the discourse after he was gone, that he went in pursuance of that Debate?
Yes my Lord, That was the whole end of his going.
I think you say, that Gentleman
undertook to send him?
Yes, he did.
Will you ask him any Questions?
I have no Questions to ask him.
Silence -- You know the Proverb. The next step is to shew you my Lord, that these persons came up immediately afterwent down thither; and according to that which was said to be the Shadow and Pretence of their coming hither, they pretended they came aboutbusiness. Sirand Mr..
Pray Sir, give an account whatGentlemen came up lately.
My Lord, About the end of the Spring, or beginning of Summer, as I remember, these Gentlemen Sir, and Commissary, and the twoFather and Son, came up hither. I did not see the Father at all, but I sawthe Son the day of the LordTryal; but the other two, I think I saw a little before the Discovery of the Plot.
What did they pretend they came about?
They pretended they came to make a Purchase in, and I saw their Commission from the Persons said to be concern'd in that Design.
Who do you speak of?
and Commissary.
As soon as the Rumour came of the, What became of those Gentlemen?
absconded, but Commissarynever absconded, and theI heard were seized, changing their Lodging from place to place.
, Will you give myand thean Account what you know of these, their absconding and lying hid.
My, Upon the latter end of, or the beginning of; the beginning ofit was, I was sent for intoupon a discovery of someGentlemen that lay about; and when I came down there, there was the Commonand some others, had been before me, and found them making an escape into a.
Who were they?
, and Sir, and one that was committed to theby the Counsel as soon as brought thither.
We shall end here, my Lord: How long had they been in Town?
They had been in Town some little time.
We have done with this piece of our Evidence. Now to shew that while this Emissary was in, at the same time the(which will be another Overt Act of the Treason) was VVriting a Treasonable. I will call you the VVitnesses. It is all of his own writings.
, Pray will you look upon those Papers, and give my Lord and the Jury an account where you found them.
I had a Warrant my Lord, from theby the King and Council, to seize Mr.Papers; and pursuant to it, I did go to his House, and such as I found there I put up. I found a great many upon the Table, amongst which were these, I suppose it is where he usually writes, I put them in aI borrowed in the House, and that in a; I desired Coll.would put his Seal upon them, that there should be no mistake; he refused, so I took my Seal, and Sealed up the, and it was carried before me to Mr. SecretaryOffice. VVhen thesate, I was commanded to undo the, and I didso, and found my own Seal upon it. And I took the Papers out of theI put them into before.
Waspresent when you seized these Papers?
Yes.
Are these some of those Papers?
Yes, I verily believe it.
In the next place, I think we have some Papers of his particular Affairs which will prove his hand. Call Mr., Mr.and Mr..
Sir, When were they Seized?
Towards the latter end ofmy Lord.
Which?
Last.
Pray will you look upon those Writings
Are you acquainted withhand?
Yes, My Lord.
Is that his hand Writing?
Yes Sir I believe so. I believe all these Sheets to be his hand.
How come you to be acquainted with his hand?
I have seen him write the indorsement upon several Bills of Exchange.
My Lord, I desire you would please to consider this, That Similitude of hands can be no evidence.
Reserve your self till anon, and make all the advantagious Remarks you can.
Have you had any dealing with him?
I never saw him write to my knowledge more than once in my life, but I have seen his Indorsement upon Bills, and 'tis very like that.
Do you believe it is his hand as far as you can guess?
My Lord, It is like what came to me for his Hand-writing.
And you believe it to be his Hand?
Yes.
What say you Mr.?
My Lord, I did never seeWrite, but I have seen several Notes that have come to me with Indorsement of his Name, and we have paid them, and 'tis like to this.
And you were never called to account for mispayment?
No, my Lord.
I pray it may be read. We will read as much as is necessary to prove the Inditement.
I pray it may be all read.
Mr.must have what part he desires read,and you shall have what part you will have read afterwards.
I desire all may be read.
Begin there., There was no Absurdity in this, because it was their own Case.
The latter end, the last sheet of all,35.
The argument runs through the book, fixing the power in the people.
The general revolt of a Nation from its own Magistrates, can never be called rebellion.
37.
The power of calling and dissolving Parliaments is not in the King.
So much we shall make use of; if the Colonel please to have any other part read to explain it, he may.
I do not know what to make of it, I can read it.
Ay, no doubt of it, better than any man here. Fix on any part you have a mind to have read.
I do not know what to say to it, to read it in pieces thus.
I perceive you have disposed them under certain heads: To what heads will you have read?
My Lord, let him give an account of it that did it.
My Lord, we will not delay Colonelfrom entring on his defence, only we have this piece of Evidence to give further. One of his Complices was my Lord, we will give in Evidence his Conviction. We will only ask my Lord, Was your Lordship sworn as a Witness at the Tryal of my Lord?
Yes.
Whether or no, when you met, were there in those debates any reflections upon the King, that he had broken his duty?
Not that I remember.
Why would you rise?
If you mean upon the misgovernment, not personally upon the King?
Ay.
Yes, and principally and chiefly that, which we thought was the general disgust of the Nation, the imposing upon the City at that time.
That was complained of at that time?
Yes, my Lord, We took it all along to be the chief grievance.
Have you any more Witnesses?
Only the Record.
I know there is no time mispent to make things clear. If the Jury have a mind to have the words read again --
If they have a mind, let it.
What will you go to next,?
We have done, unless the Jury desire to have the words of the Libel read again.
My Lord, I desire to know upon what Statute I am Indicted.
My Lord, I will give as plain an Answer, You are Indicted upon the old Statute of 253.
Then I desire to know upon what branch of that Statute?
Why, I will acquaint you, 'Tis upon the first branch of that Statute, for Conspiring and Compassing the Death of the King.
Then I conceive, what does not come within that, does not touch me.
Make what Inferences you please Colonel, we will answer you.
I desire to know what the Witnesses have sworn against me upon that point?
Go on, You have heard the Witnesses as well as we.
He says, You are Indicted upon the Statute of 253. which Statute makes it High Treason to Conspire the Death of the King, and the Overt-Act is sufficiently set forth in the Indictment; now the Question is, whether 'tis proved?
They have proved a Paper found in my Study ofand, that is Compassing the Death of the King, is it?
That I shall tell the Jury. The point in Law you are to take from the Court, Gentlemen: Whether there be Fact sufficient, that is your duty to consider.
That is a point of Fact, Whether there be two Witnesses? I tell you beforehand, one Witness is not sufficient.
Why then there is my Lord, and never another.
Nay, do not make those inferences; I will tell the Jury, if there be not two Witnesses as the Law requires in this Case, they ought to acquit you.
You confound me, I cannot stir. You talk of a Conspiracy; What is a Conspiracy to kill the King? Is there any more Witnesses than one for Levying of War?
'Pray do not deceive your self; You must not think the Court and you intend to enter into a Dialogue. Answer to the Fact; if there be not sufficient Fact, the Jury will acquit you. Make what Answer you can to it.
Then I say, There being but one Witness, I am not to Answer to it at all.
If you rely upon that, we will direct the Jury presently.
Then for Levying War, what does any one say? My Lord, let him if he please, reconcile what he hath said now, with what he said at my LordTrial. There he said, he said all he could; and now he has got I do not know how many things that were never spoken of there. I appeal to the Court whether he did then speak one word of that, that he now says of Mr.. He sets forth his Evidence very Rhetorically, but it does not become a Witness, for he is only to tell what is done and said; but he does not tell what was done and said. He says they took upon them to consider, but does not say what one man said, or what one man resolved, much less what I did. My Lord, If these things are not to be distinguished, but shall be jumbled all up together, I confess I do not know what to say.
Take what liberty you please. If you will make no Defence, then we will direct the Jury presently. We will direct them in the Law, and recollect matter of Fact as well as we can.
Why then my Lord, I desire the Law may be reserved to me, I desire I may have Council to that point of there being but one Witness.
That is point of Fact. If you can give any testimony to disparage the Witness, do it.
I have a great deal to that.
Go on to it then.
Then, my Lord, was there a War Levyed? Or was it prevented? Why then, if it be prevented, 'tis not Levyed; if it be not Levyed, 'tis not within the Statute; so this is nothing to me.
The Court will have patience to hear you; but at the same time I think 'tis my duty to advertise you, That this is but mispending of your time. If you can Answer the Fact, or if you have any mind to put any disparagement upon the Witnesses, that they are not Persons to be believed, do it, but do not ask us Questions this way or t'other.
I don't know what the Book was in answer to. We are not to speak of any Book that Sirwrote, but you are to make your Defence, touching a Book that was found in your Study, and spend not your time, and the Courts time, in that which serves to no other Purpose, than to gratify a luxuriant way of Talking that you have. We have nothing to do with his Book, you had as good tell me again, That there was a parcel of people rambling about, pretending to my L.Ghost, and so we may answer all the Comedies in. Answer to the matter you are indicted for. Do you owne that Paper?
No, my Lord.
Go on then, it does not become us to be impatient to hear you, but we ought to advertise you, that you spend not your time to no purpose, and do your self an Injury.
I say first, 'Tis not proved upon me: and secondly, 'Tis not a Crime if it be proved --
You began very materially in one thing: it is material for you to apply your self to take off the Credibility of myLordthat is a Witness; call your Witnesses to that purpose, or if you have any other point to take away the Credibility of any other Witness.
My Lord, I have seven or eight points of Law.
I hear not one yet.
Why, my Lord, Conspiring to levy war is not Treason, anddesire to have Counsel upon that.
'Tis not a Question. You had as good ask me, whether the first Chapter inbe Law?
My Lord,have neither made war, nor conspir'd to levy war.
You are still in a mistake, you shall not think that we intend to dialogue with you, to let you know how far the proof hath been given or not given, but when we come to direct the Jury, then we shall observe how far the Law requires there should be two witnesses. But whether there be such a proof, that must be left to the Jury.
If you agree the Conspiracy, I will tell you my mind of it; I cannot give you my Opinion in Law, till the Fact be stated.
The Law alwayes arises upon a point of Fact; there can be no doubt in point of Law, till there be a settlement in point of Fact.
My Lord has put you in a right way: The Conspiracy is proved but by one Witness, if you have any thing to take off his Credibility 'tis to the purpose.
Truly, my Lord, I do as little intend to mis-spend my own Spirit, and your Time, as ever any man that came before you. Now, my Lord, if you will make a Concatenation of one thing, a Supposition upon Supposition, I would take all this asunder, and shew, if none of these things are any thing in themselves, there can be nothing joyned together.
Take your own Method, Mr.; but I say, if you are a man of low Spirits and weak Body, 'tis a Duty incumbent upon the Court, to exhort you not to spend your time upon things that are not material.
My Lord, I think 'tis very material that a whimsical imagination of a Conspiracy, should not pass for a real Conspiracy of the Death of the King; besides, if these Papers were found in my House, 'tis a Crime created since my Imprisonment, and that cannot come in, for they were found since. My Lord, if these Papers are right, it mentions 200. and odd Sheets, and these show neither Beginning nor Ending, and will you my Lord, indict a man for Treason for scraps of Paper, found in his House relating to an ancient Paper, intended as innocently as any thing in the world, and piece and patch this to my LordDiscourse, to make this a Contrivance to kill the King: Then my Lord, I think 'tis a Right of Mankind, and 'tis exercised by allstudious men, that they write in their own Closets what they please for their own Memory, and no man can be answerable for it, unless they publish it.
Pray don't go away with that right of mankind, that it is lawful for me to write what I will in my own Closet, unless I publish it; I have been told, Curse not the King, not in thy thoughts, not in thy Bed-Chamber, the Birds of the air will carry it. I took it to be the duty of mankind, to observe that.
I have lived under the Inquisition --
God be thanked; we are governed by Law.
I have lived under the Inquisition, and there is no man incan be tryed for Heresie --
Draw no Presidents from the Inquisition, here, I beseech you Sir.
We must not endure men to talk, that by the right of nature, every man may contrive mischief in his own Chamber, and he is not to be punished, till he thinks fit to be called to it.
My Lord, if you will take Scripture by pieces, you will make all the Penmen of the Scripture blasphemous; you may accuse, of saying, There is no God; and accuse the Evangelists, of saying, Christ was a Blasphemer and a Seducer; and the Apostles, That they were drunk.
Look you, Mr., if there be any part of it, that explains the sense of it, you shall have it read; indeed we are trifled with a little. 'Tis true, in Scripture 'tis said, there is no God, and you must not take that alone, but you must say, the fool hath said in his heart, there is no God. Now here is a thing imputed to you in the Libel; if you can say, there is any part that is in excuse of it, call for it. As for the purpose, whosoever does publish, that the King may be put in chains or deposed, is a Traytor; but whosoever says, that none but Traytors would put the King in Chains or depose him, is an honest man; therefore apply, but don't let us make Excursions.
If they will produce the whole, my Lord, then I can see whether one part contradicts another.
Well, if you have any Witnesses call them.
The Earl of.
Ay, in God's Name, stay till to morrow in things that are pertinent.
I desire to know of my Lord, what my Lordsaid to him concerning the Plot that was broken out.
Concerning this Plot you are now questioned for?
The Plot for which my Lordand I was in Prison.
The Question I am asked, is, what my Lordsaid before the Tryal of my Lord, concerning the Plot; I suppose, this goes as a branch of that he was accused for. I was then in the Country, when the Business was on foot, andused to come to Town a day or two in the Week, living near in, and I understanding the Affliction my Lord ofwas in, I went to give my Lord a Visit, we having been acquaintance of above fifty years standing, and bred together inin. When I came to my Lord of, and had administred that comfort that was fit for one Christian to give another in that distress, I was ready to leave him, and my Lordcame in. It was upon the Friday before my Lordwas taken, he was taken (as I take it) upon Sunday or Munday, my Lordfell into the same Christian Office that I had been just discharging, to compassionate my Lords affliction, to use Arguments to comfort and support him under it, and told him, he was not to be troubled, for he had a discreet, a wife and a vertuous Son, and he could not be in any such Plot, (I think that was the word he used at first, though he gave another name to it afterward) and his Lordship might therefore well expect a good Issue of that business, and he might believe his Son secure, for he believed he was neither guilty, nor so much as to be suspected. My Lord proceeded further, and did say, that he knew of no such barbarous Design (think he called it so in the second place) and could not charge my Lordwith it, nor any body else. This was the effect of what my Lordsaid at that time, andhave nothing to say of my own knowledge more than this; but to observe thatwas present when the Jury did put my Lordparticularly to it: what have you to say to what my Lordtestifies against you? My Lord,think did in three several places, give a short account of himself, and said it was very true, and gave them some further account why he said it, and said, he should be very glad it might have been advantagious to my Lord.
My Lord of,desire to know of my Lord of, what my Lordsaid concerning this Plot and me.
My Lord, a little after Colonelwas taken, speaking of the Times, he said, that if ever he was questioned again, he would never plead, the quickest dispatch was the best, he was sure they would have his Life, though he was never so innocent, and discoursing of the late Primate ofProphesie; for my part, says he,think the Persecution is begun, andbelieve it will be very sharp, buthope it will be short, andsaid,hoped so too.
What answer did your Lordship give to it?
have told you whatknow, my Lord is too full of discourse for me to answer all he says; but for Colonel, he did with great asseverations assert, that he was as innocent as any man breathing, and used great Encomiums in his praise, and then he seemed to bemone his misfortune, whichthought real, for never was any man more ingaged to another, than he was to Colonel,believe. Thentold, they talked ofPapers that were found,am sure, says he, they can make nothing of any Papers of his.
VVhen was this?
This was at my house the beginning of.
How long before my Lordwas taken?
About a week before.
would ask you, my Lord, upon your honour, would not any man have said as much, that had been in the Plot?
can't tell,know of no Plot.
Mr..
VVhat do you ask him.
VVhat you heard my Lordsay concerning this pretended Plot, or my being in it?
My Lord, when the Plot first brake out,used to meet my Lordvery often at my Brothers house, and coming one day from, he asked me, what News? I told him, my Lord, says, there are abundance of people that have confessed the horrid Design of murthering the King, and the Duke. How, says he, is such a thing possible? says, 'tis so; they have all confessed it. Says he, do you know any of their names? yes, says I, I have heard their Names. What are their Names? says he, why, says I, Colonel, and Mr., and oneand others, that are in the Proclamation (I can't tell whetherwas in hold) says he, 'tis impossible such a thing can be; says he, there are in all Countreys, people that wish ill to the Government, and says he, I believe there are some here; but says he, for any man of Honour, Interest or Estate, to go about it, is wholly impossible. Says I, my Lord, so it is, and I believe it. Says I, my Lord, do you know any of these people? No, says he, none of them; only one day, says he, passing through the, a man saluted me, with a Blemish upon his Eye, and he embraced me, and wished me all happiness; says he, I could not call to mind who this man was: but afterwards, I recollected my self, that I met him at my Lord, and heard afterwards, and concluded his name to be -- his at whose house the King was to be assassinated --
.
Ay,. My Lord, Mayask, if my Lordbe here?
He is there behind you.
Then he will hear me. My Lord says, what does your Lordship think of this business? says he,am in a maze; says, if you will be ruled by me, you have a good opportunity to Address to the King, and all the discontented Lords, as they are called; and to shew your Detestation and Abhorrence of this thing; for, says, this will be a good means to reconcile all things. Says he, you have put one of the best Notions in my Head that ever was put. Says, You are a very good Pen man, draw up the firstAddress (andbelieve,was the first that mentioned an Address, you have had many an one since, God send them good success) says he,am sorry my Lord ofis out of Town, he should present it. But says, Here is my Lord, my Lord of, my Lord of, all of you that are disaffected, and so accompted, go about this business, and make the Nation happy, and King happy. Says he, will you stay tillcome back? Ay, says, if you will come in any time; but he never came back whilewas there. The next day,think, my Lordwas taken, andcame and found him at my Brother's House again (for there he was day and night) says he, Cozen, what News? Says, my Lordis sent to the. We are all undone then, says he. Pray, says he, go to my Lord Privy-Seal, and see if you can findam to be taken up, says he,doubt 'tis a Sham-Plot, if it was a true Plot,should fear nothing; says, what do you put me to go to my Lord Privy-Seal for? He is one of the King's Cabinet Counsel, do you think he will tell me?won't go; but says, if you are not Guilty, why would you have me go to inquire? why, says he, becausefear 'tis not a true Plot, but a Plot made upon us, and therefore, says he, there is no man free. My Lord,can say no more as to that time, (and there is no man that sits here, that wishes the King better thando.) The next thingcome to, is this,came the third day, and he was mighty sad and melancholy, that was when Col.was taken: says I, why are you melancholy, because Col.is taken? Says, Col.was a man talked of before, why, you were not troubled for my Lord, that is of your Blood, says he,have that particular Obligation from Col., that no one man had from another.have one thing to say farther,praymay be rightly understood in whathave said.
What, you would have us undertake for all the people that hear you?think you have spoken very materially, andwill observe it by and by to the Jury.
Pray call Doctor.
What do you ask Doctor?
have only to ask Dr., whether after the News of this pretended Plot, my Lordcame to him? And what he said to him?
My Lord, the day after this Plot brake out my Lordcame to see me, and upon some discourse of the Plot, with Hands and Eyes lifted up to Heaven, he protested he knew nothing of any Plot, and believed nothing of it, and said, that he looked upon it as a ridiculous thing.
My Lord,desiremay be called,
desire to know, whether he was not in my House when my Lordcame thither, a little afterwas made a Prisoner, and what he said upon it?
Yes, my Lord, my Lordcame the day after the Colonelwas taken, and he asked me, Where was the Col.? and I said, he was taken by an Order of the King; and he said, oh Lord! what is that for? I said, they have taken Papers; he said, Is some Papers left? yes, Have they taken something more? No, well you must take all the things out of the house, and carry them to some you can trust: I dare trust no body, says he; I will lend my Coach and Coach-man I said, if the Col.will save his Goods; he save them, if not, 'tis no matter. A little after the Lordcame in the House of Col., about eleven a Clock at Night. When he was in,told him, what is this? They talk of a Plot to Kill the King and the Duke, and I told him, they spake of one general Insurrection: andtold him more, thatunderstood that Col.was sent into: when my Lordunderstood that, he said, God knows,know nothing of this, andam sure if the Col.was concerned in the matter, he would tell me something, butknow nothing. VVell my Lord,told him,believe you are not safe in this house, there is more danger here than in another place. Says he,have been a Prisoner, andhad rather do any thing in the World than be a Prisoner again.
Pray my Lord be pleased to tell the Court, if my Lordhas said any thing to you concerning this late pretended Plot, or my being any party in it.
My Lord,wasto come hither, and did not know upon what accompt.am obliged to say, my Lordwas with me presently after the breaking out of this Plot, and before his appearing in that part which he now Acts, he came to me; andtold him, Thatwas glad to see him abroad, and that he was not concerned in this disorder. He said, he had Joy from several concerning it, and he took it as an injury to him, for that it looked as if he were Guilty. He said, he knew nothing of himself nor any body else. And though he was free in discourse, and free to go into any Company indifferently; yet he said, he had not seen any body that could say any thing of him, or give him occasion to say any thing of any body else.
Mr..
Mr., what have you to say to me?
My Lord, I desire you would ask Mr.the same thing, what Discourse he had with my Lordabout this Plot?
Mr., Mr.desires you to tell what Discourse you had with my Lordabout this Plot.
My Lord, I have been for some time very intimate with my Lord, not only upon the account of our Alliance, but upon a strict intimacy and correspondenceof friendship, and I think, I was as much his as he could expect from that Alliance. I did move him during this time, to serve the King upon the most honourable account I could, but that proved ineffectual: I pass that, and come to the business here. Assoon as the Plot brake out, my Lord having a great intimacy with me, expressed a great detestation, and surprizing in himself to hear of it, wherein my Lordassured me under very great Asseverations, that he could neither accuse himself, nor no man living. He told me moreover, That there were certain persons of quality whom he was very much concerned for, that they should be so much reflected upon or troubled, and he condoled very much their condition both before and after they were taken. My Lord, I believe in my Conscience, he did this without any Mental Reservation, or Equivocation, for he had no reason to do it with me. I add moreover, if I have any sense of my Lords Disposition, I think if he had known any such thing, he would not have stood his being taken, or made his Application to the King in this manner, I am afraid not so suitable to his quality.
No reflections upon any body.
My Lord, I reflect upon no body, I understand where I am, and have a respect for the place; but since your Lordship has given me this occasion, I must needs say, That that Reproof that was accidentally given me at the Tryal of my Lord, by reason of a weak Memory, made me omit some particulars I will speak now, which are these, and I think they are material: My Lord upon the discourse of this Plot did further assure me, that it was certainly a Sham, even to his knowledge; how, my Lord, says I, do you mean a Sham? Why, says he, such an one, Cozen, as is too black for any Minister of publick Employment to have devised, but, says he, it was forged by People in the dark, such as Jesuites and Papists, and, sayes he, this is my Conscience; says I, my Lord, if you are sure of this thing, then pray, my Lord, do that honourable thing that becomes your quality, that is, give the King satisfaction as becomes you; pray make an Address under your hand to the King, whereby you express your Detestation and Abhorrence of this thing: says he, I thank you for your Counsel, to what Minister, says he, shall I apply my self? I pitched upon my Lord, and I told him of my Lords desire, and I remember my Lordnamed the Duke of, my Lord of, the Earl of, and he said he was sure they would do it; that he was sure of their Innocence, and would be glad of the occasion: and I went to my L., and told him that my Lord was willing to set it under his hand, his detestation of this Plot, and that there was no such thing to his knowledge. My Lordvery worthily received me, says he, I willintroduce it; but my Lordbeing taken, this was laid aside, and my Lord gave this reason. For, says he, there will be so many People taken, they will be hindred. I must needs add from my Conscience, and from my Heart before God and Man, that if my Lord had spoken before the King, sitting upon his Throne, abateing for the solemnity of the presence I could not have more believed him, from that assurance he had in me. And I am sure from what I have said, if I had the Honour to be of this Gentleman's Jury I would not believe him.
That must not be suffered.
You ought to be bound to your good behaviour for that.
The Jury are bound by their Oaths to go according to their Evidence, they are not to go by men's conjectures.
May I go my Lord?
My Lorddesires he may stay, we shall make use of him.
My Lord, I spake of a Mortgage that I had of my Lord, I don't know whether it is needful to be proved; but it is so.
I confess it.
Then my Lord here is the other point, He is under the fear, that he dare not but say what he thinks will conduce towards the gaining his Pardon; and that he hath expressed, that he could not have his Pardon, but he must first do this drudgery of swearing. I need not say, that his Son should say, That he was sorry his Father could not get his Pardon unless he did swear against some others.
Call Mr.
My Lord, I desire he may be asked, whether my Lorddid not tell him that he could not get his Pardon yet, and he could ascribe it to nothing, but that the drudgery of swearing must be over first.
My Lord, I am very sorry I should be called to give a publick account of a private Conversation, how it comes about I don't know. My Lord sent for me about six Weeks ago, to come and see him. I went and we talked of News, I told him I heard no body had their Pardon; but he that first discovered the Plot, he told me no; but he had his Warrant for it. And, says he, I have their Word and Honour for it; but says he I will do nothing in it till I have further order, and says he, I hear nothing of it, and I can ascribe it to no other reason; but I must not have my pardon till the drudgery of swearing is over. These words my Lord said, I believe my Lord won't deny it.
'Tis a hard case they don't appear, One of them was to prove that my Lordsaid he could not have his Pardon till he had done some other Jobs.
I can't help it, If you had come for assistance from the Court I would willingly have done what I could.
Calland
I ask you only, what my Lordsaid to you at my House concerning the Plot, and my being in it?
Sir he said, that he knew nothing of a Plot he protested, and he was sureknew nothing of it. And he said If you knew any thing of it, he must needs know of it, for he, knew as much of your concerns as any one in the World.
Did he take God to Witness upon it?
yes.
Did he desire my Plate at my House?
I can't tell that, he said the Goods might be sent to his House.
What did my Lordsay in your hearing concerning the pretended Plot, or my Plate carrying away?
When he came he asked for your Honour; and they said your Honour was taken away by a man to the Tower for the Plot, and then he took God to Witness he knew nothing of it, and believed your Honour did not neither. He said he was in the Tower two years ago, and your Honour, he believed, saved his Life.
Did he desire the Plate?
Yes, And said it should be sent to his House to
be secured. He said it was only Malice.<|endoftext|>Do you know Mrs.?
Give an Account of her.
She is the Daughter ofDeceased, who left his Estate to Dr.and my self, to be sold for payment of his Debts and Legacies, and left the surplusage to his Daughter, which is about 2000
What Lands has she?
She has 20a Year.
What Age is she of?
She is near Eighteen.
Was she ever Married, or no?
She was unmarried.
My Lord, I beg the favour that only one Witness be heard at a time.
Mrs., Do you know Mrs., and Mrs.?
Yes, I do.
Have they lodged at your House?
Yes.
How long?
Above three Years.
Have you any knowledge of Mrs.?
Yes.
How came you acquainted with her?
One Mrs.came to me to know whether I took Boarders? I said, I had taken some, but would take no more, unless it were the same Ladies again.
Who was it came to you?
One Mrs..
Mrs.speak out that my Lord may hear you.
Did Mrs.lodge with you?
Yes my Lord, we were very intimate before, and since it pleased God to take away her Husband, I was pleased with her, and very willing to take her into my House.
Acquaint his Lordship how Mrs.came to you.
Yes, my Lord, as near as I can. She came to me and ask'd me, If I took Boarders? I told her No, I would take none except it were those Ladies I had before, She told me she had an Acquaintance that was a Widow Lady that came out of, about a Suit of Law, and would be in a very sober Family near a Church; but however I deny'd her Lodgings, and did expect to hear no more of her; but about three Weeks or a Month after she came to me again, and asked me whether I had altered my Resolution?
Go on.
My Lord, Mrs.said, that the Lady was come to Town on theNight before, very much Indisposed in her Journey. I asked her whether she knew thisor no. Mrs.said Yes, she was very Intimate in the Family, and she said a great deal more of her, which I cannot remember. She said also, that she would have Boarded her her self, and would have been glad of her Company if she had had Conveniences for her. Then she asked me, whether she should come her self and give her own Character? We thought no harm, she being a Woman, and not a Man. She further said, that Mrs.had been a Maid whom I knew, and she believed she would take her. I enquired of another who lived in the, if he knew Mrs., he said Yes, and that she came of a good Family. At length she came and made a very modest Appearance in her Behaviour and Garb. She said to me, that I was very curious in taking Boarders, and for that she liked me the better. I consented she should come. She asked me what I would have a Week? I told her twelve Shillings for her self and ten Shillings for her Maid. She concluded to come on thefollowing, which she did with her Maid, a modest Girl and a Neighbour, which gave me the more Encouragement. She carried her self very well tillat Night, when we heard of her New Brother; she seem'd Elevated at the News, and fell into Convulsion Fits, which I believed were real Fits. She said she had a dear Brother, a good Christian, and he would come on the Morrow; when he came he brought two Gentlewomen with him, very Modest, which I never saw before, nor since. Mrs.made a Pot of Coffee, and sent for a Bottle of Wine, and she told her Brother before me, what good Lodgings she had, and said she wished he would come andLodge near them, for she knew he had but a puney Stomach, and believed he would like her Victuals; he said it was not convenient for him because his Business called him every Day to the Change; she said also there was a Bowling Green near them, where he might divert himself, but all would not do. She asked me what I would have a Meal if her Brother should come at any time. I said, when I had other Ladies, if any of their Friends came I had twelve Pence a Meal of them. Onhe came. I went to Church, and left them together at Cribbage, as I found them at my return.
What Day of the Week was this?
Thebefore the Sacrament: Mrs.said to Mr., before Mrs., you have an extraordinary hand at making Punch, so they agreed to make a Bowl thefollowing; but Mrs.hardly drank any, she not liking any strong Liquors. After this, she told me, her Brother was very ill of his Journey, being lately come out of the Country, tho' I don't understand he was in't. ThebeforeDay we were at Dinner with two more than our Family, when Mrs.said, she had an Interest in aShip, and invited us all Aboard; but he,Mr., did not come to our House till four Days after; but onwe concluded to go on; there were Eight of us in Company in all, Mrs., Mrs., I and my Daughter. and Mr.another Lodger, belonging to the Exchequer; we went, and had much Discourse; after having drank a Glass of Wine the Cloth was laid, and the Master offered a Bowl of Punch; says Mr.,.
Is this Person Mrs.Brother?
This is he that went for her Brother.
Whereabouts is your House?
Near.
This Mrs.came to you under the Character of a Country Lady on a Law Suit; do you understand that she was so?
My Lord, she said she came from the.
You misapprehend the Question, Do you understand that her pretence was true or not?
I enquired of several Persons who acquainted me that thelived in; but it was not long before we began to suspect her, for there seemed to be an extraordinary Love between her and, more than is usual between Brother and Sister. I said, Madam, I wonder you don't marry your Brother. She said, she thought that 'twas not lawful. I said there was such a thing done in, of a Mans marrying two Sisters.
Pray call to mind what time it was that you first gave notice to her that she should not continue in your Lodgings.
When I first mistrusted her, I gave notice of it in my Family; but we being all Women, and fearful of her, thought not fit to give her warning till her Month was up; but before that, she came to me, and told me, and said, Mrs., I have received a Letter from my Sisterin the Country, which informs me, that the Trustees will agree, and so I design to return when my Month is up, for this Town is very chargeable. Very well said I, for I expect some Ladies very shortly. I went down to my Family and exprest my Joy to them, and said, I was very glad Mrs.had prevented me, for if she had not given me warning, I would have given her Warning, for I resolved she should not stay.
Mrs., it seems you had notice of Mrs.ill Carriages; Did you take any notice of it to her self?
No, I did not, but I gave the Maid notice as soon as I suspected any thing.
Do you know whether the Maid had told any thing to her or not?
The Maid said to her, Madam, Don't you see a strangeness in the Family? Yes, said she, I can see and bear a great deal, but when I am rouzed I'll be like a Lion.
How long was this before Mrs.was taken away?
I can't prefix the time, but it was before she gave me warning.
Was she gone from your House before this thing happen'd.
No, my Lord, she told me onthat her time was out; but said, there is a Fellow in Town that I fear will cheat me, and I am taking out a Statute of Bankrupcy against him, which I think will cause me to stay in Town a Week longer; she also told me, she had taken a place in the Coach to go on, but must lose her Earnest, for this Business would detain her a Week longer.
Did you ever observe they were together in private?
No, my Lord, we never had any suspition of Mr., but of the Woman; for she could put on all manner of Disguises.
Mrs., pray do you know Mrs.?
Yes, I do.
How came you first acquainted with her?
My Brotherwas one of her Guardians, and put her under the Care of my Husband, while he was living, which was four Years ago this. She came to us by the consent of her Guardian.
At what place did you Lodg?
We lived in, but since my Husband died, which is three Years last, I left House-keeping, and then we went and lodg'd at Mrs..
How long have you continued at Mrs.?
We have continued there ever since.
Do you know Mrs.?
Yes, I do, she lodg'd at Mrs..
Was there any body who used to come to her there?
None except aWoman.
Do you know any thing of Mr.?
Sir, The first of his coming to Mrs.was the Day afterDay. Mrs.said, that she had a Brother that was to come to Town, which he did the Day after, with two Gentlewomen, which I never saw, either before or since; but Mr.after this came several times to her as her Brother, her Sisters Husband, and she desired that he might Dine with her sometimes; for which she agreed with Mrs.at 12Meal.
Was this Mrsat any time in private with?
Never that I know of in all my Life, we were always in Company together when he Dined there, and the times that he Dined there, we computed to be 9 or 10, he was there sometimes when we were not at home.
How did Mrsbehave her self when she was at Mrs?
We thought very well of her, till at last we discerned too much freedom between Mr.and her self, we suspected her Vertue, and thought she would Drink, and were informed she would Swear, she said she must stay in Town about a month or 6 weeks about a Suit of Law, her Maid told her of the strangeness of the Family, she said they had best be Civil, or else she would stay and plague them. She toldat length the Town was chargeable, and her Business done, and that she would return into the Country.
What do you know concerningbeing taken away?
Mrsknowing it was our custom to go to, everymorning, she came and told us she had occasion to go to, and that being in the way, she invited us to go with her in the Coach, and she would set us down at or near the Chappel. When we came to, somebody bid the Coach man stop, I expected she should set us down as she promised, on that side where I sat there were old Buildings and as I was looking out, I heard Mrscry out to the Coach man drive on, and all of a sudden I saw a man in the Coach, which wasthe Bayliff, Mrsand I were in a very great fright knowing nothing: I said for God's sake let's come out, we are not concerned,said we were the persons that he came for, I begg'd of him to let us come out,had his Arms about Mrsside, and said, 'tis this Lady and you that I am concerned about. I ask'd him what it was, said he, let you and I have two or three words together, and all will be well enough. I said, you don't think I will say any thing to you, unless I have my Friends by me, Mrsin the Coach, said no Madam be sureyou don't. I could not tell what he would do with us, at length he carried us all to the Star and Garter Tavern in, I press'd him to let us go to, for I had Friends there.was very angry, and would hear nothing of it, when we came to, Mrswou'd have had us put on our Masks. I said I had done nothing amiss, and I wou'd not; when we were in the Room at the Tavern, Mrshastn'd out of the Room as fast as she cou'd pretending to go for my Friends, Mrsand I were in a great consternation, wondring what they would do with us, I took hold of her Arm and told her I would live and dye with her. The Bayliffs came in and said she was their Prisoner, and took her by violence from me, they told me she must go with them, for they said she was Arrested by a Writ out of one Court, and I by one out of another, when she was going I put my Head out of the Window, and cry'd Murder, Murder several times, when I pull'd in my Head again,said what have you got by your Bawling, and said they were better known there then I, they brought a Man to me who said he had Orders to keep me, and that he had only a Crown for his pains, but he would not suffer me to send for any body. The Gentlewoman of the House came up, and said I had done a diskindness to her House by crying out Murder, she said to me look and see whether your Name be spelt right, for it may be a false Arrest,that went away with Mrscame back again, and said the young Woman was well, and that he left her eating Fowl and Bacon, I said I wish she was well. The Gentlewoman of the House bid the Bayliff shew me the Writ, he said he cou'd not read well, but there was the name ofat the Suit of one, but when he heard my complaints a considerable while, he said he would go to my Friends, and would go as cheap as a Porter and as soon. I sent him to Mrand Mr, he pretended to go but return'd no more till night.
You said you cry'd out Murther, how did Mrsbehave her self then?
It was her great fright and crying that made me endeavour her rescue, when we said we wou'd dye together, then it was when they forc'd her from me, the surprize was so great that made me cry out after that manner that I did, upon which some Neighbours came in, but they told them it was an Arrest, and therefore they wou'd not meddle in it.
Mrs, they kept you till night you say, did they take or require Bail for you before you was discharged.
I'll tell you Sir, if you please, I did not know what I was Arrested for, it might be Murder or Treason for ought I knew, there was a little Boy by, said Madam I know Mr, your Friend in, and I'll go for him, he went, but when he return'd again, he said he was not at home, which I thought was a lye, there was a poor man a Labourer working in the Chimney, he gave me a whink, and said Madam I'll go for him; but I said to him pray don't leave me, I began to be affraid, for I did not know how my life might be concern'd. Said the little, Boy I'll go any where for you, I sent him for two Gentlemen who came, the Bayliffs said they had an Action of 200against me, the Gentlemen told the Bayliffs they were come to bail me. The Bayliffs were very impudent, but shuffl'd about, a while and left me and took no further notice.
Did they take any Bail for you.
No they left me with these Gentlemen
When you went out in the Morning, did you design to go any where else but to Chappel.
No where else.
Was it your invitation to Mrs, or her invitation to you to go in the Coach.
It was Mrs.invitation to me, I had not a very good opinion of Mrsfor we suspected her Virtue in the Family, by reason of her too familiar carriage to her Brother, but being to go shortly away, I apprehended no harm.
Did Mrsgo with you.
She did.
Mrs, do you know the Prisoner, is this the Man that came to MrsHouse.
Yes Sir.
How long was it from the time that you were parted after Arresting, that you saw Mrsagain.
The first time after was on, when they were before the Recorder.
When did you find her.
Onin the Afternoon.
Was you at the finding?
No my Lord.
What time was it
About Noon I believe.
When you saw her put into the Coach, did you hear her cry out?
No Sir, it was I that cry'd out.
Did Mr.make any entertainments or no?
But one as I know of.
have you done,
I think so.
If you have, I'll ask you a question, did you know of any Love between Mrsand me.
Did you know any thing of Love between Mrsand the Prisoner or no?
No my Lord.
Pray did you know?
Yes.
Was you her Servant?
Yes, Sir.
Who recommended you to her?
Mrs.
Do you know one Mr?Yes, my Lord, there he is,
Did you ever see him before you were hired to your Mistress.
no my Lord, I never saw him before.
Did you see him, when you was with your Mrs.
Yes my Lord.
Do you know whether there was any Relation between them?
Yes, my Lord, they went for Brother and Sister.
How long was you with her.
About a Month.
How did she behave her self?
Till the last of her time, very well, but the Family had a mistrust of her long before she went away.
Do you know the Reason why they mistrusted her?
I do not know my Lord.
Do you know what was the cause the Family mistrusted her?
They thought her a loose sort of a Woman and therefore they mistrusted her.
Did they discern any Familiarity betwixt them?
No more than as Brother and Sister.
After this Suspicion, do you know whether the Family exprest any Resentment?
No, my Lord.
Did you live with her when Mrswas taken away?
Yes my Lord, but I went away the next day.
Mrs, pray was you present when the Prisoner was taken up, and do you know whether he and Mrswere Brother and Sister.
I went to Mrhimself, and said is this wicked Woman your Sister? Says he, I cannot say she is, but I have made her my Tool, and she has done my business, and I would get rid of her to morrow, but that beingI will not, but onI'll give her a reward for what she has done, and then I'll discharge her, and never see her more.
Relate what discourse you had with him to the Gent. of the Jury.
I asked Mrwhether Mrswas his Sister, he said no, she is not my Sister, but I have gained my end in making her a Tool to my Dear Wife, I'll gratify her for what she has done and put her away onand never see her more.
I think you lodged in the House with her?
No, but I was a Neighbour, and was very frequently there.
Did you see any thing to cause you to mistrust that there was any thing more then ordinary betwixt them.
No cause at all that I know of.
Mrpray do you know Mrs?
Yes, Sir.
How long have you known her?
About 12 years.
Pray is she a Country Lady that has got a good Joynture.
I know nothing but that she works for her Living.
Hath she any Estate in the Country?
None as I know of.
Do you know the Prisoner at the Bar?
Yes, Sir, where did he lodge at any time?
He lodged at my house.
How long?
About 6 or 7 months.
Where is your House?
In.
What other Lodgers had you at the same time?
I had a Parliament man Lodged with me at the same time.
VVhere didlodge.
In the opposite Room against the Gentleman.
How long time?
About 7 months.
How long wasgone from your House before this matter happened?
About 5 or 6 weeks.
How long before?
I cannot certainly tell, but much about that time.
VVhen they were in your House, what did you see betwixt them.
Nothing of any harm, as I know of.
Mr.did you never see any harm by Mrs.
Not as I know of.
Do you know whether she lay in at your House?
I know not, for ought I know she might, I know nothing of VVomens lying in.
VVere you one of the Bayliffs that Arrestedand.
I was the Man that Executed the Marshals Court VVrit and Arrested them.
VVho employed you?
.
VVere you atHouse?
My Lord I'l tell you the truth of the matter, onbefore they were Arrested,, was at my House to see for me, but being not at home, but in the Country, I came home about a 11 at Night, My Daughter said to me there was a VVrit left byfor me to be served and it must be done to morrow morning, on the morning he came to me and saidwill you Execute a Writ, he carried me to the Mitre Tavern and called for a Pot of Ale and a Bottle of VVhite VVine, and we had a Toast and some Cheese, while I was there onecame in, a man that I had never saw in all my life, and said the business cannot be done this day.
VVhat day of the week was this?
, heappointed me to call upon him at 9 next morn. He said if I came first we shou'd get what we had before, he came in before we had done, and the man of the House was dressing himself in the Kitchin; we eat a Tost, and drank the VVine, and after that we had another.call'dout, and said it cannot be done, by and by he said it might be done, I don't know what it was, but they took me tostreet,andwas with me, I was asham'd to stand in the street, so I went into an Alehouse, and drank a single pot of drink.
Had you seenbefore that morning?
No, I never saw him before in all my life; At that, if't please your Honour,andwent before, and bid me follow the Coach, I did so as near as I cou'd, but cou'd not keep pase with the Coach, being lame, but atGroundstopp'd the Horses, and then I came up to the Coach, andI suppose gave the word of Arrest, and into the Coach he went, but I did not go in because there was no room, but rid behind it; the Coach was order'd to go to the Star and Garter Tavern in, when we came there we went into a back room, and the Gentlewoman that had a Band-box said toI will go to some of your Friends.
VVhat did they do inGrounds?
They were Arrested there, the Gentlewoman was carry'd byto his House, and I follow'd them, but meeting with a Gentlewoman of my acquaintance, she stopp'd me, when I came toHouse, where is she said I, they told me she was below Stairs, I said I had a little business elsewhere that will detain me about an hour, he gave me leave to go; VVhen I went outcall'd me over the way, and ask'd me ifwas at home, I said yes, and is the young Gentlewoman there to? I likewise said yes. He led me to the 5 Bells instreet; into a room where there were three boxes, and carry'd me to the middlemost box, and there was a Gentleman.
VVas it the Prisoner at the Bar?
Yes, I think so, at thatfill'd me a full Glass, which I drank off, and I told him I was going to do some business in, and when I had done that I went toHouse again, I enquir'd for the Gentlewoman,said her Husband was gone along with the Gentlewoman toto make an end of the matter. I askt her whereabout, she said at the Vine Tavern, I went thither and ask'd for, there was he andand a Tallow Chandler going to eat Stakes, they invited me to eat some with them, which I did,came into the room two or three times, then Mrtold me I was discharg'd of my Prisoner, so away I went.
You were eating Stakes you say at the Vine Tavern, was she there then?
There is a Court against the Tavern, and I saw the Gentlewoman looking out of the Vine Tavern, where there were new Sash windows, as I came over the way thro the Court this Gentlewoman look'd out of the Window.
VVhat, before you went in?
Yes my Lord, but I went in and saw him alone, but knew not whom he was.
Did you seethere?
No not at the Tavern.
VVhentook away this Gentlewoman, did she go away quietly, or didand she make any outcry?
She was a little frighted.
VVhere was it you first saw?
At the 5 Bell Tavern.
When was it you saw him there?
about 12 a Clock.
Where was it he gave you the pot of Drink?
at the 5 Bells, but it wasthat gave it me.
How many were there in Company there?
Onlyand.
What was the occasion ofyour going?
call'd me.
When was it you saw him out of the Window?
about an hour and qr after.
What answer did you give when they ask'd you where the Gentlewoman was?
I said she was at.
You said you serv'd a Writ on, had you no Process against?
No, none at all.
On what account did you keep?
I did not keep her, but onewas employed to do it.
You came back todid not you say that you had been with the young Gentlewoman, who was eating Fowls and Bacon?
ask'd me to eat some.
Did not you shewa Writ and read it to her?
I cou'd never read a King's Bench Writ.
Can you read a Marshals Court Writ?
Yes but not the Latin of it.
When you went toat the Vine Tavern did you ask for.
Yes, Yes, I ask'd where she was They told me they were making an end of it. My Lord I had like to have forgot, I asked where was the Prisoner andtold me they had just made an end of the business.
Give an account to his Lordship after what manner you were Arrested and carried from Tavern to Tavern.
My Lord I was Arrested with Madamand carried to the Star and Garter Tavern in.
How were you carried thither?
I was in a Coach going to, when 3 Bayliffs were about the Coach.
Where did they carry you?
They carried us to the Star and Garter in.
Who did they carry with you?There was,and I, andthe Bayliff, when we came to the Star and Garter they forced me up Stairsinto a Back Room, but we got into a forward room, but we had not been there long till they partedand I;was gone, for our Friends as she pretended. I was in a very great Fright, butsaying we will dyetogether they took me by force from her;swore a great Oath and thrust me down Stairs and forced me out of a Back-door into an Alley, when he went to put me intoa Coach I cry'd out Murder, then he threatn'd to put me into, he carry'd me to his House, and no body came to help me a great while, butsaid that as she was going by the Door she heard my Name, and came in, in a mighty Fright; she said to me Madam I pity you, will no body Bail you? she told me I will send to my Brother who shall be Bail for you, she sent for him, he came into the Room, and he said what is the matter with you, I said enough is the matter when I am Arrested for 200and owe no man a penny. Said he in a Jacose way what makes you affrighted at that, I have a good mind to Arrest you my self. Then they took me thence to the Vine Tavern in, where I was an hour or two before I heard any thing of Marrying or any such thing.
What did they do with you all that time?
They got a Dinner ready, and after we had Dined, she begged of me to have her Brother, and said that if I did not marry him, I should be ruined, I told her I would do nothing without the advice of my Friends. I desired my Friends to be sent for, but they would not admit it. She looked on my Ring on my Finger, and said let me see your Ring from your Finger. I said no, you shall not. She said I will force it off. I said I'll try that, but she forced it from me.
Remember you are upon your Oath.
I know I am. When she took my Ring away, I askt her what she would do with it, she said she should go and get a Wedding Ring made by it. I told her I would not marry without the advice of my Friends. Away she went and bought a Ring, and came up again and said to her Brother, she had a Ring; well said I give me my Ring and do what you will with the other; she said if I did not marry her Brother I should be ruined for ever. There was a Minister in the House, whom they said had been there about a quarter of an hour but I supposed longer, they brought him with the Clerk up Stairs; the Parson saying I hear there is a couple to be married, he asked no Questions, but told me if I did not marry this Gentleman, I should be sent toand ruined for ever.
Give an account of what was after buying the Ring.
When they brought the Ring, they said to me will you be marryed or no? I answered I will not, there are none of my Friends here, and I will not marry without the consent of my Friends they said if I did not I should be ruined for ever, so with many Threats and Perswasions, they at last prevail'd with me to marry. I was forced to marry him out of Fear, not of going to, but of being murdered.
Where did they carry you?
ToHouse in,.
What time of the day was it?
I cannot give an exact account; but I think it was Candle-light.
It was about 12 a Clock at noon.
What time was it that you were marry'd?
My Lord it was about 3 a Clock.
When you went tohouse, who was with you there?
None but Mr, Mrsand I.
Was there any Force or Threats us'd when you were atHouse?
Yes, there was my Lord.
Give an account of it.
They thrust me up Stairs, and order'd to have a Bed sheeted. Mrssaid to me undress and go to Bed. I said I wou'd not. She said she wou'd pluck my Cloaths off my back. I said she shou'd not. She told me she wou'd pluck off my Cloaths and make me go to Bed.
What did she do with you?
She put me to Bed.
Did she use any violence with you?
Such violence that made me go to Bed.
How came you to be released?
It wasmorning before I was releas'd, there was some of my Friends came to the place where I was.
Then you were with him all night?
Yes, my Lord.
Mrwill you ask her any Questions?
She must be my chiefest Evidence my Lord, when the Witnesses come she must be the chiefest of them.
You will not ask her any Questions now, but when the Witnesses are call'd
My Lord I presume she does not go out of the Court.
We have done with our Evidences at present.
MrWhat do you answer to the Evidence.
My Lord I am very much unprepar'dfor a Tryal at present.
Why so?
Because I had but little time for preparation, and I am not prepar'd, I desire that I may be allow'd Council.
No, no, it cannot be allow'd you, and as for the time of your Tryal you were told, if you would shew good cause to have it put off yet, the Court would have done it.
Then I hope if I speak any thing that may be prejudicial to my Cause, that the Court will not take advantage from it. The first time I was at Mrs, I was desired by Mrsand Mrsto make a Bowl of Punch, which I did, and we were very Merry over it, then I invited them to go on Board a Ship, which they all did, and we in a short time came very well acquainted. My Lord, I desire my Wife might stand by her self, and none of them near her.
There is none near her that will hurt her.
My Lord I beg she may stand by her self, that I may have a fair Tryal, I pray your Lordship to grant me this favour. My Lord will you please to grant it?
Must I grant it only for your humour?
'Tis not a humour, my Lord, but of a great consequence to me, will your Lordship grant me it? I beg it, my Lord, for 'tis the most material thing I have to ask, I beg all those people may be removed from her, 'tis the greatest and most material thing I have to say.
I'm sorry for it?
It is so, good my Lord grant me that.
There's no body near her, that concerns you at all.
There are those by her that will do me no kindness.
My Lord her standing there is enough to disorder her.
My Lord she is very well.
Remove her a little further.
My Lord he does on purpose to fright her.
We went (as I was telling your Lordship) aboard a Ship, and they invited me to come the Week following to partake of a Treat, accordingly I went, and there was one Mr., and he and I made a Bowl of Punch. Mr.at that time Courted Mrs., and that little time I was acquainted with her I discerned she had a Kindness for me, as I had for her; I told her I could not be easie while she suffred Mr.to Kiss her; she desired me to be easie and it should be remedied.
Mrs.. Do you remember any such thing?
My Lord, I do not remember any such thing, or that any such Words ever came out of my Mouth.
Did not you say this Mrs., Mrs.I should say, did not you say, If I would not sit by you you would not eat a bit or a crumb; when I sat by you and proffered my place to another, can you say you were not offended?
No, I was not.
Are not you upon your Oath, did not you give me some Encouragement?
I do not know how I could shew it you, I know not of any such thing.
You ought to speak the truth because his Life depends upon it. Did you in the first place ever admit of his Courtship in order to Marry you?
No, my Lord, I don't remember any such thing.
Did you ever shew any kindness to him upon any such account?
No, I don't know I shew'd him any more kindness than all the rest of the Family shewed him.
Was you ever in his Company alone.
No, my Lord.
To give me more Ease and Satisfaction after Dinner we had our Bowl and Walnuts, Mrs.pilled the Kernels and gave them to me; she gave them faster than I could eat; she heaped my Plate with them, every one at the Table took notice of it, and she jogged me with her Knee, that I should take them, and gave some to Mrs., and bid her take them and give to me.
Mrs., Were you there?
Yes, my Lord.
Did you see any thing of this kind?
No, my Lord.
Will your Lordshipplease to ask her your self?
Mrs., did you e'er give pilled Walnuts to him, or send them to him in particuler?
No, my Lord, I do not know that I was more kind to him than the rest of the Company.
Every Body took notice of it, and Mrin particular.
What do you say Mr.?
My Lord, Mrif he were here would say the same as I do. He was afraid I should get away his Lady.
Where is he?
He is in the Court.
You may have him for a Witness if you will
More than this, before he went away she told him she did not care for him; this she spoke to make me more easie still: This I believe Mr.can Witness, in as much as Madamcomplain'd to her about it, at Mr.the Picture Drawers, who is one of my Evidences, I desire he may be called.
Well, let him be called.
Hear ye, he calls you to be a Witness, you are not to be upon your Oath, but are under the highest Obligation to tell the Truth.
While I was drawing a Gentlewomans Picture, Mrs., there was a Fire, it began to be Cold, they fell into Discourse about Mr.and Mrs.; Mrs.was there at the same time, they fell into Discourse about Mr.and the young Lady.
Was she there?
Yes.
Where was it?
At my Lodgings, there were Mrs., the young Lady, and Mrs..
Whose Picture were you drawing?
Mrs., They fell into Discourse relating to a matter of Love, between Mr.and the young Lady. She said the young Lady had a Love for Mr., more than the other.
You heard her say so?
No, but I can say Mrs.said so.
But tell us what you heard.
She should have said so, I did not hear her my self, but afterwards upon a Discourse she said afterwards, what she had said she would stand to.
What did she say?
I do not know that she said so or not.
My Lord, may I speak it as well as I can, he cannot speakright, I'll speak it to him, my Lord.
No, no. Did you hear Mrs.say any thing? What did she say?
In way of Discourse she said so.
What, in way of Discourse, did she say nothing?
I heard the Lady only say that Word, that all she had said she would stand to.
What did you hear them talk about?
They were playing at Cards, and she took up the Tricks of Mr., which discovered Love.
The Question is, whether you did hear them speak any thing of Love, or not?
My Lord, he would speak better with an Interpreter.
Let an Interpreter be called for.
What Country-man are you?
My Lord, he is a.
he's none of my Country, he is a, I don't understand him.
He speakswell enough.
Very well, but he knows not where he begins, he would say what Mrsand Mrs.were speaking, but knows not how to utter himself.
He cannot say any thing for you.
I heard but a few Words, and cannot say much of it.
You must have a better Witness, or you are in a dangerous Condition.
My Lord, Mrcomplained to Madam, that she slighted him very much.
What, for Love of you?
Yes, my Lord, I could tell you of divers things that pass between Lovers, that would be impertinent for me to relate to wise Men.
Let us hear some of them.
When we were by our selves, she kissed me, and squeezed me by the Hand, when we walked privately in the Garden.
Did she kiss you?
Yes, My Lord and squeez'd me often.
Did you not think her very coming?
Yes, I did, and when we talk'd of Marriage, she seemed to be very well pleased.
Mrs., you hear what he says. Did you Squeeze him by the Hand, and Kiss him? Is it true?
No, my Lord, I did no such trick, not I, and as for walking in the Garden, I did not walk in the Garden alone with him.
I could mention a great many of these little things, but if she denies them I cannot help it. My Lord, the last time I was at the House we had a Barrel of Oysters. I stood with my Hands behind me, and as she passed by at any time, she gave me Squeezesby the Hand.
What say you to this Mrs.?
My Lord, I did not do so upon my Oath.
She says she did not do it upon her Oath.
Now for the Matter of Fact; as for the Arrest I never knew any thing of it directly or indirectly, till I saw her at the Bayliffs House.
If she did know any thing of, or was consenting to the Arrest, why did you force her to the Tavern, and Marry her with a Parson you had provided for that purpose?
She Married me with as much Freedom as could be in a Woman.
What say you to that Mrs.?
Will your Lordship please to ask her whether I offered any Violence to her either by Word or Deed.
Mrs., give an Account how you were carried from the Bayliffs House.
My Lord, when I was atthe Bayliffs House, Mrs.pretended to come accidentally by, and that she heard my Voice, and came in, and said,Rawlins? You know how I do, said I. She pretended to help me, and proposed to go to her Brother to Bail me, and he came, and I was carried from thence in a Coach to theTavern. --
Yes, he did.
Did you cry out when they put you into the Coach?
No my Lord, I did not cry out then, I made no noise then.
What did he do then?
They carry'd me to thea Prisoner.
She went willingly enough fromHouse to the, because she thought that there she should be bailed.
Mrs. What was the pretence of your being carried fromHouse?
My Lord, They would not tell me before they carry'd me to the place.
Mr., Will you ask any other Questions?
Not yet, my Lord. I desire the Parson may be called that Marry'd us.
Come Dr. You are not upon your Oath; How come you to be concern'd in this Match.
My Lord, It was at thewhere I saw them in.
Was it the, or the?
The, I believe, my Lord,
How came you there?
There was a Gentleman fetch'd Me and the Clerk from the.
What to do?
He said there was a Gentleman there to speak with us; When we came there, the Clerk and I went up one Pair of Stairs and Drank a Pint of Wine. Then we were led into another Room, I asked him what I was to do. He told me for to Marry him to that Young Gentlewoman.
Was there a License?
Yes; When I saw the License I read it, and saw it a true License; Then I asked the Gentlewoman her Name, to know whether it was the same that was in the License; and found it was the same.
Was it Written in the License that the Marriage was to be performed at the?
No my Lord, But a Blank was left.
Did you take the Queen's Duty?
No my Lord, But returned their Names to the Supervisor; My Lord, when I asked her Name, I also asked her whether she was willing to be Married. She said she was willing. And another Gentlewoman was with her, that said she was her Sister: I said to her; Madam if you consent, and your Sister is willing, here is a License, for I believe there is no danger to Marry you.
Did you ask her any other way than in your Form,.
I ask'd her whether she was willing to Marry, she said yes, she was willing.
But did you ask her before you did the Office?
Yes my Lord, I did, and she consented to it.
Pray who was the Person that came to theto you, to carry you to the, was it the Gentleman at the Bar?
No 'twas not him.
How long was it before you went to him, after you went into the Tavern?
My Clerk and I went in, and sat the Drinking a Pint of Wine, about a quarter of an Hour, then we went to the Gentleman.
Do you think that they should grant Licenses to Marry in a Tavern, and out of Canonical Hours?
I never did it in all my life before, and never will do it again.
What was the Reason, why you were conducted into another Room, and not where they were.
I know not the Reason.
How long were you in the Room where they were?
I cannot well tell.
Did you Marry them as soon as you came in?
Almost as soon.
Did you ever Marry any at a Tavern before?
No, my Lord.
Will your Lordship be pleased to hear the License read.
It may be read.You may see the Date and the Names. The License is Dated14. 1702. The Namesin the Parish of St.; andin the Parish of St..
Is there any Blank left?
Yes there is a Blank left that the Marriage may be in the Parish Church of St.,a Blank.
Were you Entertained there?
Before the Marriage the Clerk and I drank a Pint of Wine in the first Room.
Had you any Victuals then?
Not before they Married; but after.
Pray Sir, Did you bespeak a Dinner before the Marriage?No Sir, the Gentleman bespoke a Fowl.
My Lord, I desire he may be asked whether he heard any Noise, or whether any violence was offered to the Young Woman?
Did you hear any Noise, or perceive any Violence offered to the Young Woman.
No my Lord.
Ask Mrs.whether any Noise or Violence was offer'd to the Young Lady?
I'le ask her that Question. Was there any Noise, or Violence used to the Young Lady?
No my Lord, there was no Noise, they came in and asked for a Room, and I shew'd them a lower Room, but they would not have that, but went up, soon after Mr.the Vintner came down and went out, and Mr.call'd for a Pint of Wine for the Coachman, but the Drawer Grumbled at it, and said he did not know who'd pay for't, then Mr.the Bayliff told me it was an Arrest, and that the Parson was to be Bail for the Lady, and at that I very much wondred, and afterwards they told me there was a Wedding above, which we admired at, that there should be a Wedding, and Bayliffs; And after all was over, the Gentleman and the Lady went out at the Back-Door, and took Coach.
Did you see Mrs.discontented when she went out. No, my Lord, she seemed not Discontented; what I know I'll speak and no more.
Do you live at the?
Yes my Lord.
What Place?
Cook my Lord.
Was you in the House when that Young Gentlewoman was carried Prisoner there? Where were you then?
In the Bar, my Lord.
Did you keep the Bar?
No, my Lord; but I was washing the Bar at that time.
Did you hear any Noise?
No, my Lord.
Did you hear of a Wedding?
Yes my Lord.
My Lord, Will you be pleas'd to ask her if she was not had before the Recorder, and promis'd a Reward if she would say any thing for their Service?
What do you say to this?
My Lord, only this, That if I knew any thing, and discover'd it, I should be satisfied for my Trouble.
Were you sent up Stairs to the Gentlefolks to receive Directions for the Supper?
Yes.
When you came up into the Room, what Condition was the Young Gentlewoman in?
She sat at one end of the Room and seemed to be very Melancholly.
How did she look when she went away?
Not Melancholly then, when Orders were given about the Supper, I asked her what Sauce she would have, she said she would eat nothing at all.<|endoftext|>Mr., did you give Evidence against,and, for the Murder of Sir?
Yes Sir, I did.
Wasa Witness too?
Yes.
Was?
I Don't know, but I think she was.
, were you a Witness for the Murder of Sir?
Yes if it please your Honour, my Lord.
Sir, Sir,Esquire; make room there Officers, go out, make room for the Witnesses to come in.
Sir, were these Papers owned by,, and, look on them.
My Lord, these are the two Papers I indorst with my own hand, and they owned them to be their Writing,writ one of them, andthe other, and they acknowledged thatPrinted them, andlikewise confest the same before the Council.
My. Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, you see thatandowned the Writing of them andthe Printing of them.
Which was it thatdid own.
did own the first read in Council, and the other the second, but I cannot certainly say which, but I markt them.
Do you believe those Notes and Minutes to be true?
Yes I took the Notes my Lord.
Sir, didown the things produced the 29th ofasby him?
Yes.
Read the.
My Lord, Of all this Charg'd there is nothing againstbut the second Letter. My Lord, he owns it as a very rash andunadvised Act, but no malicious Act.nor none of his Family (My Lord) have been Enemies to the, or charged with malicious designs against it, but this Act its Foolish and Inconsiderate, and we cannot Justify it, we submit our selves to your Lordship.
You have promised to prove it, and I will hear whatsoever you can prove, I will hear any kind of proof you can make for it. It is a business of mighty concern, and therefore not slightly to be past over.
We are sorry at what we have done, and we have offered to giveany Satisfaction they desire, or we are Capable of.
Do not say so, for they told me themselves that they would make out what they had said by five hundred Witnesses.
andare notas they are reputed to be, but are Protestants, for they have received the.
Pray call your Witnesses, and make the best on't you can.
--, --, Mr.Witnesses.
You shall be admitted to prove any thing you can, because they did say, that they wouldit by five hundred Witnesses, and make it as plain as the day.
Since their hearing before the Council they Vaunted inIntelligence, that they were ready with threescore Witnesses to prove all they had said.
CallWitnesses.
,,.
.
And will you come again?
I am Council here for Mr., who by the Direction of Mr., and, Printed these Papers upon their promise to make them good, and they have both confest that they were Written by them, and Printed by him, although now they design to cast theupon his Shoulders; My Lord, as its a great mercy (the Murder being Committed) that Persons concerned therein, have been Detected and Punished, so it is a great mercy that the Authors of these Letters are Discovered, and so also of the two Intelligences, they were as much the Authors of the one as the other; My Lord,Intelligence is well known to beto all that will come and put any thing into it, and he is paid for his pains.
He will be paid.
,, Mr.,and his Wife, Witnesses for.
, begin, what say you Sir?
My Lord, It was early in the Morning about six a Clock, and happened the same day after Sirwas found, Mr.desired me to walk with him, and coming towards the White House we understood Sirwas found, I had known him full twenty Years before, and therefore knew him at first sight, his Shoeswere clean Bottom and Top, withsticking to them, as if he had been in a Hay-mow.
Where was he?
Upon a Table when I saw him, Then Mr.desired me to go to the place where he had lain in the Ditch, and Mr.conducted me to the place, where I saw several Gobbits of Blood by the Ditch side.
, --
Mr.and I walked into the Fields in the Morning.
Did you invite Mr.to go thither?
No, he desired to walk.
Did he carry you to thebefore he went to the place where his Body lay?
No.
Didbring you to the place where the Body lay, when it was carried to the?
Yes Sir,shewed me the, and then conducted me to the House.
How came you to go to this place?
The News was brought by a Fellow who was not believed, and by consentwas sent out to inquire the Truth, when thereturned, he said the Body of Sirwas found, and carried to the, wethither and were there quickly, and there was not above six there beside our selves.
Didwhen he carried you to the Ditch, say that was the place?
Yes.
Didshew you the place beside.
I had no acquaintance with any but him.
Did any shew you the place, but, I say?
No Sir.
Did he go directly?
We went directly, we went the straitest way to the place, and past over some Ditches.
Was any there beside Mr.and you, at the time you went over Ditches, Did any direct you?
No.
My Lord, That Morning the Murder was discovered I went with two or three of my Neighbours to see as others did, and when we came to theI saw Sirlie on the Table, his face looked swarthy, and he seemed as though he had been, thence I walked to the Ditch, where they said his Body had lain,methere, but whetheror no, I cannot Swear.
Was it athen?
I do not know whether it was a Frost or no, it is so long since, it to me looked likethat was, rather then any thing else.
My Lord, I was Carpenter to my Lord -- and I was sent for to the, and as I went to take Orders, I heard the Report that Sirwas found, I went on to my designed place, and when I came there, I saw Sirlie dead on the Table, I turned his Coat up, I saw two wounds within an Inch and half of one another, the one went no further then the bone, and the other through his back, and they brought to me thewhich they said, they had pull'd out of his Body. There was an Order to get him stript, I pull'd off his Shoes, his Shoes were, I pull'd off three pair of Stockings, and a pair of Socks, I pull'd off his black Breeches and Drawers, We set him on his breech upon the Table, with his Leggs hanging down, unbuttoned his Coat and Wastcoat pull'd them off, but we could not bend his Arms when we came to his Shirt, so we tore it open. Upon his Back, there was some Blood, but upon histhere was none. I have one thing more to say, There was a place Black round about his Throat, which looked as if he had been, and his Neck was weak and loose, and had no strength at all in it, by which.
Theis one of the Arguments which induced me to do what I have done: For as to theabout the Throat it is no more then sometimes attend Persons in an Ordinary way, I was not present in the Court at the Tryal of theMurderers, when it was strongly pretended there was nothere, whereas I'le Swear there was near a(My Lord) and I will tell. Calland his Wife.
and his Wife --
This man was the man that helped the Body out of the Ditch, and carried it to the House, let him speak to it.
I was the Person who upon the first Discovery of the Body, pull'd him out of the Ditch, when I had so done, pull'd the Sword out, which was run through him, and then removed him to the House, There was, or likeandcame from him, and carrying him into the House, while going in at the door his Back did swing against the side of the door, and there was someandleft there, and likewise upon the Table where he was laid, and the Floor, and some in the Cellar.
Did therun from the Body on the, from thence to the, and then into the.
Therein all these places, but I cannot say how it came there, unless it came from the Body.
Upon your Oath do you know that was?
I will not Swear whether it was clearor no.
Silence.
My Lord, I desire the same Question may be askedWife; Whether the Blood did not run from the Body on the Table on the Floor, and down into the Cellar.
As SirBody laid along on the Table, the Blood and Water ran from the Table on the Floor.
And did it run into the Cellar too?
I am sure the Bottles were wet with Blood there.
My Lord, now to the next Point, it is the difference between Mr.and Mr.Evidence, I have theof the House of Lords, and I will undertake to prove it. Call.
, Come into the Court.
What is it you would have of him?
I would have him prove the Copy of theof the House of Lords.
What use do you then make of it?
I say there is a great difference between the Evidence ofand him, and I will produce the Journal to prove that whereassaid he waswith a Handkerchief,in his Depositions before the House of Lords asserted he was.
Can you prove thatgave that Evidence?
Yes my Lord, by Mr.,, and others. Call them.
Mr., Mr., Mr., Mr., Mr., --
I ask Mr.but this Question, Who it washis Collar?
That day, after the Body was found, I went in company to the Field, and then to the place where they said the said Body had been; I look'd into the Ditch, and could see no sign of Blood there; but on the side of the Ditch, four or five yards distant, was some,; which they said had followed the Sword when it was pull'd out of the Body. Then I went where the Body lay, and view'd it. I saw two wounds under the left Pap, his Throat wasand blew upon opening the Collar near the breadth of an Hand, and his Face was very much swelled: I believe he was, for I cannot believe all those Injuries could otherwise attend him after he was dead.
Mr.--
I desire that Mr.may be ask'd, If he did not propose to Mr.that his Brothers Body might be opened, whereby he might certainly know whether he was murdered or no.
My Lord, I did believe he was.
Mr., Did you desire his Body might be opened? And did you say, It might be very well, if Mr.would send for a Doctor and Surgeon from the Court, to have him opened, that all might be fully satisfied that he was murdered?
My Lord, I was satisfied in my self that he was, and had those wounds from others; I did not advise it for my particular Information, but that of others.
Pray whatwas his Face?
He wasand, and the white of his Eyes and the Blood Vessels were as full as those that are troubled with Sore Eyes.
I desire to know if he had Fly-blows in his Eyes?
Had he Fly-blows in his Eyes?
No my Lord.
I walked to see this Body which I heard was found, I found a greatupon the left Muscle. I troubled my self no more at that time. I was desired after this by Doctorto go with him, and coming there to review the Body, I observed a Swelling under the left Ear, together with several other Contusions, which were very surprising, for (my Lord) I never found any soin all my life. My Lord, When we had heard the Matter of Evidence and the Persons charg'd with the Crime, Mr.one day called me aside, and told me what proof he could make in this Business against the Evidence. Then said I, Mr.you are my Friend, I would advise you for your good; I believe nothing can be made appear against it. I saw not Mr.for a considerable time after: Afterwards on theofI met Mr., and it was thus; I had been drinking a Glass of Wine with some Friends, Mr.came in and asked for one; so they knowing him, called for another Bottle. Said I, Because Mr.is come, I will drink another Glass with him, although I was taking my leave. We fell into some Discourse, and talking of this Subject, he told me, That Six Months before I had given him, if he could have taken it.
Mr.the Cook, Mr., Mr., --
Mr., What would you have from these Witnesses?
My Lord, I would have you to ask, Whether SirEyes were not Fly-blown?
Mr., It's proposed to you by Mr., Whether the Eyes of Sirwere Fly-blown?
No my Lord, not that I saw.
Was there any specks that were like Fly-blows?
My Lord, I'll call two Witnesses more, and will prove it.
No my Lord, I saw nolike Fly-blows. Mr.was with me, and told me his Eyes were Fly-blown, and would fain have me said such things, if I would have said them.
My Lord the Kings Justice commands all Persons to keep silence upon pain of Imprisonment.
He came another time, and told me, that I was wrong in my, as though he knew it better than my self.
Where was this?
He was at my House.
Was Mr.with him?
My Lord, I did not know Mr., and therefore cannot say whether he was there or no.
Do you know Mr., was he with him?
I know not, therefore cannot say that he was.
What do you ask Mr.?
The same Question about the, and whether he did not carry some of it away in his Handkerchief?
Pray tell Mr.Whether you took up any of SirBlood, and carried it home in your Handkerchief?
My Lord, When I went that way SirBody was removed, before I got thither; I viewed theplace where they said he laid: and indeed I was ask'd, Whether I saw any Blood there?
Did you not take any of SirBlood in your Handkerchief?
No not I, my Lord.
Calland his Wife. My Lord, I will prove by these Witnesses that his Eyes were.
, Mr.enquires of you, If you saw any thing like Fly-blows in SirEyes?
Yes, my Lord.
Did you observe the Flies busie at that time of the year?
I did see something like Fly-blows.
CallWife.
Wife, come into the Court.
I must fetch her then.
Make Room there forand his Wife.
They will not come.
Make Room for them if they will come.Wife,Wife, come into the Court.
Here.
Make room there, stand clear there, make room.
Woman, Mr.desires to know if there werein the Eyes of Sir.
My Lord, people said they were.
He asks too what you say to the Corners of his Mouth and Nostrils.
I did not take much notice of them; but they did say they were.
I have seen many a one who have dyed a natural death, in whom I have seen as much alteration as in him, and my Lord, I can prove, that the Discolouring of the Face, and the Circle about the Neck, might have another cause then they make the World believe.
Call -- the Kings Surgeon. --
says, That many persons dying a Natural Death may look as he did.
My Lord he was certainly, and sometimes persons may beand yet look pale: If that whichstrangled him had been taken away while his Body was warm, the Vessels would have been less, and his Face would have been very Pale: Therefore it's evident that that whichhim, was not removed till his Body was cold, which was the occasion of that blackness; for the Knot remaining, the Blood could not run away: He had as high a Colour as if in a Scarlet Feavor; and the Blood that was seen by me four yards from the Ditch, I put my finger into it, and it smelt like Blood a fortnight or three Weeks from any Body. My Lord, I presume it was Blood came off the Womb,His Neck was very much swell'd and black, on one side of his Mouth he was discoloured; where-ever any Man is bruised while he has life, or while warm, the parts so bruised when dead will soonest corrupt; as is a common thing. Mr.the Apothecary unbuttening his Collar found two great Creases about his Neck, and desired me to come and see it; and the mark was like that of a strait Ring upon a Finger, and while we with-drew to drink two or three Glasses of Beer, there remained only this Crease above.
Do you believe he killed himself now Mr.?
Were his Eyesand Shut?
There was something in the Corners of his Eyes that looked like matter; but I can't say it was. His Eyes were open and Blood-shotten, like a Man that has had an extraordinary violence used towards that part; or like a Man that hath had an extraordinary Cold.
Were not hisclosed?
Were hisclosed?
No my Lord, his Eyes were open.
When I saw him his Eyes were shut I am sure.
I am sensible, my Lord, that aof Hail and Rain had faln the, and that his Cloths were asas mine, and as whole as mine.
I will tell your Lordship the reason of that, he was removed by the Constable at Seven a Clock the Night before, and they made a great, and so dried his Clothes.
Mr., Will you call any more Witnesses?
I will call no more, my Lord, I am look'd upon with an; they'll censure me as a
You are Guilty of a worse Crime, Sir.
I submit my self to the Law.
It matters not whatyou are of, since ye are guilty of such Crimes.
Here is a high Offence against the Government and Justice of the Nation, against the Reputation of a Person of Worth and Integrity, after they had murdered his, to endevour the murdering of his. These persons have undertaken to manage it; all the Witnesses Mr.has brought, have contradicted him in all he have said. No, no, but Stranglings, Stabs, and Bruises; and for a Man that should stab himself, how could he bruise himself too in that manner? Yet they have asserted they would prove it by 500 Witnesses, but could he produce but one substantial one, it were well for him. But what have he or they to do with a matter of this nature? The Justice of the Kingdom has past upon,, andfor the said Murder upon; but suppose something might have been said, it became them not to arraign the Government and the Justice of the Kingdom in its Administrations. Sirwas certainly murdered, and we know by whom. I'll produce two or three Witnesses that shall produce; and if there were no more, there would be Evidence enough. My Lord, I desire that Mr.may tell us the manner of his Murder and the Circumstances.
Mr.has told us, and he leaves the World to make Inferences from them, and has brought Witnesses to prove some pretended Contradictions, and therefore Sirmurdered himself; this Fellow is guilty of thein the World, he has told you all these things which appear false, and from those falsities they would have inferred another, that.
Brother, I have given him leave to bring what Evidence he would, not that I think it; and if he could have proved never so much, hishad been never the less; but we see that his own Evidence runs counter to him. What had he to do in that Case? to what purpose should he writeabout the Government, to traduce the Justice of it? This ought not to be done under whatsoever pretences. It has been sufficiently proved that Sir, but there are other Witnesses yet can speak to it. -- Call them.
,.
Make room for the Witnesses there.
.
Gentlemen, It's beyond contradiction that Sirwas, and therefore shall not need furtherto prove it; we shall leave it to you, and shall not trouble our selves or you any further about it.
They did design, and would, no doubt of it, have been very much satisfied, if they could have made somethat he kill'd himself: But I was desirous to hear what they could say for themselves. All the Evidence they call, go as much against them as can be; the Evidence is as plain as the day that the Man was killed, and. Besides, Sirs, a private person must not undertake to controul the Justice of the Nation: To say he was a just person that suffered, and I will justifie it; this is not to be indured: but I was willing to hear all that could be said, and whether a doubt could be made; and you see his very Evidence conclude him kill'd, and kill'd by Strangers. They are all Three in this Mischief, there is a Combination of them to affront the Publick Justice of the Nation, but the end of this Design is to make you believe here was no; thelies under the, if they could have vomited it, and made a tolerable Proof, That Sirhad not been. But it's very plain if that could have been brought to be, then presently you would have had a full Cry,, a thing raised against the Papists; and then the Plot and all such things had been nothing. I leave it to you, Whether upon this Evidence you do not believe themof Traducing the Government and the Justice of the Nation.<|endoftext|>Mr., good-morrow, you are early at the Rehearsal this Morning.
Why, faith,, our Beer and Beer sat but ill on my Stomach, so I got up to try if I could not walk it off.
I wish I had any thing in my Stomach to walk off; if Matters do not go better with us shortly, my Teeth will forget their Office.
These are poor Times, indeed, not like the Days of.
Oh! name 'em not! those were glorious Days indeed, the Days of Beef and Punch; my Friends, when come there such again?
-- Who knows what this new Author, may produce? Faith I like my Part very well.
Nay, if Variety will please the Town, I am sure there is enough of it, but I could wish, methinks, the Satire had been a little stronger, a little plainer.
Now I think it is plain enough.
Hum! Ay, it is intelligible; but I wou'd have it downright; 'gad, I fancy I cou'd write a thing to succeed, my self.
Ay, prithee, what Subject wou'dst thou write on?
Why, no Subject at all, Sir, but I would have a humming deal of Satyr, and I would repeat in every Page, that Courtiers are Cheats and don't pay their Debts, that Lawyers are Rogues, Physicians Blockheads, Soldiers Cowards, and Ministers --
What, what, Sir?
Nay, I'll only name 'em, that's enough to set the Audience a hooting.
Zounds, Sir, here is Wit enough for a whole Play in one Speech.
For one Play, why, Sir, it's all I have extracted out of above a Dozen.
Who have we here?
Some Gentlemen, I suppose, come to hear the Rehearsal.
Pray, Gentlemen, don't you rehearse thethis Morning?
Sir, we expect the Author every Minute.
What is this, is it a Tragedy, or a Comedy?
Upon my Word, Sir, I can't tell.
Then I suppose you have no Part in it.
Yes, Sir, I have several, but -- Oh, here is the Author himself, I suppose he can tell, Sir.
Faith, Sir, that's more than I suppose.
My Lord, your most obedient Servant; this is a very great, and unexpected Favour indeed, my Lord. Mr., I kiss your Hands; I am very glad to see you here.
That's more than you may be by-and-by, perhaps.
We are come to attend your Rehearsal, Sir; Pray when will it begin?
This very Instant, my Lord: Gentlemen, I beg you would be all ready, and let the Prompter bring me some Copies for these Gentlemen.
Mr., you know I am a plain Speaker, so you will excuse any Liberties I take.
Dear Sir, you can't oblige me more.
Then I must tell you, Sir, I am a little stagger'd at the Name of your Piece; doubtless, Sir, you know the Rules of Writing, and I can't guess how you can bring the Actions of a whole Year into the Circumference of four and twenty Hours.
Sir, I have several Answers to make to your Objection; in the first Place, my Piece is not of a Nature confin'd to any Rules, as being avowedly irregular, but if it was otherwise I think I could quote you Precedents of Plays that neglect them; besides, Sir, if I comprise the whole Actions of the Year in half an Hour, will you blame me, or those who have done so little in that time? My Register is not to be fill'd like those of vulgar News-Writers with Trash for want of News, and therefore if I say little or nothing, you may thank those who have done little or nothing.
Oh! here are my Books.
In Print already, Mr.?
Yes, Sir, it is the safest way, for if a Manstays till he is damn'd, it is possible he never may get into print at all; the Town is capricious, for which Reason always print as fast as you write, that if they damn your Play, they may not damn your Copy too.
Well, Sir, and pray what is your Design, your Plot?
Why, Sir, I have several Plots, some pretty deep, and some but shallow.
I hope, Sir, they all conduce to the main Design.
Yes, Sir, they do.
Pray, Sir, what is that?
To divert the Town, and bring full Houses.
Pshaw! you misunderstand me, I mean what is your Moral, your, your, your --
Oh! Sir, I comprehend you -- Why, Sir, my Design is to ridicule the vicious and foolish Customs of the Age, and that in a fair manner, without Fear, Favour, or Ill-nature, and without Scurrility, ill Manners, or common Place; I hope to expose the reigning Follies in such a manner, that Men shall laugh themselves out of them before they feel that they are touch'd.
But what Thread or Connexion can you have in this History? For instance, how is your Political connected with you Theatrical?
O very easily -- When my Politicks come to a Farce, they very naturally lead me to the Play-House, where, let me tell you, there are some Politicians too, where there is Lying, Flattering, Dissembling, Promising, Deceiving, and Undermining, as well as in any Court in Christendom.
Won't you begin your Rehearsal, Sir?
Ay, ay, with all my Heart, is the Musick ready for the Prologue?
Musick for the Prologue!
Ay, Sir, I intend to have every thing new, I had rather be the Author of my own Dulness than the Publisher of other Mens Wit, and really, Mr., the Subjects for Prologues are utterly exhausted: I think the general Method has been either to frighten the Audience with the Author's Reputation, or to flatter them to give their Applause, or to beseech them to it, and that in a manner that will serve for every Play alike: Now, Sir, my Prologue will serve for no Play but my own, and to that I think nothing can be better adapted, for as mine is the History of the Year, what can be a properer Prologue than an Ode to the New Year?
An Ode to the New Year?
Yes, Sir, an Ode to the New Year -- Come, begin, begin.
Sir, the Prologue is ready.
Dear, let me hear you read it, possibly it may be sung so fine I may not understand a Word of it.
Sir, you can't oblige me more.Ay, ay, come on, and sing it away.
There, Sir, there's the very Quintessence and Cream of all the Odes I have seen for several Years last past.
Ay, Sir, I thought you wou'd not be the Publisher of another Man's Wit?
No more I an't, Sir, for the Devil of any Wit did I ever see in any of them.
Oh! your most humble Servant, Sir.
Yours, Sir, yours; now for my Play,, are the Politicians all ready at the Table?
I'll go and see, Sir.
My first Scene, Mr., lies in the Island of, being at present the chief Scene of Politicks of all.
Sir, they are ready.
Then draw the Scene, and discover them.
Here's a Mistake in the Print, Mr., I observe the second Politician is the first Person who speaks.
Sir, my first and greatest Politician never speaks at all, he's a very deep Man, by which, youwill observe I convey this Moral, that the chief Art of a Politician is to keep a Secret.
To keep his Politicks a Secret, I suppose you mean.
Come, Sir, begin.
Is Kingreturn'd yet?
No.
When will he return?
I cannot tell.
This Politician seems to me to know very little of the matter.
Zounds, Sir, would you have him a Prophet as well as a Politician? You see, Sir, he knows what's past, and that's all he ought to know; 'Sblood, Sir, would it be in the Character of a Politician to make him a Conjurer? Go on, Gentlemen: Pray, Sir, don't interrupt their Debates, for they are of great Consequence.
These mighty Preparations of theare certainly design'd against some Place or other; now, the Question is, What Place they are design'd against? And that is a Question which I cannot answer.
But it behoves us to be upon our Guard.
It does, and the Reason is, because we know nothing of the matter.
You say right, it is easy for a Man to guard against Dangers which he knows of, but to guard against Dangers which no Body knows of, requires a very great.
Now, Sir, I suppose you think that no Body knows any thing.
Faith, Sir, it appears so.
Ay, Sir, but there is one who knows, that little Gentleman, yonder in the Chair, who says nothing, knows it all.
But how do you intend to convey this Knowledge to the Audience?
Sir, they can read it in his Looks; 'Sblood, Sir, must not a Politician be thought a wise Man without his giving Instances of his Wisdom?
Hang foreign Affairs, let us apply ourselves to Money.
Ay, ay, ay.
Gentlemen, that over again -- and be sure to snatch hastily at the Money; you're pretty Politicians truly.
Hang foreign Affairs, let us apply ourselves to Money.
Ay, ay, ay.
All we have to consider relating to Money is how we shall get it.
I think we ought first to consider whether there is any to be got, which if there be, I do readily agree that the next Question is how to come at it.
Hum.
Pray, Sir, what are these Gentlemen in?
Why, Sir, they are the ablest Heads in the Kingdom, and consequently the greatest Men, for you may be sure all well-regulated Governments, as I represent this ofto be, will employ in their greatest Posts Men of the greatest Capacity.
I have consider'd the Matter, and I find it must be by a Tax.
I thought of that, and was considering what was not tax'd already.
Learning; suppose we put a Tax upon Learning.
Learning, it is true, is a useless Commodity, but I think we had better lay it on Ignorance, for Learning being the Property but of a very few, and those poor ones too, I am afraid we can get little among them; whereas Ignorance will take in most of the great Fortunes in the Kingdom.
Ay, ay, ay.
Faith, it's very generous in these Gentlemen to tax themselves so readily.
Ay and very wise too to prevent the People's grumbling, and they will have it all among themselves.
But what is become of the Politicians?
They are gone, Sir, they're gone; they have finish'd the Business they met about, which was to agree on a Tax, that being done -- they are gone to raise it; and this, Sir, is the full Account of the whole History of, as far as we know of it, compriz'd in one Scene.
The Devil it is! Why, you have not mention'd one Word of, or, or the Emperor.
No, Sir, I turn those over to the next Year, by which time we may possibly know something what they are about; at present our Advices are so very uncertain, I know not what to depend on; but come, Sir, now you shall have a Council of Ladies.
Does this Scene lie intoo?
No, no, this lies in-- You know, Sir, it would not have been quite so proper to have broughtPoliticians (of the male Kind I mean) on the Stage, because our Politicks are not quite so famous; but in Female Politicians, to the Honour of my Countrywomen I say it, I believe no Country can excel us; come, draw the Scene, and discover the Ladies.
Sir, they are not here; one of them is practising above Stairs with a Dancing-master, and I can't get her down.
I'll fetch 'em, I warrant you.
Well, my Lord, what does your Lordship think of what you have seen?
Faith, Sir, I did not observe it; but it's damn'd Stuff, I am sure.
I think so, and I hope your Lordship will not encourage it. They are such Men as your Lordship, who must reform the Age; if Persons of your exquisite and refin'd Taste will give a Sanction to politer Entertainments, the Town will soon be asham'd of laughing at what they do now.
Really, this is a very bad House.
It is not indeed so large as the others, but I think one hears better in it.
Pox of of hearing, one can't see -- one's self I mean; here are no Looking-glasses, I lovefor that Reason better than any House in Town.
Very true, my Lord, but I wish your Lordship would think it worth your Consideration, as the Morals of a People depend, as has been so often and well prov'd, entirely on their publick Diversions, it would be of great Consequence that those of the sublimest Kind should meet with your Lordship's and the rest of the Nobility's Countenance.
Mr., I am always ready to give my Countenance to any thing of that kind, which might bring the best Company together, for as one does not go to see the Play but the Company, I think that's chiefly to be consider'd, and therefore I am always ready to countenance good Plays.
No one is a better Judge what is so than your Lordship.
Not I, indeed, Mr.-- but as I am one half of the Play in thetalking to the Actresses, and the other half in the Boxes talking to the Women of Quality, I have an Opportunity of seeing something of the Play, and perhaps may be as good a Judge as another.
My Lord, the Ladies cannot begin yet, if your Lordship will honour me in the,where you will find it pleasanter than upon this cold Stage.
With all my Heart -- Come, Mr..
I attend your Lordship.
Thou art a sweet Judge of Plays, indeed, and yet it is in the Power of such Sparks as these to damn an honest Fellow, both in his Profit and Reputation.
Come, draw the Scene, and discover the Ladies in Council; pray, my Lord, sit.
What are these Ladies assembled about?
Affairs of great Importance, as you will see -- Please to begin all of you.
Was you at the Opera, Madam, last Night?
Who can miss an Opera whenstays?
Sure he is the charmingest Creature.
He's every thing in the World one could wish.
Almost every thing one could wish.
They say there's a Lady in the City has a Child by him.
Ha, ha, ha!
Well it must be charming to have a Child by him.
Madam, I met a Lady in a Visit the other Day with three.
All.
All, all in Wax.
Oh Gemini! Who makes them, I'll send and bespeak half a dozen to-morrow Morning.
I'll have as many as I can cram into a Coach with me.
Mr., Sir, is this History? this must be Invention.
Upon my Word, Sir, it's Fact, and I take it to be the most extraordinary Accident that has happen'd in the whole Year, and as well worth recording. Faith, Sir, let me tell you, I take it to be ominous, for if we go on to improve in Luxury, Effeminacy and Debauchery, as we have done lately, the next Age, for ought I know, may be more like the Children of squeakingthan hardy.
Don't interrupt us, dear Sir.
What mighty pretty Company they must be.
Oh, the prettiest Company in the World.
If one could but teach them to sing like their Father.
I am afraid my Husband won't let me keep them, for he hates I shou'd be fond of any thing but himself.
O the unreasonable Creature!
If my Husband was to make any Objection to my having 'em, I'd run away from him, and take the dear Babies with me.
Come, enter Beau.
Fy upon it, Ladies, what are you doing here? Why are not you at the Auction, Mr.has been in the Pulpit this half Hour?
Oh, dear Mr., I ask his Pardon, I never miss him.
What's to be sold to-day?
Oh, I never mind that; there will be all the World there.
You'll find it almost impossible to get in.
Oh! I shall be quite miserable if I don't get in.
Then you must not lose a Moment.
There they are gone.
I am glad on't with all my Heart.
Upon my Word, Mr., that last is an exceeding good Scene, and full of a great deal of Politeness, good Sense, and Philosophy.
It's Nature, my Lord, it's Nature.
Faith, Sir, the Ladies are much oblig'd to you.
Faith, Sir, it's more than I desire such Ladies, as I represent here, shou'd be; as for the nobler Part of the Sex for whom I have the greatest Honour, their Characters can be no better set off, than by ridiculing that light, trifling, giddy-headed Crew, who are a Scandal to their own Sex, and a Curse on ours.
Gentlemen, you must make room, for the Curtain must be let down, to prepare the Auction-Room.
My Lord, I believe you will be best before the Curtain, for we have but little Room behind, and a great deal to do.
Upon my Word, Mr., I must ask you the same Question which one of your Ladies did just now; what do you intend to sell at this Auction, the whole Stock in Trade of some Milliner or Mercer who has left off Business?
Sir, I intend to sell such things as was never sold in any Auction before, nor ever will again; I can assure you, Mr., this Scene, which Ilook on as the best in the whole Performance, will require a very deep Attention; Sir, if you should take one Pinch of Snuff during the whole Scene, you will lose a Joke by it, and yet they lie pretty deep too, and may escape Observation from a moderate Understanding, unless very closely attended to.
I hope, however, they don't lie as deep as the dumb Gentleman's Politicks did in the first Act; if so, nothing but an inspir'd Understanding can come at 'em.
Sir, this Scene is writ in Allegory, and tho' I have endeavour'd to make it as plain as possible; yet all Allegory will require a strict Attention to be understood, Sir.
Sir, every thing is ready.
Then draw up the Curtain -- Come, enter Mrs., and Mrs..
Dear Mrs..
Dear Madam, you are early to-day?
Oh, if one does not get near the Pulpit, one does nothing, and I intend to buy a great deal to-day; I believe I shall buy the whole Auction, at least if things go cheap; you won't bid against me?
You know I never bid for any thing?
That's true, Mrs., I'll be your Evidence.
Are you come? now I suppose we shall have fine Bidding; I don't expect to buy cheaper than at a Shop.
That's unkind, Mrs., you know I never bid against you; it would be cruel to bid against a Lady who frequents Auctions, only with a Design one Day or other to make one great Auction of her own: No, no, I will not prevent the filling your Warehouse; I assure you, I bid against no Haberdashers of all Wares.
You are a mighty civil Person, truly.
You need not take up the Cudgels, Madam, who are of no more Consequence at an Auction, than a Mayor at a Sessions; you only come here where you have nothing to do, to shew People you have nothing to do any where else.
I don't come to say rude things to all the World as you do.
No, the World may thank Heaven, that did not give you Wit enough to do that.
Let him alone, he will have his Jest?
You don't think I mind him, I hope; but pray, Sir, of what great Use is your Friend, Mr., here?
Oh, he is of very great Use to all Women of Understanding.
Ay! of what Use am I, pray?
To keep 'em at home, that they may not hear the silly things you say to 'em.
I hope, Mr., you will not banish all People from Places where they are of no Consequence; you will allow 'em to go to an Assembly, or a Masquerade, without either Playing, Dancing or Intriguing; you will let People go to an Opera without any Ear, to a Play without any Taste, and to a Church without any Religion?
Oh! dear Mr., I am glad you are come, you are horrible late to-day.
Madam, I am just mounting the Pulpit; I hope you like the Catalogue, Ladies?
There are some good things here, if you are not too dilatory with your Hammer.
Boy, give me a Catalogue?
I dare swear, Gentlemen and Ladies, this Auction will give general Satisfaction; it is the first of its kind which I ever had the Honour to exhibit, and I believe I may challenge the World to produce some of the Curiosities which this choice Cabinet contains: A Catalogue of Curiosities which were collected by the undefatigable Pains of that celebrated Virtuoso,, Esq; which will be sold by Auction, byonthe 21st Day of, beginning at Lot 1. Gentlemen and Ladies, this is Lot 1. A most curious Remnant of Political Honesty. Who puts it up, Gentlemen? It will make you a very good Cloke, you see its both Sides alike, so you may turn it as often as you will -- Come, five Pounds for this curious Remnant; I assure you, several great Men have made their Birth-day Suits out of the same Piece -- It will wear for ever, and never be the worse for wearing -- Five Pounds is bid -- no Body more than five Pounds for this curious Piece of Political Honesty, five Pound, no more --
Lord. Lot 2, a most delicate Piece of Patriotism, Gentlemen, who bids? ten Pounds for this Piece of Patriotism?
I would not wear it for a thousand Pound.
Sir, I assure you, several Gentlemen at Court have worn the same; it's a quite different thing within to what it is without.
Sir, it is prohibited Goods, I sha'nt run the risque of being brought intofor wearing it.
You take it for the old Patriotism, whereas it is indeed like that in nothing but the Cut, but alas! Sir, there is a great Difference in the Stuff: But, Sir, I don't propose this for a Town-Suit, this is only proper for the Country; Consider, Gentlemen, what a Figure this will make at an Election -- Come, five Pound -- One Guinea -- Put Patriotism by.
Ay, put it by, one Day or other it may be in Fashion.
Lot 3. Three Grains of Modesty: Come, Ladies, consider how scarce this valuable Commodity is.
Yes, and out of Fashion too, Mr..
I ask your Pardon, Madam, it is trueI assure you, and never changes Colour on any Account -- Half a Crown for all this Modesty -- Is there not one Lady in the Room who wants any Modesty?
Pray Sir, what is it, for I can't see it at this Distance?
It cannot be seen at any Distance, Madam, but it is a beautiful Powder, which makes a fine Wash for the Complexion.
I thought you said it was true, and wou'd not change the Colour of the Skin?
No, it will not, Madam; but it serves mighty well to blush behind a Fan with, or to wear under a Lady's Mask at a Masquerade -- What, no Body bid -- Well, lay Modesty aside -- Lot 4. One Bottle of Courage, formerly in the Possession of Lieutenant Colonel, Citizen, Alderman and Tallowchandler -- What, is there no Officer of the Train'd-Bands here? Or it will serve an Officer of the Army as well in Time of Peace, nay evenin War, Gentlemen; it will serve all of you who fell out?
Is the Bottle whole? is there no Crack in it?
None, Sir, I assure you; tho' it has been in many Engagements in; nay it has serv'd a Campaign or two in, since the Alderman's Death -- it will never waste while you stay at home, but it evaporates immediately if carried abroad.
Damn me, I don't want it; but a Man can't have too much Courage -- Three Shillings for it.
Three Shillings are bid for this Bottle of Courage.
Four.
What do you bid for Courage for?
Not for my self, but I have a Commission to buy it for a Lady.
Five.
Five Shillings, five Shillings for all this Courage; no Body more than five Shillings?
your Name, Sir?
Lot 5, and Lot 6. All the Wit lately belonging to Mr., Composer of Entertainments for the Play-houses, and Mr., Composer of political Papers in Defence of a Ministry; shall I put up these together?
Ay, it is a pity to part them, where are they?
Sir, in the next Room, where any Gentleman may see them, but they are too heavy to bring in; there are near three hundred Volumes in Folio.
Put them by, who the Devil would bid for them unless he was the Manager of some House or other? The Town has paid enough for their Works already.
Lot 7. A very neat clear Conscience which has been worn by a Judge, and a Bishop.
It is as clean as if it was new.
Yes, no Dirt will stick to it, and pray observe how capacious it is; it has one particular Quality, put as much as you will into it, it is never full: Come, Gentlemen, don't be afraid to bid for this, for whoever has it will never be poor.
One Shilling for it.
O fy, Sir, I am sure you want it, for if you had any Conscience, you would put it up at more than that: Come, fifty Pound for this Conscience.
I'll give fifty Pound to get rid of my Conscience with all my Heart.
Well, Gentlemen, I see you are resolv'd not to bid for it, so I'll lay it by: Come, Lot 8, a very considerable Quantity of Interest at Court; Come, a Hundred Pound for this Interest at Court.
For me, Mr.?
A Hundred Pound is bid in a Hundred Places, Gentlemen.
Two Hundred Pound.
Two Hundred Pound, two Hundred and Fifty, three Hundred Pound, three Hundred and Fifty, four Hundred, five Hundred, six Hundred, a Thousand; a Thousand Pound is bid, Gentlemen, no Body more than a Thousand Pounds for this Interest at Court; no Body more than one Thousand?
Mr..
Damn me, I know a Shop where I can buy it for less.
Egad, you took me in, Mr., I could not help bidding for it.
It is a sure Sign it's Nature, my Lord, and I should not be surpriz'd to see the whole Audience stand up and bid for it too.
All the Cardinal Virtues, Lot 9. Come, Gentlemen, put in these Cardinal Virtues?
Eighteen Pence.
Eighteen Pence is bid for these Cardinal Virtues; no body more than Eighteen Pence? Eighteen Pence for all these Cardinal Virtues, no body more? All these Virtues, Gentlemen, are going for Eighteen Pence; perhaps there is not so much more Virtue in the World, as here is, and all going for Eighteen Pence
Your Name, Sir?
Sir, here's a Mistake; I thought you had said a Cardinal's Virtues, 'Sblood Sir, I thought to have bought a Pennyworth; here's Temperance and Chastity, and a Pack of Stuff that I would not give three Farthings for?
Well, lay 'em by, Lot 10, and Lot 11, A great deal of Wit, and a little common Sense.
Why do you put up these together? they have no Relation to each other.
Well, the Sense by itself; then Lot 10, A little common Sense -- I assure you, Gentlemen, this is a very valuable Commodity; Come, who puts it in?
You observe as valuable as it is, no body bids; I take this, if I may speak in the Stile of a great Writer, to be a most emphatical Silence; you see, Mr., no one speaks against this Lot, and the reason no body bids for it, is because every one thinks he has it.
Lay it by, I'll keep it my self; Lot 12.
Hey-day! What's to be done, now, Mr.?
Now, Sir, the Sport begins.
What's the Matter?
There's a Sight without would kill all Mankind with laughing;is run mad, and thinkshimself a great Man, and he's marching thro' the Streets with a Drum and Fiddles.
Please Heaven, I'll go and see this Sight.
And so will I.
Nay, if every one else goes, I don't know why I shou'd stay behind.
Mr., we'll go too.
If your Lordship will have but a little Patience 'till the Scene be chang'd, you shall see him on the Stage.
Is not this Jest a little over-acted?
I warrant, we don't over-act him half so much as he does his Parts; tho' 'tis not so much his acting Capacity which I intend to exhibit as his ministerial.
His ministerial!
Yes, Sir, you may remember I told you before my Rehearsal, that there was a strict Resemblance between the States Political and Theatrical; there is a Ministry in the latter as well as the former, and I believe as weak a Ministry as any poor Kingdom cou'd ever boast of; Parts are given in the latter to Actors, with much the same Regard to Capacity as Places in the former have sometimes been, in former Ages I mean; and tho' the Publick damn both, yet while they both receive their Pay, they laugh at the Publick behind the Scenes; and if one considers the Plays that come from one Part, and the Writings from the other, one would be apt to think the same Authors were retain'd in both: But, come, change the Scene into the Street, and then enter-- Hitherto, Mr, as we have had only to do with inferior Characters, such as Beaux and Tailors, and so forth, we have dealt in the Prosaick; now we are going to introduce a more considerable Person, our Muse will rise in her Stile:Now, Sir, for a Taste of the sublime; come, enter,.
Associates, Brethren, Countrymen and Friends, Partakers with us in this glorious Enterprize, Which for our Consort we have undertaken; It grieves us much, yes by the Gods it does! That we whose great Ability and Parts Have rais'd us to this Pinacle of Power, Entitling us Prime Minister Theatrical; That we shou'd with an Upstart of the Stage Contend succesless on our Consort's Side; But tho', by just hereditary Right We claim a lawless Power, yet for some Reasons, Which to our self we keep as yet conceal'd: Thus to the Publick, deign we to appeal; Behold how humbly the Greatkneels. Say then, Oh Town, is it your Royal Will, That my great Consort represent the Part ofin the?
Thanks to the Town, that Hiss speaks their Assent; Such was the Hiss that spoke the great Applause, Our mighty Father met with, when he brought Hison the Stage; such was the Hiss, Welcom'd histo theShore; Such was the Hiss, in which Greatshou'd have expir'd: But, wherefore do I try in vain to number Those glorious Hisses, which from Age to Age Our Family has born triumphant from the Stage?
Get thee gone for the prettiest Hero that ever was shown on any Stage.
Short and sweet, faith, what, are we to have no more of him?
Ay, ay, Sir; he's only gone to take a little Breath.
If you please, Sir, in the mean time, we'll go take a little Fire, for 'tis confounded cold upon the Stage.
I wait upon your Lordship: Stop the Rehearsal a few Moments, we'll be back again instantly.
Now, my Lord, for my modern: Come, make all things ready, and draw the Scene as soon as you can.
Modern, why modern? You Common-Place Satirists are always endeavouring to persuade us, that the Age we live in, is worse than any other has been, whereas Mankind have differ'd very little since the World began; for one Age has been as bad as another.
Mr., I do not deny that Men have been always bad enough; Vice and Folly are not the Invention of our Age; but I will maintain, that what I intend to ridicule in the following Scene, is the whole and sole Production and Invention of some People now living; and faith, let me tell you, tho' perhaps the Publick may not be the better for it, it is an Invention exceeding all the Discoveries of every Philosopher or Mathematician, from the Beginning of the World to this Day.
Ay, pray what is it?
Why, Sir, it is a Discovery lately found out, that a Man of great Parts, Learning and Virtue, is fit for no Employment whatever; that an Estate renders a Man unfit to be trusted, that being a Blockhead is a Qualification for Business; that Honesty is the only Sort of Folly for which a Man ought to be utterly neglected and contemn'd. And -- But here is the Inventor himself.
Come, bring him forward, that the Audience may see and hear him: You must know, Sir, this is a Bastard of, begotten on that beautiful Nymph, who sold Oranges toCompany, or rather Cart-load of Comedians; and being a great Favourite of his Father's, the old Gentleman settled upon him the entire Direction of all our Play-houses and poetical Performances whatever.
Prompter.
Sir.
Is there any thing to be done?
Yes, Sir, this Play to be cast.
Give it me. The Life and Death of King, written by: Who can act the King?
, Sir, he loves to act it behind the Scenes.
Here are a parcel ofLords.
Their Parts are but of little Consequence, I will take care to cast them.
Do but be sure you give them to Actors who will mind their Cues ---- What sort of a Character is he?
Sir, he is a Warrior, my Cousin here will do him very well.
I do a Warrior! I never learnt to fence.
No Matter, you will have no Occasion to fight; can you look fierce, and speak well?
Boh!
I would not desire a better Warrior in the House than your self ---- What, is this?
Really, Sir, I don't well know what he is, his chief Desire seems to be for Land, I think; he is no very considerable Character, any body may do him well enough; or if you leave him quite out, the Play will be little the worse for it.
Well, I'll leave it to you --of, a Prophet -- Have you any Body that looks like a Prophet?
I have one that looks like a Fool.
He'll do --of.
I have cast all theParts, except the Ambassador.
Who shall do it? His Part is but short, have you never a good genteel Figure, and one that can dance? for as theare the politest People in, it will be mighty proper that the Ambassador should be able at his Arrival to entertain them with a Jig or two.
Truly, Sir, here are Abundance of Dancing-masters in the House, who do little or nothing for their Money.
Give it to one of them; see that he has a little Drollery tho' in him, forseems to have intended him as a ridiculous Character, and only to make the Audience laugh.
What's that, Sir? Do you affirm thatintended the Ambassadora ridiculous Character?
No, Sir, I don't.
Oh, Sir, your humble Servant, then I misunderstood you; I thought I had heard him say so.
Yes, Sir, but I shall not stand to all he says.
But, Sir, you shou'd not put a wrong Sentiment into the Mouth of the God of Wit.
I tell you, he is the God only of modern Wit, and he has a very just Right to be God of most of the modern Wits that I know; of some who are lik'd for their Wit; of some who are preferr'd for their Wit; of some who live by their Wit; of those ingenious Gentlemen who damn Plays, and those who write them too perhaps. Here comes one of his Votaries; come, enter, enter -- Enter Mr..
What are you doing here?
I am casting the Parts in the Tragedy of King.
Then you are casting the Parts in a Tragedy that won't do.
How, Sir! Was it not written by, and was notone of the greatest Genius's that ever lived?
No, Sir,was a pretty Fellow, and said some things which only want a little of my licking to do well enough; King, as now writ, will not do -- But a Word in your Ear, I will make him do.
How?
By Alteration, Sir, it was a Maxim of mine, when I was at the Head of Theatrical Affairs, that no Play, tho' ever so good, would do without Alteration -- For instance, in the Play before us, the Bastardis a most effeminate Character, for which reason I would cut him out, and put all his Sentiments in the Mouth of, who is so much properer to speak them -- Let me tell you, Mr., Propriety of Character, Dignity ofDiction, and Emphasis of Sentiment are the things I chiefly consider on these Occasions.
I am only afraid asis so popular an Author, and you, asking your Pardon, so unpopular.
Damn me, I'll write to the Town and desire them to be civil, and that in so modest a manner, that an Army ofshall be melted: I'll tell them that no Actors are equal to me, and no Authors ever were superior: And how do you think I can insinuate that in a modest manner?
Nay, faith, I can't tell.
Why, I'll tell them that the former only tread on my Heels, and that the greatest among the latter have been damn'd as well as my self; and after that, what do you think of your Popularity? I can tell you, Mr., I have seen things carried in the House against the Voice of the People before to Day.
Let them hiss, let them hiss, and grumble as much as they please as long as we get their Money.
There, Sir, is the Sentiment of a great Man, and worthy to come from the greathimself.
He's worthy his Sire, indeed, to think of this Gentleman for altering.
Sir, I will maintain this Gentleman as proper as any Man in the Kingdom for the Business.
Indeed!
Ay, Sir, for asis already good enough for the People of Taste, he must be alter'd to the Palates of those who have none; and if you will grant that, who can be properer to alter him for the worse? But if you are so zealous in oldCause, perhaps you may find by-and-by all this come to nothing -- Now for.
Pox on't, the Boy treads close on my Heels in a literal Sense.
Your Pardon, Sir, why will you not obey Your Son's Advice, and give him still his way; For you, and all who will oppose his Force, Must be o'erthrown in his triumphant Course.
I hope, Sir, youris not intended to burlesque.
No, Sir, I have too great an Honour forto think of burlesquing him, and to be sure of not burlesquing him I will never attempt to alter him, for fear of burlesquing him by Accident, as perhaps some others have done.
is the young Captain.
My Lord,is every insignificant Fellow in Town, who fancies himself of great Consequence, and is of none; he is my Lord, Captain, Counsellor, Alderman, Beau, and -- and -- Odso, what was I going to say? Come, go on.
, take care that all things well go on; We will retire, my Friend, and read King.
To what purpose, Sir, was Mr.introduced?
To no purpose at all, Sir; it's all in Character, Sir, and plainly shews of what mighty Consequence he is -- And there ends my Article from the Theatre.
Hey-day! What's become of your two?
Damn'd, Sir, damn'd; they were damn'd at my first Rehearsal, for which Reason I have cut them out; and to tell you the Truth, I think the Town has honour'd 'em enough with talking of 'em for a whole Month; tho', faith, I believe it was owing to their having nothing else to talk of. Well, now formy Patriots -- You will observe, Mr., that I place my Politicians and my Patriots at opposite Ends of my Piece, which I do, Sir, to shew the wide Difference between them; I begin with my Politicians to signify that they will always have the Preference in the World to Patriots, and I end with Patriots to leave a good Relish in the Mouths of my Audience.
Ay? by your Dance of Patriots, one would think you intended to turn Patriotism into a Jest.
So do I -- But don't you observe I conclude the whole with a Dance of Patriots? which plainly intimates that when Patriotism is turn'd into a Jest, there is an End of the whole Play: Come, enter four Patriots -- You observe I have not so many Patriots as Politicians; you will collect from thence that they are not so plenty.
Where does the Scene lie now, Sir?
In, Sir, all in.
These Patriots seem to equal your greatest Politicians in their Silence.
Sir, what they think now cannot well be spoke, but you may conjecture a great deal from their shaking their Heads; they will speak by-and-by -- as soon as they are a little heated with Wine: You cannot, however, expect any great Speaking in this Scene, for tho' I do not make my Patriots Politicians, I don't make them Fools.
But, methinks, your Patriots are a Set of shabby Fellows.
They are the cheaper dress'd; besides, no Man can be too low for a Patriot, tho' perhaps it is possible he may be too high.
Prosperity to.
Liberty and Property.
Success to Trade.
Ay, to Trade -- to Trade -- particularly to my Shop.
Why do you suffer that Actor to stand laughing behind the Scenes, and interrupt your Rehearsal?
O, Sir, he ought to be there, he's a laughing in his Sleeve at the Patriots; he's a very considerable Character -- and has much to do by-and-by.
Methinks the Audience shou'd know that, or perhaps they may mistake him as I did, and hiss him.
If they shou'd, he's a pure impudent Fellow, and can stand the Hisses of them all; I chose him particularly for the Part -- Go on, Patriots.
Gentlemen, I think this our Island ofis an ill State, I do not say we are actually in War, for that we are not; but however we are threaten'd with it daily, and why may not the Apprehension of a War, like other Evils, be worse than the Evil itself; for my part, this I will say, this I will venture to say, That let what will happen I will drink a Health to Peace.
This Gentleman is the Noisy-Patriot, who drinks and roars for his Country, and never does either Good or Harm in it -- The next is the Cautious-Patriot.
Sir, give me your Hand; there's Truth in what you say, and I will pledge you with all my Soul, but remember it is all under the Rose.
Look'ee, Gentlemen, my Shop is my Country, I always measure the Prosperity of the latter by that of the former. My Country is either richer or poorer, in my Opinion, as my Trade rises or falls; therefore, Sir, I cannot agree with you that a Warwou'd be disserviceable: On the contrary I think it the only way to make my Country flourish; for as I am a Sword-Cutler, it would make my Shop flourish, so here's to War.
This is the Self-interested-Patriot, and now you shall hear the fourth and last kind, which is the Indolent-Patriot, one who acts as I have seen a prudent Man in Company fall asleep at the beginning of a Fray, and never wake till the end on't.
Here's to Peace or War, I do not care which.
So this Gentleman being neutral, Peace has it two to one.
Perhaps neither shall have it, perhaps I have found a way to reconcile both Parties: But go on.
Can any one, who is a Friend to, wish for War, in our present Circumstances? -- I desire to ask you all one Question, Are we not a Set of miserable poor Dogs?
Ay, ay.
That we are sure enough, that no body will deny.
Yes, Sir, I deny it.
Nay, Gentlemen, let me not disturb you, I beg you will all sit down, I am come to drink a Glass with you -- Canbe poor while there is this in it?
Nay, be not afraid of it, Gentlemen, it is honest Gold I assure you; you are a set of poor Dogs, you agree, I say you are not, for this is all yours, there,
take it among you.
And what are we to do for it?
Only say you are rich, that's all.
Oh, if that be all!
Well, Sir, what is your Opinion now? tell me freely.
I will, a Man may be in the wrong through Ignorance, but he's a Rascal who speaks with open Eyes against his Conscience -- I own I thought we were poor, but, Sir, you have convinc'd me that we are rich.
We are all convinc'd.
Then you are all honest Fellows, and here is to your Healths, and since the Bottle is out, hang Sorrow, cast away Care, e'en take a Dance, and I will play you a Tune on the Fiddle.
Agreed.
Strike up when you will, we are ready to attend your Motions.
Perhaps there may be something intended by this Dance which you don't take.
Ay, what prithee?
Sir, every one of these Patriots have a Hole in their Pockets, as Mr.the Fiddler there knows, so that he intends to make them dance till all the Money is fall'n through, which he will pick up again, and so not lose one Half-penny by his Generosity; so far from it, that he will get his Wine for nothing, and the poor People, alas! out of their own Pockets, pay the whole Reckoning. This, Sir, I think is a very pretty Pantomime Trick, and an ingenious Burlesque on all the Fourberies which the greathas exhibited in all his Entertainments: And so ends my Play, my Farce, or what you please to call it; may I hope it has your Lordship's Approbation?
Very pretty, indeed, it's very pretty.
Then, my Lord, I hope I shall have your
Encouragement; for things in this Town do not always
succeed according to their Merit; there is a Vogue,my Lord, which if you will bring me into, you will
lay a lasting Obligation on me: And you, Mr., I hope, will serve me among the Criticks, that
I may have no elaborate Treatise writ to prove that
a Farce of three Acts is not a regular Play of Five., to you Gentlemen, whom I have not the
Honour to know, who have pleas'd to grace my
Rehearsal; and you Ladies, whether you beLadies, orandLadies, I hope you
will make Allowances for a Rehearsal;

And kindly all report us to the Town;
No borrow'd, nor no stol'n Goods we've shown,
If witty, or if dull, our Play's our own.<|endoftext|>Indeed, my Dear, you'll repent this Frolic.
Indeed, my Dear, then it will be the first Frolic I ever repented in all my Life. Lookee,, 'tis in vain to oppose me, for I am resolv'd -- the only Way to find out his Character, is to see him thus, and converse freely with him. If he is the Wretch he is reported to be, I shall away with him at once; and if he is not, he will thank me for the Trial, and our Union will be the stronger.
I never knew a Woman yet, who had Prudence enough to turn off a pretty Fellow, because he had a little more Wickedness than the rest of his Neighbours.
Then I will be the first to set a better Example. -- If I did not think a Man's Character was of some Consequence, I should not now run such Risques, and encounter such Difficulties, to be better acquainted with it.
Ha,! if you have Love enough to be jealous, and Jealousy enough to try these Experiments -- don't imagine, tho' you should make terrible Discoveries, that you can immediately quit your Inclinations, with your Breeches; and return so very philosophically to your Petticoats again, ha, ha! --
You may be as merry with my Weaknesses, as you please, Madam; but I know my own Heart, and can rely upon it.
We are great Bullies by Nature; but Courage and Swaggering, are two Things, Cousin.
Since you are as little to be convinc'd, as I am to be persuaded -- your Servant --
Nay,-- This is unfriendly -- if you are resolv'd upon your Scheme, open to me without Reserve, and I'll assist you.
, then; I confess to you, that I have a kind of whimsical Attachment to; not but I can see his Vanities, and laugh at 'em.
And like him the better for 'em --
Pshaw! don't plague me,-- my other Lover, the jealous Mr.--
Who loves you too well to be successful --
And whom I really esteem --
As a good Sort of Man, ha, ha, ha.
Nay, shou'd have lov'd him --
Had not a prettier Fellow stept in between, who perhaps does not care a Farthing for you --
That's the Question, my Dear --, I say, either stung by Jealousy, or unwilling to lose me, without a Struggle, has intreated me to know more of his Rival, before I engage too far with him -- Many strange Things he has told me, which have piqu'd me I must confess, and I am now prepar'd for the Proof.
You'll certainly be discover'd, and put to Shame.
I have secur'd my Success already.
What do you mean?
I have seen him, convers'd with him, and am to meet him again to-day, by his own Appointment.
Madness! -- it can't be.
But it has been, I tell you --
How? how? -- Quickly, quickly, dear?
When you went to Ladylast Night, and left me, as you thought, little dispos'd for a Frolic, I dress'd me as you see, call'd a Chair, and went to the-- ask'd for my Gentleman, and was shewn into a Room -- he immediately left his Company, and came to me.
I tremble for you.
I introduc'd myself as anNobleman, just arriv'd:--
Ridiculous! -- ha, ha.
An Intimate of Sir, who is now at-- I told him my Letters were with my Baggage, at the-- He receiv'd me with all the Openness imaginable, and wou'd have introduc'd me to his Friends; I begg'd to be excuse'd, but promis'd to attend him to-day, and am now ready, as you see, to keep my Word.
Astonishing! -- and what did you talk about?
Of various Things -- Women among the rest; and tho' I have not absolutely any open Acts of Rebellion against him, yet, I fear he is a Traytor at Heart -- and then such Vanity! -- but I had not Timeto make great Discoveries -- It was merely the Prologue -- The Play is to come.
Act your Part well, or we shall hiss you --
Never fear me; you don't know what a mad, raking, wild young Devil I can be, if I set my Mind to it,.
You fright me! -- you shall positively be no Bedfellow of mine any longer.
I am resolv'd to ruin my Woman, and kill my Man, before I get into Petticoats again.
Take Care of a Quarrel tho' -- a Rival may be too rough with you.
No, no, Fighting is not the Vice of these Times; and as for a little Swaggering -- damn it, I can do it as well as the best of 'em.
Hush, hush! Mr.is here --
Now for a Trial of Skill; if I deceive him, you'll allow that half my Business is done.
Your Servant Miss-- I need not ask if Missbe at home, for I believe I have seen her since you did.
Have you, Sir? You seem disconcerted, Mr.: Has any Thing happen'd?
A Trifle, Madam -- but I was born to be trifled with, and to be made uneasy at Trifles.
Pray, what trifling Affair has disturb'd you thus?
What's the Matter now?
I met Missthis Moment in a Hackney Chair, at the End of the Street: I knew her by the Pink Negligee`; but upon my crossing the Way to speak to her, she turn'd her Head away, laugh'd violently, and drew the Curtain in my Face.
So, so; well said, Jealousy
She was in Haste, I suppose, to get to her Engagement.
Yes, yes, Madam; I imagine she had some Engagement upon her Hands -- But sure, Madam, her great Desire to see her more agreeable Friends, need not be attended with Contempt and Disregard to the rest of her Acquaintance.
Indeed, Mr., I have so many Caprices, and Follies of my own, that I can't possibly answer for my Cousin's too.
Well said,.
Answer, Miss! -- No, Heav'n forbid you should -- for my Part, I have given up all my Hopes as a Lover, and only, now, feel for her as a Friend -- and indeed as a Friend, a sincere Friend -- I can't but say, that going out in a Hackney Chair, without a Servant, and endeavouring to conceal herself, is somewhat incompatible with MissRank and Reputation -- This I speak as a Friend -- not as a Lover, Miss-- pray mind that.
I see it very plainly, Mr.-- and it gives me great Pleasure, that you can be so indifferent in your Love, and yet so jealous in your Friendship.
You do me Honour, Miss, by your good Opinion.
Who's that, pray?
A Gentleman who is waiting for.
I think she has Gentlemen waiting for her every where.
I am afraid, Sir,
you'll excuse me, that notwithstanding your Declaration, and this Lady's Compliments, there is a little of the Devil, call'd Jealousy, at the Bottom of all this Uneasiness.
Sir! --
I say, Sir, wear your Cloak as long as you please, the Hoof will peep out, take my Word for it.
Upon my Word, Sir, you are pleas'd to honour me with a Familiarity which I neither expected, or indeed desired, upon so slight an Acquaintance.
I dare swear you did not.
I don't understand this!
This is beyond Expectation --
I presume, Sir, you never was out of--
I presume, Sir, that you are mistaken -- I never was so foolishly fond of my own Country, to think that nothing good was to be had out of it; nor so shamefully ungrateful to it, to prefer the Vices and Fopperies of every other Nation, to the peculiar Advantages of my own.
Ha, ha; well said, old, i'faith -- Now, Madam, if this Gentleman would put this Speech into a Farce, and properly lard it with Roast Beef, and Liberty, I wou'd engage the Galleries wou'd roar and halloo at it for half an Hour together -- Ha, ha, ha.
Now the Storm's coming.
If you are not engag'd, Sir, we'll adjourn to the next Tavern, and write this Farce between us.
I fancy, Sir, by the Information of your Face, that you are more inclin'd to Tragedy, than Comedy --
I shall be inclin'd to treat you very ill, if you don't walk out with me.
I have been treated so very ill already, in the little Conversation I have had with you, that you must excuse my walking out for more of it; but if you'll persuade the Lady to leave the Room, I'll put you to Death -- Damme --
For Heaven's sake! what's the Matter, Gentlemen?
What can I do with this Fellow?
Madam, don't be alarm'd -- this Affair will be very short -- I am always expeditious; and will cut his Throat, without shocking you in the least: -- Come, Sir,
if you won't defend yourself, I must kick you about the Room.
Respect for this Lady, and this House, has curb'd my Resentment hitherto: But as your Insolence wou'd take Advantage of my Forbearance, I must correct it at all Events --
Ha, ha, ha!
What is all this?
What, would you set your Courage to a poor, weak Woman? You are a bold, indeed! -- Ha, ha, ha.
What,? --
No, no; she is in a Hackney-Chair, you know, without a Servant, in her Pink Negligee` -- Ha, ha, ha. --
I am astonish'd! and can scarce believe my own Eyes -- What means this Metamorphosis?
'Tis in Obedience to your Commands -- Thus equipp'd, I have got Access to, and shall know whether your Picture of him is drawn by your Regard for me, or Resentment to him --.
Your Spirit transports me -- This will be a busy, and, I hope, a happy Day for me. I have appointed no less than five Ladies to meet me at the Widow; to each of whom, as well as yourself, the accomplish'd Mr.has presented his Heart; the Value of which I am resolved to convince 'em of this Night, for the sake of the whole Sex.
Pooh, pooh! that's the old Story -- You are so prejudic'd. --
I am afraid 'tis you who are prejudic'd, Madam; for if you will believe your own Eyes and Ears --
That I will, I assure you -- I shall visit him immediately -- He thinks me in the Country, and to confirm it, I'll write to him as from thence -- But ask me no more Questions about what I have done, and what is to be done; for I have not a Moment to lose; and so, my good Friend, yours -- My dear, I kiss your Hand --
You are a fine Woman, by Heav'ns! Here,, -- where are my Fellows there? Call me a Chair ----
Ha, ha; there's a Spirit for you! -- Well now, what do you stare at? -- You cou'd not well desire more -- O, fie, fie, -- don't sigh, and bite your Fingers; rouze yourself, Man; set all your Wits to work; bring this faithlessto Shame, and I'll be hang'd if the Prize is not yours -- If she returns in Time, I'll bring her to the Widow--
Dear Miss--
Well, well; make me a fine Speech another Time. About your Business now --
I fly --
What a Couple of blind Fools has Love made of this poor Fellow, and my dear Cousin? Little do they imagine, with all their wise Discoveries, thatis as faithful a Lover, as he is an accomplish'd Gentleman -- I pity these poor deceiv'd Women, with all my Heart -- But how will they stare, when they find that he has artfully pretended a Regard for them, the better to conceal his realPassion for me -- They will certainly tear my Eyes out; and what will Cousinsay to me, when we are oblig'd to declare our Passion? No Matter what -- 'Tis the Fortune of War -- And I shall only serve her, as she and every other Friend wou'd serve me in the same Situation --
But are you sure,, that you deliver'd the Letter last Night, in the Manner I order'd you?
Exactly, Sir.
And you are sure that Mr.saw you slip the Note into his Wife's Hand?
I have alarm'd him, and you may be assur'd, that he is as uneasy as you wou'd wish to have him -- But I shou'd be glad, with your Honour's Leave, to have a little serious Conversation with you; for my Mind forebodes much Peril to the Bones of your humble Servant, and very little Satisfaction to your Honour.
Thou art a most incomprehensible Blockhead --
No great Scholar, or Wit, indeed -- but I can feel an Oak Sappling, as well as another -- Ay, and I shou'd have felt one last Night, if I had not had the Heels of all Mr.Family -- I had the whole Pack after me --
And did not they catch you?
No, thank Heaven --
You was not kick'd then?
No, Sir.
Nor can'd?
No, Sir.
Nor drag'd thro' a Horse-pond?
O, Lord! No, Sir.
That's unlucky --
Sir!
You must go again,, to Night, perhaps you may be in better Luck.
If I go again, Sir, may I be can'd, kick'd, and Horse-ponded for my Pains -- I believe I have been lucky enough to bring an old House over your Head.
What d'ye mean?
Mr.only hobbled after me, to pay me for the Postage of your Letter; but being a little out of Wind, he soon stopt, to curse and swear at me --I cou'd hear him mutter something of Scoundrel, and Pimp, and my Master, and Villain -- and Blunderbuss, and Saw-pit; and then he shook his Stick, and look'd like the Devil!
Blunderbuss, and Saw-pit! This Business grows a little serious, and so we will drop it -- The Husband is so old and peevish, and she so young and pressing, that I'll give it up,-- The Town talks of us, and I am satisfied.
Pray Sir, with Submission, for what End do you write to so many Ladies, and make such a Rout about 'em; there are now upon the List half a Dozen Maids, a Leash of Wives, and the Widow. I know your Honour don't intend Mischief; but what Pleasure can you have in deceiving them, and the World? for you are thought a terrible young Gentleman.
Why that Pleasure, Booby.
I don't understand it -- What do you intend to do with 'em all? Ruin 'em?
Not I, faith.
But you'll ruin their Reputations.
That's their Business -- Not mine.
Will you marry any one of 'em?
O, no; that wou'd be finishing the Game at once -- If I preferr'd one, the Rest wou'd take itill; so because I won't be particular, I give 'em all Hopes, without going a Step further.
Widows can't live upon such slender Diet.
A true Sportsman has no Pleasure but in the Chace; the Game is always given to those who have less Taste, and better Stomachs.
I love to pick a Bit, I must confess -- Really, Sir, I shou'd not care what became of half the Women you are pleas'd to be merry with -- But Miss, sure, is a heavenly Creature, and deserves better Treatment; and to make Love to her Cousin too, in the same House -- that is very cruel.
But it amuses one -- besides they are both fine Creatures. And how do I know, if I lov'd only one, but the other might poison herself?
And when they know that you have lov'd 'em both, they may poison one another -- This Affair will make a great Noise.
Or I have taken a great Deal of Pains for nothing; but no more prating, Sirrah; while I read my Letters, go and askwhat Cards and Messages he has taken in this Morning.
There is no mending him.
This is from the Widow-- I know her Scrawl at a Mile's Distance -- she pretends that the Fright of her Husband's Death hurther Nerves so, that her Hand has shook ever since -- ha, ha, ha -- It has hurt her Spelling too, for here is Joy with a G; ha! ha! poor Creature.
Hum -- hum -- hum -- Well said, Widow; she speaks plain, faith, and grows urgent -- I must get quit of her -- she desires a te`te a` te`te; which, with Widows who have suffered much for the Loss of their Husbands, is, as Capt.says, a Service of Danger. So, I am off --
What the Devil have we here? A Bill in Chancery: Oh, no! my Taylor's Bill -- Sum Total 374 l. 11 s. 5 3/4 d. -- Indeed, Monsieur, this is a damn'd Bill, and you will be damn'd for making it -- therefore, for the Good of your Soul, Mons., you must make another.
Theknow their Consequence, and use us accordingly.
This is from. --
----a Genius, and a good Servant. I have not as yet lost above a Thousand Pounds by my Horses -- But such Luck can't always last.
There's the Morning's Cargo, Sir.
Heigh Day! I can't read 'em in a Month; prithee,, set down my Invitations from the Cards, according to their Date, and let me see 'em Tomorrow Morning -- So much Reading wou'd distract me.
And yet these are the only Books that Gentlemen read Now-a-Days.
And please your Honour, I forgot to tell you that there was a Gentleman here last Night -- I've forgot his Name.
Old Mr., perhaps.
Old; no, no, he looks younger than his Honour -- I believe he's mad, he can't stand still a Moment; he first caper'd out of the Chair, and when I told him your Honour was not at Home, he caper'd into it again -- said he would call again, jabber'd something, and away he went singing.
'Tis the Marquis of, I saw him at theYesterday: Admit him when he comes,.
I shall, your Honour -- I can neither write or remember these outlandish Names.
Where is my List of Women,, and the Places of their Abode, that we may strike off some, and add the new Acquisitions?
What, alter again! I wrote it out fair but this Morning -- There are quicker Successions in your Honour's List, than the Court-Calendar.
Strike off Mrs., and the Widow.
They are undone.
A Lady, Mr., in a Chair, must speak with you.
Did she ask for me? -- See, who it is.
No, your Honour; but she look'd quite.
Well, go below, and be careful not to let any old Gentleman in this Morning -- and d'ye hear, if any of the Neighbours shou'd inquire who the Lady is, you may say it is a Relation; and be sure smile, do you hear? when you tell 'em so.
I shall, your Honour -- He, he, he, I am never melancholy.
That Fellow's a Character.
Sir, it is Mrs.; she has had a terrible Quarrel with her Husband about your Letter, and has something to say of Consequence to you both -- she must see you, she says.
I won't see her -- Why wou'd you say that I was at Home -- You know I hate to be alone with 'em, and she's so violent too -- Well, well, shew her up -- This is so unlucky --
He hates to see Duns he never intends to pay.
What shall I do with her? This is worse than meeting her Husband with a Blunderbuss in a Saw-pit.
Dear Mrs., this is so obliging --, don't let a Soul come near me.
-- And harkee, don't leave us long together, and let every Body up that comes.
What a Deal of Trouble here is about nothing.
In the Name of Virtue, Mr., I hope you have not given any private Orders, that may in the least derogate from that absolute Confidence which I place in your Honour.
You may be perfectly easy under this Roof, Madam. I hope, I am polite enough not to let myPassions, of any Kind, run too great Lengths in my own House.
Nothing but absolute Necessity cou'd have made me take this imprudent Step -- I am ready to faint with my Apprehensions -- Heigh ho! --
Heav'n forbid! -- I'll call for some Assistance.
Let your Bell alone
You'r always calling for Assistance, I think -- you never give one Time to come to ones self -- Mr.has seen your Letter, and vows Vengeance and Destruction -- Why wou'd you be so violent and imprudent?
The Devil was in me, Madam; but I repent it from my Soul; it has cur'd me of being violent.
Come, come, don't take it too deeply neither; I thought it proper, at all Hazards, to let you know what had happen'd, and to intreat you, by that Affection you have sworn to me, to be careful of my Reputation.
That I will indeed, Madam; we can't be too careful.
Well, Mr., I am an unhappy Woman -- married to one I cannot love; and loving one I ought to shun -- It is a terrible Situation, Mr.--
It is indeed, Madam, -- I am in a terrible one too -- Wou'd I was well out of it.
Do you know, Mr., that if I had not beenvery religious, my Passions would have undone me -- But you must give me Time, for nothing but that, and keeping the best Company, will ever conquer my Prejudices --
I should be very ungenerous not to allow you Time, Madam -- three Weeks or a Month, I hope, will do the Business -- Tho', by my Honour, I got the better of Mine in half the Time -- What isdoing?
He's very cold, methinks; but I'll try him further -- Lookee, Mr., you must curb your Passions, and keep your Distance -- Fire is catching, and one does not know the Consequences when once it begins to spread.
As you say, Madam, Fire is a catching; 'tis dangerous to play with it; and as I am of the Tinder-Kind, -- as one may say, -- we had better, -- as you say -- Madam, -- change the Subject -- Pray did you ever hear of the Pug-dog that you advertis'd? It was a very pretty Creature -- what was his Name, Madam?
, Sir!
Madam!
Could I love and esteem any Thing, and not call it? -- What a Wretch!
You do me Honour, Madam -- I don't like her Looks, I must change the Discourse
Upon my Soul, Mrs., this Struggle is too much for Man: My Passions are now tearing me to Pieces, and if you will stay, by Heav'n I will not answer for the Consequences.
Consequences! What Consequences! Thou wretched, base, false, worthless Animal!
You do me Honour.
Canst thou think that I am so blinded by my Passion, not to see thy treacherous, mean, unmanly Evasions? -- I have long suspected your Infamy, and having this Proof of it, I cou'd stab your treacherous Heart, and my own weak one -- Don't offer to stir, or ring your Bell, for, by Heav'ns, I'll --
I stir! I am never so happy, as when I am in your Company.
Thou liest: Thou art never so happy as when thou art deceiving, and betraying our foolish Sex -- and all for what? Why, for the poor Reputation of having that, which thou hast neither Power nor Spirit to enjoy.
Ha! I hear Somebody coming -- Now for a Rapture
Talk not of Power or Spirit -- Heav'n, that has made you fair, has made me strong -- O! forgive the Madness which your Beauty has occasion'd.
The Marquis of--
Ha!
I am betray'd! --
Mrs., by all that's virtuous --
Signor, tat I am com.
Dear Marquis, no Excuse I beg -- nothing at all -- a Relation of mine -- my Sister only -- Miss, this is,, an Intimate of Sir-- This was lucky
-- Well, then, my dear Sister, I will wait upon you To-morrow, and settle the whole Affair.
I am the most miserable of Mortals, and have lost the most precious Moments of my Life.
You are a Villain -- I despise you, and detest you -- and will never see you more.
Ha, ha, ha! -- My Sister has a noble Spirit, my Lord.
-- it tisplis me, tat I hafof you Famili.
It is the old Family-business, my Lord; and so old, that, by my Honour, I am quite tir'd of it.
I hate him already.
-- Signor, she is, a very prit' Siss' intit.
I must confess to you, my Lord, that my Sister is a young distress'd Damsel, married to an old Gentleman of the Neighbourhood, Ha, ha, ha.
! vat ais tis!te olt Men marri de yong fine Girl, and te yong fine Girl visite te yong Signors ----
Indeed, my Lord, Men of Fashion here have some small Privileges; we gather our Roses without fear of Thorns -- Husbands and Brothers don't deal in Poison and Stilletos, as they do with you.
, Signor, has tol me a tousant, dat you vas dehimself.
But not, I can assure you, my Lord, Ha, ha, ha! I am for Variety, and Badinage, without Affection -- Reputation is the great Ornament, and Ease the great Happiness of Life -- To ruin Women wou'd be troublesome; to trifle and make Love to 'em amuses one -- I use my Women as daintily as my Tokay; I merely sip of both, but more than half a Glass palls me.
is right; he's a Villain.
-- Signor; Vil you do me de Favor to give me Stranger,to some of your, lettaste a littel,of yourTokay.
-- I have half a hundredat your Service.
, Signor.
Here is a Letter for your Honour.
What is the Matter with the Fellow?
Matter, your Honour! -- the Lady that went out just now, gave me such a Souse on the Ear, as I made my Bow to her, that I cou'd scarce tell, for a Minute, whether I had a Head or no.
Ha! ha! -- Poor Fellow! -- there's Smart Money for you.
--
-- Will your Lordship give me Leave? --
-- now for it.
-- My Lord Marquis, here is a Letter has started Game for you already -- the most lucky Thought imaginable.
There are two fine Girls you must know, Cousins, who live together; this is a Letter from one of 'em,is her Name -- I have address'd 'em both, but as Matters become a little serious on theirSide, I must raise a Jealousy between the Friends; discover to one the Treachery of the other; and so in the Bustle steal off as quietly as I can.
-- I can scarce contain myself.
Before the Mine is sprung, I will introduce you into the Town.
You are great, I feelvat de poorSophia vil feel for de Loss of Signor.
Yes, poor Creature; I believe she'll have a Pang or two -- tender indeed! and I believe will be unhappy for some Time.
What a Monster!
You must dine with our Club to-day, where I will introduce you to more of SirFriends, all Men of Figure and Fashion.
I musthaf my Lettere, dat yourmay bedat I am no.
In the Name of Politeness, my Lord Marquis, don't mention your Letters again; none but a Justice of Peace, or a Constable, would ever ask for a Certificate of a Man's Birth, Parentage, and Education, Ha, ha, ha!
il Signor! You shall beof Love and Pleasure.
With all my Heart -- You must give me Leave now, my Lord, to put on my Cloaths -- In the mean Time, if your Lordship will step into my Study there, if you chuse Music, there is a Guittar, and someBallads; or, if you like reading, there's Infidelity, and baudy Novels for you -- Callthere.
I am shock'd at him -- He is really more abandon'd thanJealousy describ'd him -- I have got my Proofs, and will not venture any further; I am vex'd that I shou'd be angry at him, when I shou'd only despise him -- But I amangry, that I cou'd almost wish myself a Man, that my Breeches might demand Satisfaction for the Injury he has done my Petticoats. --
In short, his own Declarations, the unexpected Meeting of Mrs., his Usage of my Letter, and twenty Things beside, determin'd me not to go among the Set of 'em -- So making the best Excuse I cou'd, I got quit of him and his Companions.
All this may be true,-- Every young Fellow has his Vanities; Fashion has made such Irregularities Accomplishments, and the Man may be worth having, for all your Discoveries.
What! an abandon'd, rash, profligate Male-Coquette; a Wretch, who can assume Passions he never feels, and sport with our Sex's Frailties -- Fie, fie,.
Well, well, you are too angry to be merciful -- If he is such a Monster, I am glad you are out of his Clutches, and that you can so easily resign him to another.
To another! there is not that Woman, be she ever so handsome, that I hate enough, to wish her so muchEvil; and happy it is for you,, that you have a Heart to resist his Allurements.
Yes, I thank my Stars -- I am not so susceptible of Impressions of that Kind -- and yet -- I won't swear -- if an agreeable Man -- I -- I --
No, no,, you are not absolute Stone -- you you may be mollified -- She is confounded --
Surely he has not betray'd me -- 'Tis impossible, I cannot be deceiv'd.
Well, shall we go in to the Ladies and Mr.? Were they not surpriz'd when he open'd the Business to 'em?
'Twas the finest Scene imaginable -- You cou'd see, tho' they all endeavour'd to hide their Liking to, all were uneasy atDiscovery. At first, they objected to his Scheme; but they began to listen to his Proposal the Moment I was call'd out to you; what farther he intends, is a Secret to us all; but here he comes, and without the Ladies.
Pray, Miss-- Bless me! Missreturn'd! I dare not ask -- and yet if my Eyes do not flatter my Heart -- your Looks --
Don't rely too much upon Looks, Mr..
Madam -- why sure --
Don't imagine, I say, that you can always see the Mind in the Face.
I can see, Madam, that your Mind is not dispos'd to wish, or make me happy.
Did not I bid you not to rely upon Looks; for do you know now that my Mind is at this Time most absolutely dispos'd -- to do every thing that you wou'd have me.
Then I have nothing more to wish or ask of Fortune.
Come, come, this is no Time to attend to one, when you have so many Ladies to take Care of.
I will not yet enquire into your Adventures, 'till I have accomplish'd my own. The Ladies within have at last agreed, to attend me this Evening; where, if you have a Mind to finish the Picture you have begun this Morning, an Opportunity may offer.
I am contented with my Sketch -- However, I'll make one; and if you have an Occasion for a Second in any thing -- I am your Man -- command me.
A Match -- from this Moment I take you as my Second; nay, my First in every Circumstance of our future Lives.
Mighty pretty, truly! -- and so I am to stand cooling my Heels here, while you are making yourselves ridiculous.
in the Right -- to Business, to Business -- Mr., you must introduce me to the Ladies; I can at least make as good a Figure as Mr.among 'em.
Whenreal Inclinations are known, how those poor Wretches will be disappointed.
What do you say, my Lord, that I don't do it in an Hour?
Not in an Hour and Half,.
Done with you, my Lord -- I'll take your Seven to Five -- Seventy Poundto Fifty.
Done -- I'll lay the Odds again, with you, Sir-- and with you, Sir.
Not I, faith; --has too many fine Women -- he'll never do it.
I'll go into the Country for a Week, and not a Petticoat shal come near me -- I'll take the Odds again.
Done,.
You are to hop upon one Leg, without changing, mind that -- Set it down,.
I have -- Shall I read it? LordSilence in the Court.
I say, done --
And done.
Consider your Women -- you'll never do it,.
Not do it!
Why, I'll get aPensioner shall do it in an Hour, with his wooden Leg -- What Day shall we fix for it?
The first of, to be sure.
Ha, ha, ha. --
Come,, read the Betts and Matches of To-day -- then let us finish our, and go to the Opera.
Done.
The Odds are against you,-- my Lord has got to plainnow every Morning.
And the Ladies have been at it to my Knowledge, this half Year.
Good, again,.
He must have no Books,.
No, no; the Gentleman I mean can't read.
'Tis not yourself,!
Ha, ha, ha; 'tis impossible, it must kill him.
Why, then I lose my Bet.
I'll lay Fifty more, neither of 'em run the Ground in Half an Hour.
Not in an Hour.
Done,-- I'll bet you a Hundred of that.
Done, Baronet; I'll double it, if you will.
With all my Heart -- Book it,.
You'll certainly lose,.
Impossible, my Lord; Siris damnably out of Wind.
What, Asthmatic?
No, quite cur'd of his Asthma -- he dy'd Yesterday Morning -- Bite.
Bravo,.
Now you talk of dying -- how does your Cousin?
Lingers on -- better and worse -- Lives upon Asses Milk, Panada, and Eringo Root.
You'll have a fine Wind-fall there,-- a good Two Thousand a Year.
'Tis better, my Lord; but I loveso well, and have had so many Obligations to him -- he sav'd my Life once -- that I cou'd wish him better Health.
Or in a better Place -- there's devilish fine Timber inWoods.
Down with 'em,.
But letdrop first -- a little Blast will fell him.
Not so little as you may imagine, my Lord -- hugh, hugh --
Ha, ha, ha.
Angels and Ministers! what Cousin! We were got among your Trees.
You are heartily welcome to any one of 'em, Gentlemen, for a proper Purpose -- hugh, hugh.
Well said,. How quick his Wit, and how youthful the Rogue looks!
Bloomy and plump -- the Country Air is a fine Thing, my Lord --
Well, well, be as jocular as you please; I am not so ill, as you may wish, or imagine; -- I can walk toin an Hour, for a Hundred Pound.
I bet you a Hundred of that,.
I'll lay you a Hundred,, that I drive a Sow and Pigs to your Lodgings, before you can get there.
Done, I say;
Done -- Two Hundred -- done -- Three.
I'll take, against your Sow and Pigs.
I take the Field against.
Done.
Done.
Damn your Sow and Pigs; I am so sick with the Thoughts of runningwith 'em, that I shall certainly faint --
-- hugh, hugh --
Cousincan't bear the Mention of Pork -- he hates it -- I knew it would work.
I wish you had not mention'd it -- I can't stay -- Damn your Sow and Pigs -- Here, Waiter, call a Chair -- Damn your Sow and Pigs! -- hugh, hugh.
Poor-- What a Passion he is in! -- Ha, ha, ha.
The Woods are yours,; you may whet the Axe --won't live a Month.
Pooh, this is nothing -- he was always weakly --
'Tis a Family Misfortune,.
Mr., Gentlemen, dropp'd down at the Stair Foot, and the Cook has carried him behind the Bar.
Lay him upon a Bed, and he'll come to himself.
I'll bet Fifty Pound, that he don't live till Morning.
I'll lay Six to Four, he don't live a Week.
I'll take your Fifty Pound.
I'll take your Lordship again.
Done, with you both.
I'll take it again.
Done, done, done; -- but I bar all Assistance to him -- Not a Physician, or Surgeon sent for -- or I am off.
No, no; we are upon Honour -- There shall be none, else it wou'd be a bubble Bet. -- There shall be none.
If I were my Lord, now, the Physicians should attend him.
A Letter for his Honour --
, remember the First of-- and let the Women alone.
Upon my Soul you have hit it -- 'tis a Woman, faith -- Something very particular, and if you are in Spirits for a Scheme --
Ay, ay; come, come; a Scheme, a Scheme!
There then, have among you.
Hum --
Will you go?
What do you propose?
To go -- If after I have been with her half an Hour, you'll come upon us -- and have a Blow up.
There's a Gallant for you!
Prithee, Sir, be quiet -- must a Man be in Love with every Woman that invites him!
No; but he should be honourable to 'em,-- and rather conceal a Woman's Weakness, than expose it -- I hate this Work -- so, I'll go to the Coffee-house.
Let him go -- don't mind him,; he's married, and past fifty -- this will be a fine Frolic -- Devilish high --
Very! -- Well, I'll go and prepare myself -- put on my Surtout, and take my Chair to-- I know the very Spot.
We'll come with-- you must be surpris'd, and --
I know what to do -- Here, Waiter, Waiter;
How does Cousin?
Quite recover'd, Sir; -- he is in the, with two Ladies, and has order'd a boil'd Chicken and Jellies.
There's a Blood for you! -- without a Drop in his Veins.
Do you stay with him, then, till I have secur'd my Lady; and in Half and Hour from this Time come away, and bringwith you.
If he'll leave the Ladies -- Don't theMarquis dine with us To-morrow?
Certainly.
Well, do you mind your Business -- and I'll speak to the Cook to shew his Genius --
, bid the Cook attend me To-morrow Morning, on special Affairs --
I shall, my Lord.
I'll lay you,, Five Six-pences to Three, that my Lord wins his Bett with his Honour.
Done with you-- I'll take your Half Crown to Eighteen-pence --
Coming, Sir; -- I'll make it Shillings,.
No,, you've the best on't.
Coming, Sir. I'll take Five Shillings to Two.
Coming, Sir. --
Coming, Sir. -- No, Five to Three.
Shillings? -- Coming, Sir.
No -- Sixpences --
Done -- Sixpences.
Here, Sir.
And done.
Coming, Sir.
Ha, ha, ha.
What a Figure! And what a Scheme.
Dear Ladies, be as merry with my Figure as you please -- Yet you shall see, this Figure, awkward as it is, shall be preferr'd in its Turn, as well as you have been.
Why will you give yourself this unnecessary Trouble, Mr., to convince these Ladies, who had rather still be deluded, and will hate your Friendship for breaking the Charm.
My dear Cousin, tho' you are satisfied, these Ladies are not; and if they have their particular Reasons for their Infidelity; pray, let 'em enjoy it, 'till they have other Proofs than your Prejudices.
Ay,, we have all our Prejudices.
What signifies reasoning, when we are going upon the Experiment? Dispose of yourselves behind those Trees, and I will repair to the Place of Appointment, and draw him hither; but you promise to contain yourselves, let what will happen. Hear, and see; but be silent. --
A severe Injunction, indeed, Ladies -- But I must to my Post.
If he's a Villain, I can never hold!
I shall tear his Eyes out.
For my Part, if I was unmarried, I should not think him worth my Anger.
But as you are, Madam --
I understand your Insinuations, Miss; but my Character and Conduct need no Justification.
I beg Pardon, Madam; I intended no Offence. -- But haste to your Posts, Ladies; the Enemy's at Hand.
For Heaven's Sake, let us be cautious -- I am sure I heard a Noise.
'Twas nothing but your Fear, my Angel! -- don't be alarm'd -- There can be no Danger, while we have Love and Darkness to befriend us.
Bless me, how my Heart beats!
Poor Soul! what a Fright it is in! -- You must not give Way to these Alarms -- Were you as well convinc'd of my Honour, as I am of your Charms, you wou'd have nothing to fear --
Upon my Word! --
So, so, so.
Hold, Sir, you must take no Liberties -- But, if you have the least Feeling for an unhappy Woman, urg'd by her Passion to this imprudent Step, assist me -- forgive me -- let me go.
Can you doubt my Honour? Can you doubt my Love? What Assurances can I give you to abate your Fears?
Very slender Ones, I can assure her.
I deserve to suffer all I feel -- For what, but the most blinded Passion, cou'd induce me to declare myself to one, whose Amours and Infidelities are the common Topic of Conversation.
Flattering Creature!
-- May I never know your dear Name, see your charming Face, touch your soft Hand, or hear your sweet Voice, if I am not more sincere in my Affection for this little Finger, than for all the Sex besides.
Except the Widow--
She! -- Do you know her, Madam;
I have not that Honour --
I thought so -- Did you never see her, Madam, nodling and gogling in her Old-fashion'd heavy Chariot, drawn by a pair of lean hackney Horses, with a fat Blackamoor Footman behind, in a scanty Livery, Red greasy Stockings, and a dirty Turban?
All which may be only a Foil to her Beauty.
Beauty! Don't sigh, Madam; she is past Forty, wears a Wig, and has lost two of her fore Teeth. -- And then, she has so long a Beard upon her upper Lip, and takes so muchSnuff, that she looks, for all the World, like thein Petticoats; ha, ha, --
What Falshood and Ingratitude!
Cou'd I descend to the Slander of the Town, there is a married Lady --
Poor Mrs., you mean --
Why am I to be mentioned! -- I have nothing to do --
Nay, nay; you must have your share of the Panegyrick.
She is young, and has Wit.
She's an Ideot, Madam; and as Fools are generally loving, she has forgot all her Obligations to old Mr., who married her without a Petticoat; and now seizes upon every young Fellow she can lay her Hands upon; she has spoil'd me three Suits of Cloaths, with tearing the Flaps and Sleeves. -- Ha, ha, ha.
Monster of Iniquity! --
She has even storm'd me in my own House; but with all my Faults, Madam, you'll never find me over-fond of Age, or Ignorance.
cou'd tear him to Pieces. --
I will tear him to Pieces.
Be quiet -- and we'll all tear him to Pieces.
He has swallow'd the Hook, and can't escape.
What do you say, Madam?
I am only sighing, Sir.
Fond Creature!
I know there are a thousand Stories about me: You have heard too of Lady, I suppose? Don't be alarm'd.
I can't help it, Sir. She is a fine Woman, and a Woman of Quality.
A fine Woman, perhaps, for a Woman of Quality -- but she is an absolute old Maid, Madam, almost as thick as she is long -- middle-aged, homely and wanton! That's her Character.
Then there is no Sincerity in Man.
Positively, you shan't stir.
Upon my Soul, I pity the poor Creature! -- She is now upon her last Legs. -- If she does not run away with some foolish Gentleman this Winter -- She'll return into the Country, and marry her Footman. -- Ha, ha, ha.
My Footman shall break his Bones, I can tell him that.
Hush, Madam! I protest, I thought I heard a Voice -- I wonder they don't come.
'Twas only I, Mr.-- I was murmuring to you.
Pretty Murmurer! -- Egad, if they don't come soon, the Lady will grow fond.
But among your Conquests, Mr., you forget Miss.
And her Cousin. -- I was coming to 'em; poor, silly, good-natur'd, loving Fools; -- I made my Addresses to one thro' Pique, and the other for Pity -- That was all.
O, that I could believe you.
Don't be uneasy, I'll tell you how it was, Madam -- You must know, there is a silly, self-sufficient Fellow, one--
So, so,
I know him a little.
I am sorry for it -- The less you know of him the better; the Fellow pretended to look fierce at me, for which I resolv'd to have his Mistress: So I threw in my Line, and without much Trouble, hook'd her. Her poor Cousin too, nibbled at the Bait, and was caught. -- So I have had my Revenge upon, and now I shall willingly resign poor, and throw him in her Cousin, for a Make-Weight. -- Ha, ha, ha!
This is some Comfort at least.
Your Ladyship is better than you was.
I vow I hear a Noise. -- What shall we do? It comes this Way.
They can't see us, my Dear. -- I wish my Friends would come.
Don't whisper or breath.
If I cou'd but catch her at her Pranks -- she certainly must be this Way -- for the Chair iswaiting at the End ofPond -- I have thrown one of her Chairmen into it -- and if I cou'd but catch her --
O, Sir! My Passion has undone me -- I am discover'd; it is my Husband, Sir, and he is looking for me --
The Devil it is! Why then, Madam, the best Way will be for you to go to him -- and let me sneak off the other Way.
Go to him, Sir! What can I say to him?
Any Thing, Madam -- say you had the Vapours, and wanted Air.
Lord, Sir! -- he is the most passionate of Mortals; and I am afraid is in Liquor too -- and then he is mad.
If I cou'd but catch her --
For your Sake, Madam, I'll make the best of my Way Home --
What! wou'd you leave me to the Fury of an enrag'd Husband! -- Is that your Affection.
If I cou'd but catch her -- Ha! what's that? I saw something move in the Dark -- the Point of my Sword shall tickle it out, whatever it is.
For Heaven's Sake draw, and fight him, while I make my Escape.
Fight him! -- 'twou'd be cowardly to fight in the Dark, and with a drunken Man -- I'll call the Sentery.
And expose us to the World?
I wou'd to Heav'n we were
--
Let me go, Madam, you pinch me to the Bone.
He won't know us -- I have my Masque on.
Ha! ha! ha!
What, is the Devil and his Imps playing at Blindman's Buff? -- Ay, ay, here he is, indeed -- Satan himself, dress'd like a fine Gentleman -- Come, Mr. Devil, out with your Pitch-fork, and let us take a Thrust or two.
You mistake me, Sir, I am not the Person -- indeed, I am not -- I know nothing of your Wife, Sir-- and if you know how little I care for the whole Sex, you wou'd not be so furious with an innocent Man.
Who are you then? -- And what are you doing with that Blackamoor Lady there -- dancing a Saraband with a Pair of Castanets? Speak, Sir!
Pray forbear, Sir; here's Company coming that will satisfie you in every Thing -- Hallo, hallo --Here, here, here;
my Lord, my my Lord --,-- Hallo!
What's the Matter here? -- Who calls for Help?
O, my Friends, I have been wishing for you this half Hour. I have been set upon by a dozen Fellows -- They have all made their Escape, but this -- My Arm is quite dead -- I have been at Cart and Tierce with 'em all, for near a Quarter of an Hour.
In Buckram, my Lord! -- He was got with my Property here, and I wou'd have chastis'd him for it, if your Coming had not prevented it.
Let us throw the Rascal intoPond.
Come Sir, can you swim?
I'll defend you, my Dear -- What, wou'd you murder a Man, and lie with his Wife too? -- Oh! you are a wicked Gentleman, Mr.
Why, the Devil's in the Woman, I think.
Ha, ha, ha! your humble Servant, Mr.-- Ha, ha, ha.
This is all Enchantment!
No, Sir, the Enchantment is broke -- and the old Maid, Sir, homely and wanton, before she retires into the Country, has the Satisfaction of knowing that the agreeable Mr.is a much more contemptible Mortal, than the Footman which his Goodness has been pleas'd to marry her to.
Ha, ha, ha.
Wou'd Mr.please to have a Pinch ofSnuff, out of theBox? 'Tis the best Thing in the World for low Spirits.
Ha, ha, ha.
If a Fool may not be permitted to speak, Mr., let her at least be permitted to laugh at so fine a Gentleman -- Ha, ha, ha.
Were you as sensible of Shame, as you are of Fear, the Sight of me, whom you lov'd for Pity, wou'd be Revenge sufficient -- But I can forgive your Baseness to me, much easier than I can myself, for my Behaviour to this happy Couple.
Who the Devil are they?
The Marquis and Marchioness of, Ladies -- Ha ha.
Ha!, il Signior!
How!and! -- If I don't wake soon, I shall wish never to wake again.
Who bids fairest now forPond?
What, in the Name of Wonder, is all this Business? I don't understand it.
Nor I neither; but 'tis very drole, faith.
The Mystery will clear in a Moment.
Don't give yourself any Trouble, Mr., Things are pretty clear as they are -- The Night's cool, and my Cousin, here, is an Invalid -- If you please, another Time, when there is less Company,
-- The Ladies are pleas'd to be merry, and you are pleas'd to be a little angry; and so, for the Sake of Tranquility -- I'll go to the Opera.
This is a fine blow-up, indeed! Ladies, your humble Servant -- Hallo!.
I'll lay you a Hundred, that my Cousin never intrigues again --Don't run -- hugh, hugh --
As my Satisfaction is compleat, I have none to ask of Mr.. I forgive his Behaviour to me, as it has hasten'd and confirm'd my Happiness here;
-- But as a Friend to you, Ladies, I shall insist
upon his making you ample Satisfaction -- However,
this Benefit will arise, that you will hereafter equally
detest and shun these Destroyers of your
Reputation --<|endoftext|>Once more I am got safe to the-- let me reflect a little -- I have set up all Night. I have my Head full of bad Wine, and the Noise of Oaths, Dice, and the damn'd tingling of Tavern Bells; my Spirits jaded, and my Eyes sunk into my Head: and all this for the Conversation of a Company of Fellows I despise. Their Wit lies only in Obscenity, their Mirth in Noise, and their Delight in a Box and Dice. Honest, take my Word for it, thou art a mighty silly Fellow.
Where have you been, Rascal? If I had not had the Key in my Pocket, I must have waited at the Door in this dainty Dress.
I was only below combing out your Honour's Wig.
Well, give me my Cap -- Why, how like a raking Dog do you look, compar'd to that spruce, sober Gentleman -- Go, you batter'd Devil, and be made fit to be seen.
Cod, my Master's very merry this Morning.
And now for the Law.
Honestwas a Man after my own Heart.
Have you been for the Money this Morning, as I order'd you?
No, Sir, you bad me go before you was up -- I did not know your Honour meant before you went to Bed.
None of your Jokes, I pray; but to Business -- Go to the Coffee-house, and enquire if there has been any Letter or Message left for me.
I shall, Sir.
Oh, that I had such a soft, deceitful Fair to lull my Senses to their desir'd Sleep --
Come in.
Oh, Master, is it you? How long have you been in Town?
Just come, Sir, and but for a little time neither; and yet I have as many Messages as if we were to stay the whole Year round. Here they are, all of them.
And among them one for your Honour.
Clarinda'sRanger,. -- Ha! ha! ha! the same merry Girl I ever knew her.
My Lady is never sad, Sir.
Pr'ythee,, open the Door.
Well, Child -- and who are you?
Sir, my Mistress gives her Service to you, and has sent you home the Linnen you bespoke.
Well,, my Service to your Lady, and let her know I will most certainly wait upon her -- I am a little busy,-- and so --
Ah, you're a Wag, Master, you're a Wag -- but Mum for that!
I swear, my Dear, you have the prettiest pair of Eyes -- the loveliest pouting Lips -- I never saw you before.
No, Sir -- I was always in the Shop.
Was you so? Well, and what does your Mistress say? -- The Devil fetch me, Child, you look'd so prettily, that I could not mind one Word you said.
Lard, Sir, you are such another Gentleman! Why, she says she is sorry she could not send them sooner. Shall I lay them down?
No, Child. Give 'em me! Dear little smiling Angel --
I beg, Sir, you would be civil.
Civil? Egad, I think I am very civil.
Sir, Mr..
Damn your Impertinence -- Oh, Mr., your Servant.
What shall I say to my Mistress?
Bid her make half a dozen more; but besure you bring them home yourself.
Pshah! Pox! Mr., how should you like to be serv'd so yourself.
How can you,, for a Minute's Pleasure, give an innocent Girl the Pain of Heart I am confident she felt? -- There was a modest Blush upon her Cheek convinces me she was honest.
May be so. I was resolv'd to try, however.
Fy,, -- will you never think?
Yes, but I can't be always thinking. The Law is a damnable dry Study, Mr., and without something now and then to amuse, and relax, it would be too much for my Brain, I promise ye -- But I am a mighty sober Fellow grown -- Here have I been at it these three Hours -- but the Wenches will never let me alone --
Three Hours! -- Why, do you usually study in such Shoes and Stockings?
Rat your inquisitive Eyes.Egad, you have me! The Truth is, I am but this Moment return'd from the Tavern. What,here too!
My Boy, I am heartily glad to see you., let me embrace you. You are the Person I want. I have been at your Lodgings, and was directed hither.
It is to him then I am oblig'd for this Visit: But with all my Heart -- He is the only Man, to whom I don't care how much I am oblig'd.
Your very humble Servant, Sir.
You know,, I want no Inducement to be with you. But -- You look sadly -- What -- No merciless Jade has -- Has she?
No, no. Sound as a Roach, my Lad. I only got a little too much Liquor last Night, which I have not slept off yet.
Thus,, it is every Day. All the Morning his Head akes, at Noon he begins to clear up, towards Evening he is good Company, and all Night he is carefully providing for the same Course the next Day.
Why, I must own, my ghostly Father, I did relapse a little last Night, just to furnish out a decent Confession for the Day.
And he is now doing Penance for it. Were you his Confessor indeed, you could not well desire more.
, he sets up for a Confessor with the worst Grace in the World. Here has he been reproving me for being but decently civil to my Millener. Plague! because the Coldness of his Constitution makes him insensible of a fine Woman's Charms, every body else must be so too.
I am no less sensible of their Charms than you are; tho' I cannot kiss every Woman I meet, or fall in Love, as you call it, with every Face which has the Bloom of Youth upon it. I would only have you a little more frugal of your Pleasures.
My dear Friend, this is very pretty talking. But let me tell you, it is in the Power of the very first Glance from a fine Woman utterly to disconcert all your Philosophy.
It must be from a fine Woman then: and not such as are generally reputed so -- And it must be a thorough Acquaintance with her too, that will ever make an Impression on my Heart.
Would I could see it once! For when a Man has been all his Life hoarding up a Stock, without allowing himself common Necessaries, it tickles me to the Soul to see him lay it all out upon a wrong Bottom, and become a Bankrupt at last.
Well, I don't care how soon you see it. For the Minute I find a Woman capable of Friendship, Love, and Tenderness, with Good-sense enough to be alwayseasy, and Good-nature enough to like me: I will immediately put it to the Trial, which of us shall have the greatest Share of Happiness from the Sex, You or I.
By marrying her, I suppose! Capable of Friendship, Love, and Tenderness, ha, ha, ha! That a Man of your Sense should talk so. If she be capable of Love 'tis all I require of my Mistress; and as every Woman, who is young, is capable of Love, I am very reasonably in Love with every young Woman I meet. -- My Lord, in a Case I read this very Morning, speaks my very Sense.
My Lord!
Yes,Lord! What he says of one Woman, I say of the whole Sex.
There is no arguing with so great a Lawyer. Suppose therefore we adjourn the Debate to some other time. I have some serious Business with Mr., and you want Sleep I am sure.
Sleep! mere Loss of Time, and Hindrance of Business -- We Men of Spirit, Sir, are above it.
Whither shall we go?
Into the. My Chariot is at the Door.
Then if my Servant calls, you'll send him after us.
I will.
Compliments-- A pox of this Head of mine! Never once to ask where she was to be found. It's plain she is not one of us, or I shou'd not have been so remiss in my Inquiries. -- No matter -- I shall meet her in my Walks.
There is no Letter nor Message, Sir.
Then my Things, to dress.
Good-morrow, my dear.
Good-morrow to you, Madam. I have brought my Work, and intend to sit with you this Morning. I hope you have got the better of your Fatigue. Where is? I should be glad if she wou'd come, and work with us.
She work! she is too fine a Lady to do any thing. She is not stirring yet -- we must let her have her Rest. People of her waste of Spirits require more time to recruit again.
It is pity she should be ever tir'd with what is so agreeable to every body else. I am prodigiously pleas'd with her Company.
And when you are better acquainted, you will be still more pleas'd with her. You must rally her upon her Partner at: for, I fancy, Part of her Rest has been disturb'd on his Account.
Was he really a pretty Fellow?
That I can't tell. I did not dance myself, and so did not much mind him. You must have the whole Story from herself.
Oh, I warrant ye, I get it all out. None are so proper to make Discoveries in Love as those who are in the Secret themselves.
Madam, Mr.is inquiring for you. Here has been Mr.with a Letter from his Master, which has made him very angry.
Mr.said indeed he would try him once more, but I fear it will prove in vain. Tell your MasterI am here.
What signifies Fortune, when it only makes us Slaves to other People?
Do not be uneasy, my. You shall always find a Friend in me: But as for Mr., I know not what ill Temper hangs about him lately. Nothing satisfies him. You saw how he receiv'd us when we came off our Journey; tho'was so good Company. He was barely civil to her, and downright rude to me.
I cannot help saying I did observe it.
I saw you did. Hush! he's here.
Oh, your Servant, Madam! Here, I have receiv'd a Letter from Mr., wherein he desires I would once more hear what he has to say -- You know my Sentiments -- Nay, so does he.
For Heaven's sake consider, Sir. This is no new Affair, no sudden start of Passion -- We have known each other long. My Father valued and lov'd him, and I am sure were he alive, I should have his Consent.
Don't tell me. Your Father would not have you marry against his Will; neither will I, against mine: I am your Father now.
And you take a fatherly Care of me.
I wish I had never had any thing to do with you
You may easily get rid of the Trouble.
By listening, I suppose, to the young Gentleman's Proposals.
Which are very reasonable in my Opinion.
Oh, very modest ones truly; and a very modest Gentleman it is that proposes them! A Fool, to expect a Lady of Thirty Thousand Pounds Fortune should, by the Care and Prudence of her Guardian, be thrown away upon a young Fellow not worth three Hundred a Year. He thinks being in Love is an Excuse for all this; but I am not in Love. What does he think will excuse me?
Well, but Mr., I think the Gentleman should be heard.
Well, well! Seven o'Clock's the time, and if the Man has had the good Fortune, since I saw him last, to persuade somebody, or other, to give him a better Estate, I give him my Consent -- not else. His Servant waits below. You may tell him I shall be at home
But where is your Friend, your other Half, all this while? I thought you could not have breath'd a Minute without your.
Why, the Truth is, I was going to see what makes her keep her Chamber so long.
Look ye, Mrs., you have been asking me for Money this Morning. In plain Terms, not one Shilling shall pass through these Fingers till you have clear'd my House of this.
How can her innocent Gaiety have offended you? She is a Woman of Honour, and has as many good Qualities --
As Women of Honour generally have. I know it, and therefore am uneasy.
But, Sir, --
But, Madam, --, nor e'er a Rake of fashion in, shall live in my Family to debauch it.
Sir, she treated me with so much Civility in the Country, that I thought I could not do less than invite her to spend as much time with me in Town, as her Engagements would permit. I little imagin'd you could have been displeas'd at my having so agreeable a Companion.
There was a Time when I was Company enough for leisure Hours.
There was a Time when every Word of mine was sure of meeting with a Smile: But those happy Days, I know not why, have long been over.
I cannot bear a Rival, even of your own Sex. I hate the very Name of female Friends. No twoof you can ever be an Hour by yourselves, but one or both are the worse for it.
Dear Mr.--
This I know -- and will not suffer.
It grieves me, Sir, to see you so much in earnest: But to convince you how willing I am to make you easy in every thing, it shall be my Request to her to remove immediately.
Do it then -- hark ye? -- Your Request, why yours? It's mine. -- My Command -- Tell her so -- I will be Master in my own Family, and I care not who knows it.
You fright me, Sir. -- But it shall be as you please.
Ha! have I not gone too far? I am not Master of myself -- Mrs.--
Understand me right. I do not mean, by what I have said, that I suspect your Innocence: But by crushing this growing Friendship all at once, I may prevent a Train of Mischief which you do not foresee. I was perhaps too harsh, therefore do it in your own way -- But let me see the House fairly rid of her.
His Earnestness in this Affair amazes me. I am sorry I made this Visit to-- and yet I'll answer for her Honour. -- What can I say to her? Necessity must plead in my Excuse -- For at all Events, Mr.must be obey'd.
Now,, I may unfold the Secret of my Heart to you with greater Freedom; for tho'has Honour, I am not in a Humour to be laugh'd at. I must have one, that will bear with my Impertinence,sooth me into Hope, and, like a Friend indeed, with Tenderness advise me.
I thought you appeared more grave than usual.
Oh!, my Soul is so full of Joy, of Pain, Hope, Despair, and Extasy, that no Word but Love is capable of expressing what I feel.
Is Love the Secretis not fit to hear? In my mind, he wou'd prove the more able Counsellor. And is all the gay Indifference of my Friend at last reduced to Love?
Even so -- Never was Prude more resolute in Chastity and Ill-nature, than I was fix'd in Indifference: But Love has rais'd me from that inactive State above the Being of a Man.
Faith,, I begin to think it has -- But pray, bring this Rapture into order a little, and tell me regularly, how, where, and when.
If I was not most unreasonably in Love, those horrid Questions would stop my Mouth at once. But as I am arm'd against Reason -- I answer -- at-- on, she danced and caught me.
Danced? -- and was that all? But who is she? What is her Name? her Fortune? where does she live?
Hold! hold! not so many hard Questions. Have a little Mercy. I know but little of her, that's certain. But all I do know you shall have. That Evening was the first of her appearing at. The Moment I saw her I resolved to ask the Favour of her Hand. But the easy Freedom with which she gave it, and her unaffected Good-humour during the whole Night, gain'd such a Power over my Heart, as none of her Sex could ever boast before. I waited on her home, and the next Morning, when I went to make the usual Compliments, the Bird was flown. She had set out fortwo Hours before; and in a Chariot and Six -- you Rogue.
But was it her own,?
That I don't know; but it looks better than being drag'd to Town in the Stage. That day and the next I spent in Enquiries. I waited on the Ladies who came with her. They knew nothing of her. So, without learning either her Name or Fortune, I e'en call'd for my Boots, and rode Post after her.
And how do you find yourself after your Journey?
Why, as yet, I own, I am but upon a cold Scent. But a Woman of her Sprightliness and Gentility cannot but frequent all publick Places; and when once she is found, the Pleasure of the Chace will overpay the Pains of rousing her. -- Oh!, there was something peculiarly charming in her, that seem'd to claim my farther Acquaintance: and if in the other more familiar Parts of Life she shine with that superior Lustre; and at last I win her to my Arms, how shall I bless my Resolution in pursuing her!
But if at last she should prove unworthy --
I would endeavour to forget her.
Promise me that,,
and I allow -- But we are interrupted.
Whom have we here? my old Friend? Thou art grown a meer Antique since I saw thee? How hast thou done these five hundred Years?
Even as you see me; well, and at your Service, ever.
Ha! who's that?
A Friend of mine. Mr., this is, Sir, as honest a Fellow as any in Life.
Pho! prithee! Pox!-- Don't be silly -- Sir, I am your humble -- Any one who is a Friend of myI am proud of embracing.
Sir, I shall endeavour to deserve your Civility.
Oh! Sir, -- Well!, what? Dumb? Come, come; you may talk tho' you have nothing to say, as I do -- Let us hear, where have you been?
Why, for this last Week,, I have been at.
! the most ridiculous Place in Life! -- amongst Tradesmens Wives that hate their Husbands, and People of Quality that had rather go to the Devil than stay at home. People of no Taste -- no-- and for. If it were not for the Puppet-show,would be dead amongst them. -- But the News,, -- the Ladies, -- I fear, your Time hung heavy on your Hands, by the small Stay you made there.
Faith, and so it did,. The Ladies are grown such Idiots in Love -- The Cards have so debauch'd their five Senses, that Love, almighty Love himself, is utterly neglected.
It is the strangest thing in Life, but it is just so with us abroad. Faith!To tell you a Secret, which I don't care, if all the World knows. I am almost surfeited with the Services of the Ladies; the modest ones I mean. The vast Variety of Duties they expect -- as dressing up to the Fashion, losing fashionably, keeping fashionable Hours, drinking fashionable Liquors, and fifty other such irregular Niceties so ruin a Man's Pocket and Constitution, that foregad! he must have the Estate of a Duke, and the Strength of a Gondolier, who would lift himself into their Service!
A free Confession truly,, for one of your Coat.
The Ladies are oblig'd to you.
Oh! Lard!I have had the greatest Misfortune in Life, since I saw you -- Poor! that I brought fromwith me, is dead.
Well! well! get you another, and all will be well again.
No! the Rogue broke me so much, and gnaw'dmyLeather Shoes so filthily, that when he was dead, I began not to endure him.
Exactly at Seven! Run back, and assure him I will not fail.
Dead? Pray, who was the Gentleman?
This Gentleman was my Monkey, Sir, -- an odd sort of a Fellow that used to divert me, -- and pleased every body so at, that he always made one in our-- But Mr., I saw a Servant, I hope no Engagement. For you two positively shall dine with me. I have the finestin Life. Oblige me so far.
Sir -- your Servant! what say you,?
Pho! Pox!! you shall go. My Aunts think you begin to neglect them; and old Maids, you know, are the most jealous Creatures in Life.
swears they can't be Maids, they are so good-natur'd! Well! I agree, on Condition I may eat what I please, and go away just when I will.
Ay! ay! you shall do just what you will. But how shall we do? My Post-Chaise won't carry us all.
My Chariot is here: and I will conduct Mr..
Mr.-- I beg pardon, I can't possibly dine out of Town! I have an Engagement early in the Evening. --
Out of Town! No, my Dear; I live just by. I see one of the, I would not miss speaking to for the Universe. And so I expect you at Three.
Ha! ha! ha! and so you thought you had at least fifty Miles to go Post for a Spoonful of.
I suppose then, he is just come out of the Country.
Nor that neither. I would venture a Wager, from his own House hither; or to an Auction or two of old dirty Pictures, is the utmost of his Travels to-day: Or he may have been in Pursuit, perhaps of a new Cargo, ofTooth-picks.
A special Acquaintance I have made to-day.
For all this,, he has a Heart worthy your Friendship. He spends his Estate freely, and you cannot oblige him more, than by shewing him how he can be of Service to you.
Now you say something. It is the Heart,, I value in a Man.
Right! -- and there is a Heart even in a Woman's Breast that is worth the Purchase, or my Judgment has deceiv'd me. Dear, I know your Concern for me. See her first, and then blame me, if you can.
So far from blaming you,, that if my Endeavours can be serviceable, I will beat the Bushes with you.
That I am afraid will not do. For you know less of her than I. But if in your Walks you meet a finer Woman than ordinary, let her not escape till I have seen her. -- Wheresoe'er she is, she cannot long lie hid.
Ay! ay we both stand condemn'd out of our own Mouths.
Why -- I cannot but own -- I never had a thought of any Man that troubled me, but of him.
Then I dare swear, by this time, you heartily repent your leavingso soon.
Indeed you are mistaken. I have not had one Scruple since.
Why, what one Inducement can he have ever to think of you again?
Oh! the greatest of all Inducements, Curiosity. Let me assure you, a Woman's surest Hold over a Man is to keep him in Incertainty. As soon as ever you put him out of Doubt, you put him out of your Power: But when once a Woman has awak'd his Curiosity, she may lead him a Dance of many a troublesome Mile without the least Fear of losing him at last.
Now do I heartily wish he may have Spirit enough to follow, and use you as you deserve. Such a Spirit, with but a little Knowledge of our Sex, might put that Heart of yours into a strange Flutter.
I care not how soon. I long to meet with such a Fellow. Our modern Beaux are such jointed Babies in Love, they have no Feeling. They are entirely insensible either of Pain or Pleasure, but from their own dear Persons: And according as we flatter, or affront their Beauty, they admire or forsake ours. They are not worthy even our Displeasure; and, in short, abusing them is but so much ill-nature merely thrown away. But the Man of Sense, who values himself upon his high Abilities: Or the Man of Wit, who thinks a Woman beneath his Conversation -- To see such the Subjects of our Power, the Slaves of our Frowns and Smiles, is glorious indeed!
No Men of Sense, or Wit either, if they be truly so, ever did, or ever can think a Woman of Merit beneath their Wisdom to converse with.
Nor will such a Woman value herself upon making such a Lover uneasy.
Amazing! Why, every Woman can give Ease? You cannot be in earnest.
I can assure you she is, and has put in practice the Doctrine she has been teaching.
Impossible! Who ever heard the Name of Love mention'd without an Idea of Torment? But pray let us hear.
Nay, there is nothing to hear that I know of.
So I suspected, indeed! The Novel is not likely to be long, when the Lady is so well prepar'd for the.
The Novel, as you call it, is not so short as you may imagine. I and my Spark have been long acquainted. As he was continually with my Father, I soon perceiv'd he lov'd me, and the Manner of his expressing that Love was what pleas'd and won me most.
Well! and how was it? The old Bait? Flattery? Dear Flattery, I warrant ye.
No, indeed, -- I had not the Pleasure of hearing my Person, Wit, and Beauty painted out with forced Praises; but I had a more sensible Delight in perceiving the Drift of his whole Behaviour was to make ev'ry Hour of my Time pass away agreably.
The Rustick! What, did he never say a handsom thing of your Person?
He did, it seems, what pleas'd her better. He flatter'd her good Sense as much as a less cunning Lover would have done her Beauty.
On my Conscience, you are well match'd.
So well, that if my Guardian denies me Happiness, (and this Evening he is to pass his final Sentence) nothing is left but to break my Prison, and fly into my Lover's Arms for Safety.
Hey Day! O' my Conscience thou art a brave Girl. Thou art the very first Prude, that ever had Honesty enough to avow her Passion for a Man.
And thou art the first finish'd Coquet who ever had any Honesty at all.
Come, come! You are both too good for either of those Characters.
And my dear Mrs., here is the first young married Woman of Spirit, who has an ill-natur'd Fellow for a Husband, and never once thinks of using him as he deserves. -- Good Heaven! If I had such a Husband --
You would be just as unhappy as I am.
But come now -- Confess -- Do not you long to be a Widow?
Would I were any thing but what I am!
Then go the nearest Way about it. I'd break that stout Heart of his in less than a Fortnight. I'd make him know --
Pray be silent. You know my Resolution.
I know you have no Resolution.
You are a mad Creature, but I forgive you.
It is all meant kindly, I assure you. But since you won't be persuaded to your Good; I will think of making you easy in your Submission as ever I can, I dare say, I may have the same Lodging I had last Year. I can know immediately -- I see my Chair: And so Ladies both, adieu!
Come, Mrs., we shall but just have time to get home before Mr.comes.
Let us return then to our common Prison. You must forgive my Ill-nature,, if I almost wish Mr.may refuse to join your Hand where your Heart is given.
Lord! Madam, what do you mean?
Self-interest only, Child! Methinks your Company in the Country would soften all my Sorrows, and I could bear them patiently.
Dear Mrs.-- I am so confus'd, and so out of Breath --
Why, what is the Matter?
I protest you fright me.
Oh! I have no time to recover myself, I am so frighten'd and so pleas'd. In short then, the dear Man is here?
Here -- Lord -- Where?
I met him this Instant. I saw him at a Distance, turn'd short; and ran hither directly. Let us go home. I tell you, he follows me.
Why, had you not better stay, and let him speak to you?
Ay! But -- then -- He won't know where I live, without my telling him.
Come, then. Ha! ha! ha!
Ah! Poor! --
Sure that must be she! Her Shape and easy Air cannot be so exactly copied by another. -- Now, you young Rogue,, guide me directly to her, as you would the surest Arrow in your Quiver.
Lord! -- Dear-- for Heaven's sake make haste. He'll overtake us before we get in.
Overtake us? Why, he is not in Sight.
Is not he? Ha! sure I have not dropt my Twee -- I would not have him lose Sight of me neither.
Here he is --
In -- In -- In then.
What, without your Twee?
Pshah! I have lost nothing. -- In -- I'll follow you.
It is impossible I should be deceiv'd: My Eyes, and the quick Pulses at my Heart assure me it is she. Ha!'tis she, by Heaven! and the Door left open too -- A fair Invitation, by all the Rules of Love --
I hope, Madam, you will excuse the Boldness of this Intrusion, since it is owing to your own Behaviour that I am forc'd to it.
To my Behaviour, Sir?
You cannot but remember me at, Madam, where I so lately had the Favour of your Hand --
I do remember, Sir; but I little expected any wrong Interpretation of my Behaviour from one, who had so much Appearance of a Gentleman.
What I saw of your Behaviour was so just, it would admit of no Misinterpretation. I only fear'd, whatever Reason you had to conceal your Name from me at, you might have the same to do it now; and tho' my Happiness was so nearly concern'd, I rather chose to venture thus abruptly after you, than be impertinently inquisitive.
Sir, there seems to be so much Civility in your Rudeness, that I can easily forgive it; tho' I don't see how your Happiness is at all concern'd.
No, Madam! I believe you are the only Lady, who could, with the Qualifications you are Mistress of, be insensible of the Power they give you over the Happiness of our Sex.
How vain should we Women be, if you Gentlemen were but wise! If you did not all of you say the same things to every Woman, we shou'd certainly be foolish enough to believe some of you were in earnest.
Could you have the last Sense of what I feel whilst I am speaking, you would know me to be inearnest, and what I say to be the Dictates of a Heart that admires you. May I not say --
Sir, this is carrying the --
When I danced with you at, I was charm'd with your whole Behaviour, and felt the same tender Admiration: But my Hope of seeing you afterwards kept in my Passion 'till a more proper Time should offer. You cannot therefore blame me now, if, after having lost you once, I do not suffer an inexcusable Modesty to prevent my making use of this second Opportunity.
This Behaviour, Sir, is so different from the Gaiety of your Conversation then, that I am at a loss how to answer you.
There is nothing, Madam, which could take off from the Gaiety with which your Presence inspires every Heart, but the Fear of losing you. How can I be otherwise than as I am, when I know not, but you may leaveas abruptly as you did?
Madam, the Tea is ready, and my Mistress waits for you.
Very well, I come --
You see, Sir, I am call'd away; but I hope you will excuse it, when I leave you with an Assurance, that the Business which brings me to Town will keep me here some time.
How generous it is in you thus to ease the Heart, that knew not how to ask for such a Favour -- I fear to offend -- But this House, I suppose, is yours.
You will hear of me, if not find me here.
I then take my Leave.
I'm undone! -- He has me!
Well! How do you find yourself?
I do find -- that if he goes on, as he has begun, I shall certainly have him without giving him the least Uneasiness.
A very terrible Prospect, indeed!
But I must teize him a little. -- Where is? How will she laugh at me, if I become a Pupil of hers, and learn to give Ease? No! positively I shall never do it.
Poorhas met with what I fear'd, from Mr.Temper -- An utter Denial. I know not why, but he really grows more and more ill-natur'd.
Well! now do I heartily wish my Affairs were in his Power a little, that I might have a few Difficulties to surmount. -- I love Difficulties -- and yet, I don't know, it is as well as it is.
Ha, ha, ha! Come, the Tea waits.
These Doings in my House distract me! I met a fine Gentleman -- when I inquir'd who he was; why, he came to. I met a Footman too, and he came to. I shall not be easy till she is decamp'd. My Wife had the Character of a virtuous Woman -- and they have not been long acquainted. But then they were by themselves at! That hurts -- that hurts. -- They must be watch'd -- they must -- I know them, I know all their Wiles, and the best of them are but Hypocrites. Ha! --
Suppose I bribe the Maid -- She is of their Counsel -- The Manager of their Secrets -- It shall be so -- Money will do it, and I shall know all that passes.
Sir.
Sir. If he should suspect, and search me now, I'm undone.
She is a sly Girl, and may be serviceable.
, you are a good Girl, and have an honest Face. I like it. It looks as if it carried no Deceit in it -- Yet if she should be false, she can do me most harm.
Pray, Sir, speak out.
No! she is a Woman, and it is the highest Imprudence to trust her.
I am not able to understand you.
I am glad of it. I would not have you understand me.
Then what did you call me for? If he should be in Love with my Face, it would be rare Sport.
, ay,is the proper Person --, tellI want him.
Yes, Sir. --
Mighty odd, this! It gives me time however to sendwith this Letter to his Master.
Could I but be once well satisfied that my Wife had really finish'd me, I believe I should be as quiet, as if I were sure of the contrary. -- But whilst I am in doubt, I am miserable.
Does your Honour please to want me?
Ay,. -- I need not fear. The Honesty of his Service and the Goodness of his Look make me secure. I will trust him.
--, I think I have been a tolerable good Master to you.
Yes, Sir, -- very tolerable.
I like his Simplicity well. It promises Honesty -- I have a Secret,, to impart to you -- A thing of the greatest Importance. Look upon me, and don't stand picking your Fingers.
Yes, Sir. -- No, Sir.
But will not his Simplicity expose him the more toCunning? Yes, yes! she will worm the Secret out of him. I had better trust her with it at once. -- So -- I will.
, go, sendhither.
Yes, Sir. -- Here she is.
, my Master wants you.
Get you down,.
Yes, Sir.
If you want me, Sir, I beg you would make haste, for I have a thousand things to do.
Well! well! What I have to say will not take up much time, could I but persuade you to be honest.
Why, Sir, I hope you don't suspect my Honesty?
Well! well! I believe you honest.
What can be at the bottom of all this?
So! We cannot be too private. Come hither, Hussy! nearer yet.
Laud! Sir! You are not going to be rude. I vow, I will call out.
Hold your Tongue. Does the Baggage laugh at me?
She does -- She mocks me, and will reveal it to my Wife; and her Insolence upon it will be more insupportable to me than Cuckoldom itself. I have not Leisure now,-- Some other time -- Hush! Did not the Bell ring? Yes, yes; my Wife wants you. Go, go, go to her.
There is no Hell on Earth like being a Slave to Suspicion.
Nay, nay, I would not put your Family into any Confusion.
None in Life, my Dear, I assure you. I will go and order every thing this Instant for her Reception.
You are too obliging, Sir; but you need not be in this hurry, for I am in no Certainty when I shall trouble you: I only know that myhas taken such a Resolution.
Therefore we should be prepar'd; for when once a Lady has such a Resolution in her Head, she is upon the rack till she executes it, foregad! Mr., this must be a Girl of Fire.
Tol de rol, lol!
Who is this you talk thus rapturously of?
Who should it be, but -- I shall know her Name to Morrow.
What is the matter, ho! Is the Man mad?
Even so, Gentlemen, as mad as Love and Joy can make me.
But inform us whence this Joy proceeds.
Joy! Joy! my Lads! She's found! My! My Charmer!
Egad! her Charms have bewitch'd the Man I think. -- But who is she?
Come, come, tell us, who is this Wonder?
But will you say nothing?
Nothing, as I live.
Nor you?
I'll be as silent as the Grave --
With a Tombstone upon it, to tell every one whose Dust you carry.
I'll be as secret as a debauch'd Prude --
Whose Sanctity every one suspects., 'tis not in thy Nature. Keeping a Secret is worse to thee than keeping thy Accounts. But to leave fooling, listen to me, both, that I may whisper it into your Ears, that Echo may not catch the sinking Sound -- I cannot tell who she is, 'faith -- Tol do rol, lol --
Mad! mad! very mad!
All I know of her is, that she is a charming Woman, and has given me liberty to visit her again --, 'tis she, the lovely she.
So I did suppose.
Poor! For Heaven's sake, Mr., persuade him home to his Chamber -- Whilst I prepare every thing for you at home.
Adieu! -- B'ye! ha, ha, ha!
Oh, Love! thou art a Gift worthy of a God indeed! Dear, nothing now could add to my Pleasure, but to see my Friend as deep in Love as I am.
I shew my Heart is capable of Love, by the Friendship it bears to you.
The Light of Friendship looks but dim before the brighter Flame of Love. Love is the Spring of Chearfulness and Joy. Why, how dull and phlegmatick do you shew to me now? Whilst I am all Life; light as feather'd. -- You dull, and cold as Earth and Water; I light and warm as Air and Fire. -- Those are the only Elements in Love's World! Why,, for Shame! get thee a Mistress, and be sociable.
, I am now going to --
Why that Face now? Your humble Servant, Sir. My Flood of Joy shall not be stopt by your melancholy Fists, I assure you.
Stay,, I beg you stay. What would you say now, if I really were in Love?
Why, faith, thou hast such romantick Notions of Sense and Honour, that I know not what to say.
To confess the Truth then, I am in Love.
And do you confess it as if it were a Sin? Proclaim it loud. -- Glory in it -- Boast of it as your greatest Virtue. -- Swear it with a Lover's Oath, and I will believe you.
Why then, by the bright Eyes of her I love?
Well said!
By all that's tender, amiable, and soft in Woman --
Bravo!
I swear, I am as true anas ever tagg'd a Rhyme.
And art thou then thoroughly in Love? Come to my Arms, thou dear Companion of my Joys --
Why -- Hey! -- Is there never a Wench to be got for Love or Money?
Pshah!here!
Yes,is here, and perhaps does not come so impertinently as you may imagine. Faith! I think I have the knack of finding out Secrets. Nay, never look so queer -- Here is a Letter, Mr., that seems to promise you better Diversion than your hugging one another.
What do you mean?
Do you deal much in these Paper Tokens?
Oh! the dear kind Creature! It is from her herself.
What, is it a Pair of lac'd Shoes she wants? Or have the Boys broke her Windows?
Hold your prophane Tongue!
Nay, prithee, don't keep it to yourself, as if her whole Affections were contain'd in these few Lines.
Prithee, let him alone to his silent Raptures: But it is, as I always said -- Your grave Men ever are the greatest Whore-masters.
I cannot be disoblig'd now, say what you will. But how came this into your Hands?
Your Servantand I chang'd Commissions. He went on my Errand, and I came on his.
S'death! I want him this very Instant.
He will be here presently! But I demand to know what I have brought you?
Ay! ay! Out with it! You know we never blab, and may be of Service.
Twelve o'Clock! oh! the dear Hour.
Why, it is a pretty convenient Time, indeed.
By all that's happy, she promises in this Letter here -- to leave her Guardian this very Night -- and run away with me.
How is this?
Nay, I know not how myself -- she says at the Bottom --Lucetta,, Jacintha.
Carry her to a Bagnio, and there you may lodge with her.
Why, this must be a Girl of Spirit, Faith!
And Beauty equal to her Sprightliness. I love her, and she loves me -- She has thirty Thousand to her Fortune.
The Devil she has!
And never plays at Cards. --
Nor does any one thing like any one other Woman, I suppose.
Not so, I hope, neither.
Oh!,, I never felt such Ease before. The Secret's out, and you don't laugh at me.
Laugh at thee? -- for loving a Woman of thirty thousand Pound? Thou art a most unaccountable Fellow.
How the Devil could he work her up to this? I never could have had the Face to have done it. But -- I know not how. -- There is a Degree of Assurance in you modest Gentlemen, which we impudent Fellows never can come up to --
Oh! your Servant, good Sir; you should not abuse me now,, but do all you can to assist me.
Why, look ye,, I am a damnable unlucky Fellow -- and so will have nothing to do in this Affair. I'll take care to be out of the way, so as to do you no harm. That is all I can answer for, and so Success attend you.
I cannot leave you, quite to yourself neither, for if this should prove a Round-house Affair, as I make no doubt it will, I believe I may have more Interest there than you; and so, Sir, you may hear of me at --
For shame,, the most noted Gaming-house in Town.
Forgive me this once, my Boy. I must go, Faith, to pay a Debt of Honour to some of the greatest Rascals in the Nation.
But where do you design to lodge her?
At Mr.-- He is already gone to prepare for her Reception.
The properest Place in the World. His Aunts will entertain her with Honour.
And the Newness of our Acquaintance will prevent its being suspected. --, give me your Hand. This is a very critical Time --
Pho! none of your musty Reflexions now! When a Man is in Love to the very Brink of Matrimony, what the Devil has he to do withand? Here is your Servant with a Face full of Business -- I'll leave you together -- I shall be at the, where, if you want my Assistance, you may find me.
So -- Buckle -- you seem to have your Hands full.
Not fuller than my Head, Sir, I promise you. You have had your Letter, I hope.
Yes, and in it she refers me to you for my Instructions.
Why, the Affair stands thus -- As Mr.sees the Doors lock'd and barr'd every Night himself, and takes the Keys up with him; it is impossible for us to escape any way but thro' the Window: for which Purpose I have a Ladder of Ropes.
Good --
And because a Hoop, as the Ladies wear them now, is not the most decent Dress to come down a Ladder in -- I have in this other Bundle a Suit of Boys Cloaths, which I believe will fit her. At least, it will serve the Time she will want it -- You will soon be for pulling them off, I suppose.
Why, you are in Spirits, you Rogue.
These I am now to convey to-- Have you any thing to say, Sir?
Nothing, but that I will not fail at the Hour appointed -- Bring me word to Mr.how you go on. Succeed in this, and it shall make your Fortune.
How tediously have the Minutes past these last few Hours! and the envious Rogues will fly, no Lightning quicker, when we would have them stay. -- Hold! let me not mistake. -- This is the House.
By Heaven! it is not yet the Hour -- I hear somebody coming. The Moon's so bright -- I had better not be here, 'till the happy Instant comes.
Wine is no Antidote to Love, but rather feeds the Flame. Now am I such an amorous Puppy, that I cannot walk straight Home, but must come out of my way to take a View of my Queen's Palace by Moon-light. -- Ay, here stands the Temple where my Goddess is adored! the Door opens!
Madam, Madam, hist! Madam -- How shall I make her hear? --
Who is there? -- What's the Matter? --
It is I, Madam. You must not pretend to stir 'till I give the Word -- You'll be discover'd if you do. --
What do I see! a Man. My Heart misgives me! --
My Master is below sitting up for Mrs.. He raves as if he was mad about her being out so late.
Here is some Intrigue, or other. I must see more of this, before I give further way to Love.
One Minute he is in the Street -- the next he is in the Kitchen. Now he will lock her out, and then he'll wait himself, and see what Figure she makes when she vouchsafes to venture home.
I long to have it over. Get me but once out of this House!
Cowardly Rascal! Would I were in his Place.
If I can but fix him any where, I can let you out myself. -- You have the Ladder ready in Case of Necessity.
Yes! yes!
The Ladder! This must lead to some Discovery. I shall watch you, my young Gentleman. I shall.
This Whisk is a most enticing Devil. I am afraid I am too late for Mr.sober Hours.
Ha! I hear a Noise!
No! I see a Light inWindow. You may go home.
I am safe.
Sure it must be he! Mr.-- Sir!
Does not he call to me?
Ha! who's that? I am frighted out of my Wits. -- A Man! --
Is it you?
Yes! yes! 'tis I! 'tis I!
Listen at the Door.
I will, 'tis open -- There is no Noise -- All's quiet.
Sure it is my Spark -- and talking to.
You may come down the Ladder -- quick.
Catch it then; and hold it.
I have it. Now I shall see what sort of Mettle my young Spark is made of.
With a Ladder too! I'll assure you. But I must see the end of it.
Hark! did not somebody speak!
No! no! Be not fearful -- 'Sdeath! we are discover'd.
Hist! hist! are you ready?
Yes, may I venture?
Now is your Time. He is in high Conference with his Privy-Counsellor Mr.. You may come down the Back Stairs, and I'll let you out.
I will, I will, and am heartily glad of it.
May be so -- But you and I shall have a few Words before you get off so cleanly.
How lucky it was I came homeat this Instant. I shall spoil his Sport, I believe. Do you know me, Sir?
I am amaz'd! You here! This was unexpected indeed!
Why, I believe I do come a little unexpectedly; but I shall amaze you more -- I know the whole Course of your Amour; all the Process of your mighty Passion from its first Rise --
What is all this! --
To the very Conclusion, which you vainly hope to effect this Night.
By Heaven, Madam, I know not what you mean. I came hither purely to contemplate on your Beauties.
Any Beauties, Sir, I find will serve your Turn. Did I not hear you talk to her at the Window?
Her!
Blush, blush for Shame; but be assur'd you have seen the last both ofand me.
Hear me, Madam -- She is gone. This must certainly beMistress, and I have fairly ruin'd all his Scheme. This it is to be in Luck.
Ha! A Man under the Window!
No, here she comes, and I may convey her to him.
I have at last got to you: Let's haste away -- Oh!
Be not frighten'd, Lady.
Oh! I am abus'd, betray'd!
Betray'd!
I can scarce believe it, tho' I see it. Draw --
Hear me,-- Lady.
Stay -- do not fight.
I am innocent; it is all a Mistake.
For my Sake, be quiet -- We shall be discover'd. The Family is alarm'd.
You are obey'd -- Mr., there is but one Way --
I understand you. Any time but now. You will certainly be discover'd. To-morrow -- at your Chambers. --
'Till then, farewel.
Then, when he is cool, I may be heard; and the real, tho' suspicious Account of this Matter may be believ'd. Yet amidst all this Perplexity, it pleases me to find my fairis jealous of my Love.
Where's? Search every Place.
Hark! the Cry is up -- I must be gone.
She's gone! She's lost! I am cheated! pursue her!Seek her!
Sir, all her Cloaths are in her Chamber.
Sir, Mrs.said she was in Boys Cloaths.
Ay, ay! I know it --has her -- Come along -- Pursue her.
Well! I am in great Hopes she will escape.
Never fear, Madam. The Lovers have the start of him, and I warrant, they keep it
Were Mr.ever to suspect my being privy to her Flight, I know not what might be the Consequence.
Then you had better be undressing -- He may return immediately.--
Young and beautiful.--
I have watch'd him pretty narrowly of late, and never once suspected till this Morning --
And who gave you Authority to watch his Actions, or pry into his Secrets?
I hope, Madam, you are not angry. I thought it might have been of Service to you to know my Master was jealous.
And her Husband jealous! If she does but send away the Maid, I am happy.
Leave me!
This is to meddle with other Peoples Affairs.
What a lucky Dog I am! I never made a Gentleman a Cuckold before. Now, Impudence, assist me.
Provoking! I am sure I never have deserv'd it of him.
Oh! Cuckold him by all means, Madam, I am your Man!
Oh, fy, Madam! If you squawl so cursedly, you will be discover'd.
Discover'd! What mean you, Sir? Do you come to abuse me?
I'll do my Endeavours, Madam: You can have no more.
Whence came you? How got you here?
Dear Madam, so long as I am here, what signifies how I got here, or whence I came? But that I may satisfy your Curiosity. First, as to your whence came you? I answer, out of the Street: And to your How got you here? I say, in at the Window. It stood so invitingly open, it was irresistible. But, Madam -- You was going to undress. I beg I may not incommode you.
This is the most consummate Piece of Impudence! --
For Heaven's sake, have one Drop of Pity for a poor young Fellow, who long has lov'd you.
What would the Fellow have?
Your Husband's Usage will excuse you to the World.
I cannot bear this Insolence! Help! help!
Oh! hold that clamorous Tongue! Madam, speak one Word more, and I am gone, positively gone?
Gone! So I would have you.
Lord! Madam, you are so hasty.
Shall I not speak, when a Thief, a Robber breaks into my House at Midnight? Help! help!
Ha! no one hears. Now,, assist me! Look ye, Madam, I never could make fine Speeches, and cringe, and bow, and fawn, and flatter, and lye. I havesaid more to you already, than I ever said to a Woman in such Circumstances in all my Life. But since I find you will yield to no Persuasion to your Good -- I will gently force you to be grateful.
Come, come! unbend that Brow, and look more kindly on me!
For Shame, Sir -- Thus on my Knees, let me beg for Mercy.
And thus, on mine, let me beg the same.
Take away her Sword! She'll hurt herself!
Oh! Heavens! that is my Husband's Voice!
The Devil it is!
Take away her Sword, I say; and then I can close with her.
He is upon the Stairs, now coming up. I am undone, if he sees you.
Pox on him! I must decamp then. Which Way?
Thro' this Passage into the next Chamber.
And so into the Street. With all my Heart. You may be perfectly easy, Madam. Mum's the Word. I never blab. --
I shall never leave off so, but wait till the last Moment.
So, he is gone? What could I have said, if he had been discover'd!
Once more, my pretty masculine Madam, you are welcome home. And I hope to keep you somewhat closer than I have done: for to-morrow Morning, eight o'Clock, is the latest Hour you shall stay in this lewd Town.
Oh, Sir! when once a Girl is equip'd with a hearty Resolution, it is not your Worship's Sagacity, northe great Chain at your Gate can hinder her from doing what she has a Mind.
Oh, Lord! Lord! How this Love improves a young Lady's Modesty!
Am I to blame to seek for Happiness any where, when you are resolv'd to make me miserable here!
I have this Night prevented your making yourself so; and will endeavour to do it for the future. I have you safe now, and the Devil shall not get you out of my Clutches again. I have lock'd the Doors and barr'd them, I warrant you. So, here --
Troop to your Chamber, and to Bed, whilst you are well. Go --
What's here? a Hat! A Man's Hat in my Wife's Dressing-Room!
What shall I do?
Ha! By Hell! I see 'tis true.
My Fears confound me. I dare not tell the Truth, and know not how to frame a Lye!
Mrs.! Mrs.! How came this Hat into your Chamber!
Are you that way dispos'd, my fine Lady, and will not trust me?
Speak, Wretch, speak. --
I could not have suspected this.
Why dost thou not speak?
Sir --
Guilt -- 'tis Guilt that ties your Tongue!
I must bring her off, however. -- No Chambermaid can help it. --
My Fears are just, and I am miserable -- Thou worst of Women!
I know my Innocence, and can bear this no longer.
I know you are false, -- and 'tis I who will bear my Injuries no longer.
Is not the Hat yours? Own it, Madam.
What Ground? what Cause have you for Jealousy, when you yourself can witness, your leaving me was accidental; your Return uncertain; and expected even sooner than it happen'd? The Abuse is gross and palpable.
Why, this is true!
Indeed,, I am innocent.
And yet this Hat must belong to somebody.
Dear Mrs., be not concern'd when he has diverted himself a little longer with it --
Ha! --
I suppose he will give me my Hat again?
Your Hat?
Yes, my Hat. You brush'd it from my Side yourself, and then trod upon it; whether on purpose to abuse this Lady, or no, you best know yourself.
It cannot be -- It's all a Lye.
Believe so still -- with all my Heart -- But the Hat is mine.
Why did she look so?
Your Violence of Temper is too much for her. You use her Ill, and then suspect her for that Confusion which you yourself occasion.
Why, did not you set me right at first?
Your hard Usage of me, Sir, is a sufficient Reason why I should not be much concern'd to undeceive you at all. 'Tis for your Lady's sake, I do it now; who deserves much better of you than to be thus expos'd for every slight Suspicion. See where she sits -- Go to her.
Indeed, Mr., I have a Soul as much above --
Whew! now you have both found your Tongues, and I must bear their eternal Rattle!
For Shame! Sir, Go to her, and --
Well! well! what shall I say? I forgive -- all is over. I, I, I forgive!
Forgive? What do you mean?
Forgive her? is that all? Consider, Sir --
Hold -- hold your confounded Tongues, and I'll do any thing. I'll ask Pardon -- or forgive -- or any thing. Good now, be quiet -- I ask your Pardon -- there --
For you, Madam -- I am infinitely oblig'd to you, and I could find in my Heart to make you a Return in kind, by marrying you to a Beggar, -- but I have more Conscience. Come, come; to your Chamber. -- Here, take this Candle -
Sir, if you please, I will light my young Lady to Bed.
No! no! no such thing, good Madam. She shall have nothing but her Pillow to consult this Night, I assure you. -- So, in, in.
Good Night, kind Madam.
Pox of the jealous Fool! We might both have escap'd out of the Window purely.
Go, get you down; and, do you hear? order the Coach to be ready in the Morning at Eight exactly.
So she is safe till to-morrow, and then for the Country; and when she is there, I can manage as I think fit.
Dear Mr.--
I am not in a Humour, Mrs., fit to talk with you. -- Go to Bed, I will endeavour to get the better of my Temper, if I can -- I'll follow you!
How despicable have I made myself!<|endoftext|>Mercy on us! why does not this Mr.come?
Oh shameful! Here's a whole Morning has been thrown away, without so much as taking one single Medicine. -- These Apothecaries are bewitch'd sure! 'Tis a horrible thing a poor Creature must be left to die for want of a Bolus. -- Oh here. -- No, 'tis my Wife. -- I thought, my Love, you had been gone into the City.
I was prevented, my Life, by an Accident, I thought it my Duty to inform you of before I went. As I pass'd byChamber, just now, I saw a young Fellow in earnest Conference with her.
How! a young Fellow with my Daughter!
Yes. The Regard I have for you and your Family, my Dear, made me endeavour to learn what they were talking of, but I could hear nothing to the purpose -- only a few luscious Expressions, and a Contrivance how to cheat the old Gentleman, as they call'd him.
LusciousExpressions, d'ye say? -- The old Gentleman! What old Gentleman? -- Who?
I can't guess, Child: Not you, to be sure, my Dear -- one should think not. But yourlittle Daughter,, was with 'em, and can tell you all.
Send her to me here, my Love; send her to me here.
I will. -- Good by t'ye, my Love, for a little while; I'll see thee again as soon as possible.
Goodby to thee, my Life.
Ah, that impudent Minx,I don't wonder now at her Obstinacy.
What would you have, Papa? My Mama told me that you wanted to speak with me.
Yes, come here -- nearer -- turn this way -- look up -- look upon me.
Well, Papa.
So!
What so, Papa?
Have you nothing to tell me?
Yes. I'll tell you the story of the, or the Fable of the.
That's not what I ask you.
What then?
Ah! you cunning Gipsy -- you know well enough what I mean.
Indeed, Papa, but I don't.
Is this the way of doing what you was bid? Did not I order you to come and tell me immediately every thing that you saw?
Yes, Papa.
And have you done so, pray?
Yes, I am come to tell you every thing I have seen.
Very well; and what have you seen to-day then?
Nothing, Papa.
Nothing!
Nothing at all.
O! I shall make you see something presently.
O dear, Papa!
You little Counterfeit, you did not tell me you saw a Man in your Sister's Chamber.
Why, my Sister forbad me, Papa; but I'll tell you every thing.
Take care you tell me the Truth then; for here's my little Finger that knows all, will tell me if you lye.
But, pray, Papa, don't let my Sister know that I told you.
No, no.
Why then, Papa, there came a Man into my Sister's Chamber as I was there; I ask'd him what he wanted; and he told me that he was her Musick-Master.
Oho! the Matter's out now. This is the Opera-monger, with his Shepherd and Shepherdess! -- Well, and what then?
My Sister came in after, and cry'd, Be gone, be gone; for Heaven's sake, be gone; I'm in Pain for you; and we shall certainly be catch'd.
What then?
Why, he would not be gone.
What did he say to her?
He said I don't know how many things to her.
Ay, but what?
He said This, and That, and T'other; that he lov'd her mightily; and that she was the prettiest Creature in the World.
And then?
Why, and then he fell upon his Knees to her.
And then?
Why, and then he kiss'd her Hands.
And then?
Why, and then he swore to be true to her, and she swore to be true to him.
And then?
Why, and then they quarrell'd a little.
Quarrell'd, did you say?
Yes, Papa.
Very well, I like that. And what then?
Why then they grew more loving than ever.
How! and what then, Hussy? and what then?
Why, and then -- they parted.
And this is all?
Yes, indeed, and indeed, Papa.
Ay, but my little Finger mutters as if there was something else. -- Hold, ay, ay, so, so; ay, my little Finger tells me that you've seen something you've not yet told me of.
Ah, Papa, your little Finger is a Storyteller.
Have a care what you say.
Pray don't believe it, Papa, for it tells Fibs, upon my Word.
Very well, very well, we shall find that. -- Get you gone, and be sure you take notice of every thing you see.
Yes, yes, Papa, I'll be sure to mind what you say.
Lack-a-day! how do these Businesses distract me! I have not so much as Leisure to mind my Indisposition. In truth, this is insupportable.
Brother, how is it? How d'ye do?
Very ill, Brother, very ill.
Very ill!
Yes, I'm so very faint, you'd hardly think it; I have not Strength so much as to speak.
Good lack! that's hard indeed. -- I am come hither, Brother, to propose a Match for my Niece.
Brother, don't speak to me of that Baggage; she's a base impertinent, saucy Quean, and I'll make her know that I am her Father.
So, so, this is mighty well; I'm glad to find your Strength return a little, and that my Visit has done you so much good. But now, Brother, I desire you'd inform me, for what Reason you would force your Daughter upon this Match, which she's so averse to?
For what Reason, Brother, am I Master of my own Family, but to do what I please in't?
My Lady, I suppose, does not fail advising you to get rid of your Children at any rate.
Ah, there's the Thing. -- My Lady, poor Woman, is sure to be brought on the Stage; 'tis she that does all the Mischief, for certain; and all the World will have it so, I suppose.
No, no, Brother, we'll leave her out of the Question then. She's a good Woman, that has the best Intentions in the World for your Family; is free from all manner of Self-Interest; has a marvellous Tenderness for you; and shews an inconceivable Affection to your Children, that's certain. -- We'll say no more therefore of her, but return to your Daughter. With what View would you marry her to this Nephew of Dr.?
With a View of having so skilful a Physician as Dr., related to me.
Is it possible you should always be so bewitch'd with your Doctors and Apothecaries, and resolve to be sick, in spite of the World, and Nature it self?
What d'ye mean by that, Brother? I have been under the Doctor's Hands here, and taking Physick, for these Twenty Years, and yet I'm not sick, I warrant.
I mean, Brother, that 'tis a plain Sign you have a strong Constitution, when, with all thePhysick you have taken, you've not been able to destroy it.
But do you know, Brother, 'tis that keeps me alive? Dr.has assur'd me that I should absolutely go off, if I were but three Days from under his Hands; but this Dr.knows nothing, I suppose, in your Opinion.
Oh! yes, he can talk good; call all Distempers by their Names, in; knows how to define 'em and distinguish 'em. -- But how to cure 'em, is what he doesn't know.
But, Sir, with Submission; there are People as wise and clear-sighted as your Worship, that in case of Sickness have Recourse to him for Cure.
There are a great many Trades, you know, that take Advantage of the Frailty of Mankind, and get their Bread from the lucky Prepossession of Error. And as the greatest Weakness Men have, is the Fear of Death, upon That the Quack builds his Fortune and Reputation.
Yes, Sir, but Dr.no Quack; he's a regular Physician, and one that has not the least Artifice or Craft, but deals sincerely and conscientiously by his Patients.
Right; so far from meaning ill in what he prescribes, that he dispatches you out of pure Principle; and does no more in killing you, than what he has done by his Wife and Children, and what upon occasion he would do by himself.
Hold, Brother, say no more against Dr., I intreat you, for it raises my Choler, and will bring my Distemper upon me.
I've done, Brother; and to change the Discourse, I must tell you; that you ought not to take such a barbarous Resolution with regard to your Daughter.
Hold, Brother, a little, with your Leave.
What are you going to do?
To take this Bolus and Draught from Mr., I shall have done it presently.
You jest, sure! Can't you be one Moment without swallowing some Drug or other? Put it off till another time, and let Nature have a little Respite now.
Well then, to-night, Mr., or tomorrow Morning.
What Business have you, Sir, to oppose the Prescriptions of the Faculty? The Physick is prepar'd, and won't keep, Sir. -- And since you hinder his Worship from taking my Bolus, I'll come upon you, and you shall take it for him.
Be gone, Sir. -- You are not us'd, I see, to talk to People's Faces.
Medicines are not to be jested with, Sir, nor my Time to be lost. I came here by Dr.Order, and shall acquaint him how I have been hinder'd in the Performance of my Function.
Brother, you'll be the Cause here of some Mischief.
A great Mischief indeed! spoiling a Bolus of Dr.Prescription. -- Once more, Brother, Is it impossible to cure you of the Doctor, for that's your Disease, and nothing else?
Brother, you'll make me mad. -- I wish you had my Distemper, and then we should see if you would rattle at this rate. -- Hah! here comes Dr., and Fury in his Face too; Heaven preserve us!
Very fine! this. -- I have heard a verypleasant Story from Mrs.here; my Prescriptions contemn'd, and my Medicines rejected.
Indeed, Sir, it was not --
Sir, 'tis a very great Insolence, a rank Rebellion in a Patient against his Physician.
Horrible!
A Bolus that I took the pains to make up my self!
'Twas not me.
Invented and compos'd according to the nicest Rules of Art!
Monstrous!
And which was to have wrought Miracles upon the Animal Spirits!
'Twas my Brother --
To send it back contumaciously.
'Twas he --
'Tis an enormous Insult on the Faculty.
He was the Cause --
Such a Crime against the Profession as can never be enough punished.
Right, Doctor.
I therefore declare, that from this time forth I break off all Correspondence with you.
'Twas my Brother --
I'll have no Alliance with you.
You'll serve him right, there, Doctor.
And to prevent any Relation between us, I thus destroy the Deed of Gift I made to my Nephew in favour of the Marriage.
I'm glad o'that; let him take it for his pains.
'Tis my Brother has been the Occasion of all this Mischief; let it be brought again, and, to make you amends, I'll take double the Quantity.
I should have set you to rights in a very little time.
He does not deserve it.
I wanted but a Score or two of Medicines more, to have done your Business effectually.
He's unworthy of your Care.
But, since you refuse to be cur'd by my Hands --
Ah! Brother, Brother!
Since you have withdrawn from me the Obedience a Patient owes his Physician --
That cries for Vengeance.
And have declar'd your self rebellious to my Regimen and Prescriptions --
Not at all, not at all.
I abandon you to your evil Constitution, to the Acidity of your Stomach, the Alkalescency of your Blood, the Acrimony of your Bile, and the Feculency of your I'll-humours.
Well said!
And my Will is, That within these four Days you enter on an absolutely incurable State.
Ah, Mercy! Mercy!
That you fall immediately into a.
Good Doctor!
From ainto an.
Doctor!
From an, into a.
Dr.!
From a, into a.
Spare me, good Doctor!
And from a, into a, the Condition your Folly has brought you into. -- And so, Good by t'ye, Good by t'ye.
O Heavens! I'm dead. -- Brother, you have been the Ruin of me; I feel the Faculty taking Vengeance of me already.
In good troth, Brother, you are out of your Senses, and I would not for any thing you should be seen in these Fits. Pr'ythee feel your own Pulse a little, and don't give up your self to such wild Chimeras. Here's a lucky Opportunity now, of getting rid of your Doctors; or, if you are born to be a Slaveto 'em, you may easily procure another, with whom you'll run less Hazard than with this.
Joy, Joy, Sir.
What now?
Rejoice, Sir.
For what?
Rejoice, I say.
Why, you impertinent Hussy, won't you tell me for what, first?
No; I'll have you rejoice beforehand; sing and dance.
Was there ever such a Slut?
You are cur'd, Sir.
Cur'd!
Ay, there's a Doctor come to see you, that will cure you of all your Distempers at once.
Heaven forbid! -- Pr'ythee who is it?
I don't know him; but He and I are as like one another, as two Drops of Water, all but his Beard; and if I were not sure that my Mother was an honest Woman, I should swear she had play'd the Wag before she married my Father.
Desire him to walk up.
This happens to your Wish -- one Doctor leaves you, and another immediately comes in his room.
Ay, but Doctorwas perfectly well acquainted with my Constitution, and knew the way to deal with me exactly. -- Oh! Oh! I feel at Heart all those -- I don't know what to call 'em -- those strange Distempers he threaten'd me with.
One would think Dr.held in his Hands the Thread of your Life, and by a supreme Authority, could shorten or prolong it as he thought proper: Reflect a little, that the Principles of your Life are in your self, and that Dr.Anger is as incapable of killing you, as his Medicines are of keeping you alive.
Oh lack! Oh lack! And pray, wise Sir, what would you, out of your profound Knowledge and Skill, advise one to do when one happens to be sick, then?
Nothing.
Nothing?
No, nothing, but keep your self quiet. Nature herself, if we'd let her alone, would gradually throw off the Load she labours with. 'Tis our own Impatience spoils all; for when we have but just Strength enough to struggle with our Distemper, we must take Loads of Drugs to burden us the more. Believe me, Brother, it must be a wonderful robust Constitution that is able to bear both the Physick and the Disease.
Mighty well, Sir, with your Nature and you. -- But is not this Nature to be assisted by Art, Pray?
Lud! Lud! Brother, how you are impos'd on! When a Physician talks to you of assisting, relieving, and supporting Nature; when he talks of sweetning the Blood, strengthning the Nerves, and restoring the Lungs, 'tis nothing but a specious way of prating, which gives you Words instead of Reasons, and Promises instead of Effects: For when you come to make Trial, you find it a mere Dream, which leaves nothing but the Regret of having ever thought it real.
Sir, your Servant.
Your Servant, Sir. -- By my Troth,herself!
They are very like one another, indeed; but 'tis n't the first time we've seen such sort of things.
I hope, Sir, you'll pardon my Curiosity in visiting a Person of so famous an Indisposition as your self, and offering you my small Services in relation to what Bleedings and Purgations you may have occasion for.
Sir, your Servant.
I observe, Sir, that you look very earnestly at me, pray how old d'ye think I may be?
Old! why Thirty, belike.
Ha, ha, ha! why, I'm above Fourscore, Sir.
Fourscore!
Yes; you see an Effect of the Secrets of my Art, that preserve me thus lively and vigorous.
I profess, a jolly Youth, for one o'Fourscore, if he could have but hinder'd the Growth of his Beard, Brother.
O! by no means; a Physician's Skill lies chiefly in his Chin.
I am, Sir, an Itinerant Physician, who travel from Town to Town, from Kingdom to Kingdom, to find out Patients worthy of my Practice, and fit to exercise the great and noble Secrets of my Art upon. I scorn to amuse my self with the little Fry of common Distempers, the Trifles of Rheumatisms, Scurvies, Vapours, and Megrims. Give me your Diseases of Importance, good Purple-Fevers, good Plagues, good confirm'd Dropsies, good Pleurisies, with Inflammation of the Lungs. These are what please me; these are what I triumph over; and I wish with all my Heart, Sir, that you had a Complication of 'em all upon you at once; that you were given over by all the Physicians, and at the very Point of Death, that I might demonstrate to you the Excellency of my Medicines, and the Desire I have to do you Service.
I am very much obliged to you, Sir, for your kind Wishes.
Let me feel your Pulse. -- Come, beat as you should do. -- Hey! this Pulse plays the Fool. -- Ye don't know me yet, I find. -- Who is your Physician?
Dr..
Dr.! Who is he? I have not hisName in my List of eminent Physicians. Where does he say your Distemper lies?
He says in the Spleen; others in the Liver.
They are all of 'em; I say, that it lies in your Lungs.
In my Lungs!
Yes; where's your Pain?
I have every now and then a Pain in my Head.
The Lungs exactly.
Sometimes a Mist before my Eyes.
The Lungs.
Sometimes a violent Palpitation of the Heart.
The Lungs.
At other times I am taken with a violent Pain in my Belly, as if it was the Colick.
The Lungs again. You have a good Appetite to what you eat?
Yes, Sir.
The Lungs. You love to drink a Glass of Wine?
Yes.
That's the Lungs. You take a comfortable Nap after Dinner.
True, Sir.
The Lungs, the Lungs, I tell ye. What does your Physician order you to eat?
He orders me Broth.
Ignorant!
Chicken.
Ignorant!
New-laid Eggs.
Ignorant!
And above all, to drink a good deal of Water in my Wine.
-- You must drink good, unmix'd,Wine, to thickenyour Blood, which is too thin. -- You must eat good fat Beef, good fat Bacon, goodCheese, Rice-Gruel, and Craw-fish Soup, to corroberate and conglutinate. -- Your Dr.is an Ass, and knows nothing of his Business; I'll send you a Physician of my own bringing up, and will visit you sometimes my self, whilst I stay in the Town.
Sir, you'll oblige me extremely.
What the Duce d'ye do with this Arm?
Do with it?
Cut me off this Arm immediately.
Why so, pray?
Don't you see that it draws all the Nourishment to it self, and hinders the other from thriving?
Ay, but I've occasion for my Arm.
Here's an Eye too, which I'd have instantly pluck'd out, were I in your Place.
Pluck out my Eye!
Don't you perceive it injures the other, and occasions those Mists you complain'd of but now? Be guided by me, and have it taken away directly; you'll see the better with your Left.
There's no haste for that, Sir; 'tis as well let alone.
But hark'e Sir, is there not a certain Gentleman, one Squire, that is to marry your Daughter?
Yes, Sir, he is just arriv'd fromfor that Purpose.
The same. -- 'Twas there he was constituted and inducted my Patient, but feloniously withdrew himself from the Remedies I had prepar'd for him.
Why, ay, Doctor, your Physick is Money at any time; so that he has actually stole your Cash.
Pardon me; I don't intend to lose him so neither; he's tied and bound my Patient, and I'll have him seiz'd wherever I find him, and either cure him, or be the Death of him.
Has he any Distemper on him, then?
Yes.
What Distemper, pray?
No matter: Physicians are oblig'd to Secrecy. 'Tis enough that I injoin you not to celebrate the Nuptials, without my Consent, under pain of incurring the Resentment of the Faculty, and bringing the worst of Maladies into your Family.
Nay, if it be so with him, I shall be in no Hurry for the Match.
Be sure you don't. -- He may run away as much as he pleases; but I'll get a Decree against him, and force him to be cur'd; yes, tho' there were a Complication of Distempers, thirteen to the Dozen: His Body is mortgag'd to my Conduct; and it shall never be said, that a Patient got the better of his Doctor.
You have my Consent, Sir, to physick him your Belly-full.
Farewel, Sir. I am sorry I must leave you so soon, but I'm oblig'd to be at a great Consultation to-day, upon a Person that dy'd Yesterday.
A Person that dy'd Yesterday!
Yes; to consider what ought to have been done to have kept him alive -- and so your Servant, Sir.
Sir, your Servant. -- Sick People, you know, are excus'd from Ceremony.
This is a thorough Doctor now, and talks like himself.
Yes, but he goes a little too fast, tho'.
Oh! that's the way of all your eminent Physicians.
To cut off an Arm, and pluck out an Eye, in order to make the other better! I'd rather 'twas not quite so well. A pleasant Operation truly, to make me at once both blind and lame. -- But you'll excuse me, Brother, if I go to my Couch and take a Nap, for I'm so fatigu'd with these Affairs. If you have a mind to sit by me a Quarter of an Hour,you'll meet with some very good Books in my Study: There's a Treatise upon the Virtues of Water-Gruel; another against eating Fish or Flesh; and another to prove, that we ought to eat both.
Very well, I'll attend you, Brother.
So far, so good: I have look'd out sharp to all things yet; the Doctor's Business is done, I believe; and now I'll so fatigue our Country Squire, that he shall make more haste back again than ever he did to come. O! here's my Chap, dress'd Bridegroom-like.
Mrs., your Servant.
Sir, Your Servant.
You seem, Mrs., to look at my Clothes. I was desirous to put my self into the Court Fashion, for the Credit o' my Country.
O' my Word, Sir, you make another-guise Figure than any of our Courtiers.
Ay, why so my Tailor told me. The Suit is rich, and proper for him that wears it, and will make no small Show and Noise here; Hey? -- But, pray, can you bring one to the Speech of your Lady?
No, Sir.
Is she gone out, then?
No.
Busy, belike?
No.
In Company, may be?
No.
Um, um, that's strange indeed!
Why, look ye, Sir, my Lady is often abroad and at home, at the same time; engag'd, and yet doing nothing; in Company, and yet no Body withher: In a Word, my Lady's an Oracle, and I am her Priest.
Then you must be brib'd, I suppose.
-- Give me your Hand, Mrs.; let you and I shake Hands a little, and then, belike, we shall be better acquainted.
Psha! be quiet. Why, what a Fool 'tis!
-- Um, no, Troth, the Man has more Wit than I thought he had.
When I'm marry'd to your Lady, Mrs., you shall have an excellent Place on't.
You marry my Lady, Sir?
Why ay, I'm come on purpose to marry her, now.
To -- to marry her?
Yes.
In Marriage, say ye?
Yes, to be sure; how else can it be?
Um -- I'm sorry for it.
Sorry for it!
Ay, I was thinking -- but 'tis no matter, I beg your Pardon.
What d'ye mean by that?
Nothing, nothing.
But, pray now --
Nothing, I tell you; I spoke too hastily.
Nay, but I must know what's at the bottom of all this.
No, no, 'tisn't at all necessary you should.
Ods my Heart! but it is tho'.
Well, if it is, you must excuse me there.
By what you said o' me, this Morning, Mrs., I took you for my Friend.
Ay, marry, no body can be more so; from the Moment I saw you, I felt an Inclination for you; I saw something of Ingenuity --
Your Servant.
Something lovely --
Oh, Mrs.!
So majestick --
Ay, something manly, as one may say.
So cordial --
Ah, sweet Mrs.!
This is all true. -- But here is a Thing that one's Neighbour's Interest is concern'd in.
Hark ye, Mrs., here's this Ring you must wear for my sake. -- Nay, 'tis in vain to say, No; for wear it you must. -- And this, I hope, will oblige you to open your Heart to me.
Let me see, I'll consult my Conscience a little on the Case. -- In the first Place, here's my Master pursuing his own Interest, and endeavouring to provide for his Daughter as advantageously as possible, and we ought to do no Man an Injury in such an Affair. -- Not that the thing is any manner of Secret; but shall I go discover it to one who's ignorant of it? No, we are forbid to speak Evil of our Neighbour, that's true; but then on the other side --
Ay, now for t'other side!
Here's a worthy Gentleman, who's a Stranger to the Town --
And has been strangely us'd in it.
Who comes thro' Thick and Thin, with an honest Intention to marry a Woman he knows nothing of -- an open-hearted Gentleman --
And a Man of Parts, too.
Who places a Confidence in me as his Friend, has presented me with a Purse most curiously wrought.
Of Twenty Guineas.
And a Ring to wear for his Sake.
Which cost Twenty more.
And shall I see this courteous generous Gentleman abus'd and impos'd on, without so much as telling him of it?
No, to be sure.
Well, I find I may let you into Matters, without wounding my Conscience; but let us endeavour to tell 'em in the gentlest way possible, and spare People as much as we can -- To say that this youngLady o' mine leads a dishonourable Life, would be a little too harsh; let us therefore seek some milder Terms to express our Meaning by. The Word,, perhaps may do it; no, that dosn't quite come up to't -- that of compleatseems to hit our Purpose the best.
Cocket! Cocket! What are your Cockets?
Oh! your Coquets, Sir, are your prancing, prattling, gaming, galloping, witty, wanton, fine Ladies; who rail at their Friends, jilt their Lovers, and cuckold their Husbands; and are true to nothing but Scandal and Strong-waters.
Oho! are they so? are they so? I am not such a Coxcomb then, as to have any Business with a Cocket.
Why so? there's not so much Harm in't as People imagine, perhaps.
O! isn't there so? I'm your Servant for that; I'll put no such Cap on my Crown, I assure ye; the Brows of theare not made to bear Branches.
Pooh, Pooh! 'tis what Husbands now-a-days sit down satisfy'd under. If you can't so well bear to see it done under your very Nose, why, you have nothing to do but, when the Galant comes, to take your Cane and Gloves, and very civilly walk off.
Good, good! Ha, ha, ha! I am a very proper Person to be made a Stalking-Horse of, no doubt. They fansy'd, I warrant ye, that, Esq; had no Guts in his Brains, to inform himself how the World went, and to see his Honour well secur'd in a Wife. -- But I'll go and ferret out old, and let him see, i'cod! that aMan is not so easily to be bubbled
Ha, ha, ha! a rare Gudgeon, truly!
Very well; bid 'em go up one after another, the Scotch Woman first.
Hist!, is the Coast clear?
Yes, yes, oldis employ'd above.
Well, and how are we? how came you off with your Scene of Quackery?
As Quacks of all sorts do, Sir; with flying Colours. I soon routed the Doctor, and run away with his Business.
Bravely said! But where's our Squire? what's doing with him?
Oh! we are doing very handsomly by him above Stairs.
Is the Farce we contriv'd, in Action now, then?
Yes; Ha, ha, ha! He'll have enough of Wives, I'll warrant him.
Well, but what have you for me to do now?
Let it be your Business to contrive the Winding-up of the Play, while I play my Scenes with him. -- You understand.
Ay, ay.
And as soon as I have planted him as I would --
Very well; that will do the best of any thing in the World.
But here he comes. -- Get you gone quick, for we mustn't be seen together.
What the Murrain can all this mean? Are the People in this Town all stark mad?
What's the matter, Squire?
I shall certainly be murder'd here in this cursed Place! -- jabbering Jades! brazen Whores!
How! What's that?
Why, a couple of foul-mouth'd Carrions have been abusing me at such a rate, within; and pretend that I am marry'd to 'em both.
Marry'd to 'em both!
Ay, and threaten me with Justice, and swear they'll have me hang'd.
Mercy on us! an ugly Business! a very ugly Business, and Justice here is as rigorous as Vengeance against that sort of Crime.
Ay; but I am as innocent o' the Matter as you be, Mrs..
No matter for that; if you are accus'd of it, 'tis enough. You have nothing for't, but to make your Escape as soon as you can; there's an Army of Constables after you already, I warrant 'em.
O Lud! O Lud! O Lud! for Goodness sake, what shall I do, Mrs.? Have you ne'er a dark Room you could hide me in? ne'er a Cupboard that you could ram me into?
Um! I have hit on't. Come along with me quickly; I'll tell you the best way to get off, without being known.
Dear Mrs., let us be gone then, directly, for this Town rains nothing but Plagues. What the Murrain had I to do, to come to?
Was ever the like seen? I hope they'll have him hang'd.
You had like to have been finely fitted with a Son-in-law.
'Tis very true, that I had so. What shall I do in this perplexing Affair? I am so confounded, I can fix on nothing.
Well, Sir, I have been making Preparations for the Wedding that's to be to-night.
What Wedding, Hussy?
Why, Madamand Squire, Sir. And, as my Lady is out of the way, I have taken upon me to order a handsom Supper, a Concert of Musick, and a --
Why, you meddling Baggage, there's to be no Wedding, nor no Supper, nor no --
No Wedding! ay, but there is, tho'.
I tell you, there is not.
Lack-a-day! Sir, you forget your self; didn't you say that it was to be to-night?
If I did say it, I unsay it again.
You may do as you will; but marry'd they shall be, now things are gone so far, that's positive.
Heyday! whereabout are we? -- Why -- why --
I have more Love for you than to suffer you to make your self laugh'd at, for saying and unsaying in this manner.
I want none of your Love.
But I will Love you, in spite of your Teeth.
Will you hold your Tongue, Serpent? I'll make you be silent, or I'll --
Be it so. But if I don't speak, I'll think.
Think as much as you will; but take care you don't speak.
Brother, I am almost mad. What must be done?
I wish I might speak.
What must be done, Brother?
Why, they must be marry'd.
Then what I say, signifies nothing? Hey! Baggage, Hey!
What ails you, Sir? I don't speak to you.
What then?
I talk to my Self.
Very well.
I have thought seriously of it, Brother
Why don't you speak?
I have thought seriously of it, and it must be so.
Why, you tormenting Beast!
And therefore I'll go send for the Parson this very Moment.
Her Insolence has put me mad! How am I tormented on every hand! -- Ah! Brother, let me advise you never to marry.
Never a second time, Brother; and a young ravenous Widow, too.
That's not the Thing; I don't speak of my Lady; she's all the Comfort I have -- but, Children, Children, Brother, they are the Bane of Matrimony; they are so many Serpents, which a Man hatches and breeds up only to sting him to Death for his pains.
We only think 'em so, by not considering 'em as what they are. The little Gaieties and Excesses of Youth, are as much the Beauty and Perfection of that State, as Care and Policy are of Age; and yet because they an't immediately grave and gray-headed, we are dissatisfy'd and offended.
Ah! Brother, no body knows the Cares, the Anxieties, the Pangs of a Parent, but those who feel 'em; I profess, I am quite oppress'd and bore down by 'em. Ah!
Come, come, Brother, this is all Distemper; we'll talk more of these things by and by: In the mean time I have order'd an Entertainment below, which will dissipate your Concern, and dispose you to judge the better of what's proper to be done. Things won't appear so dismal, after a Song and a Dance; 'twill do you more good than all the Drugs in Mr.Shop. In social Mirth, and gay Delights, we find The truest Cure for a distemper'd Mind.
Well,, how go we on?
With Wind and Tide, and Fortune herself sits smiling at the Helm.
Blessings on her for it!
I have put our Chap into such a terrible Fright, about the Severity of the Law here against having two Wives, that he's resolv'd to fly for't; and that he may escape more easily from the Constables, which I've told him are plac'd in every Corner to apprehend him, he's gone to disguise himself in Woman's Habit.
Ha, ha, ha! I should be glad to see him in that Equipage. -- But now,, what have we to go upon next?
Why, we have nothing now to do, but to sow the Seeds of Discord betwixt Husband and Wife, and the Day's our own.
That will be a difficult Task, I fear; she's a sly Beast, and won't easily be trap'd.
Courage, Man; I have Snares for Foxes, as well as for Woodcocks.
Thou art a dear, charming, courageous Wench, and shalt be rewarded accordingly.
But see, here comes our Lass -- away, quick, that he mayn't see us together; as soon as I've got him fairly pack'd off, I shall go to work upon the old Gentleman within; and be you ready to appear upon proper Notice.
Success attend you.
So, Squire, why you make a very graceful Figure! You've the perfect Air of a Woman o' Quality. I defy them to know you in this Equipment.
'Tis strange, tho', Mrs., that the Forms of Law should not be observ'd in this Town!
But 'tis as I told you; they hang a Man here, first, and try him afterwards.
But when a Body's innocent --
They never trouble themselves about that. -- Then they have an intolerable Hatred for People of your Country, and nothing can please 'em more than to see aMan hang'd.
Why, what have theMen done to 'em?
Oh! yourare mere Brutes, and Enemies to the Gentility and Merit of other Places. For my part, I protest I am in a terrible Fright for you, and should never have any Comfort if you should come to be hang'd.
'Tisn't so much the Fear of Death, as that 'twould be such a Blot in one's Scutcheon.
Right, I don't know if you wou'dn't lose your Title of Squire by it. -- But come, give me your Hand now, and walk like a Woman; and talk, and give yourself all the Airs of Quality.
Let me alone, I have seen People of Fashion; all the Mischief is, I have somewhat of a Beard.
Pho! your Beard's nothing; I have known many Women of Quality have a great deal more -- Come, let us see a little how you behave yourself. -- Good.
Why, my Cauch, there! Where is my Cauch? Lard! what a miserable thing it is to have such Servants as these! Must I wait all Day on the Pavement, and will no body call my Cauch for me?
So.
What, no Cauchman to be found, no Page? I'll break the Neck of these Doings. -- Why Page!Little Rascal! -- Isn't the little Fool to be found? -- Is there no Page there? -- Have I no Page in the Warld?
Admirable!
Who have we here that makes this Outcry? Hah! here's a Face that much resembles what was describ'd to us.
'Tis not me, I assure you.
How! how! What's that?
I can't tell.
There's some Meaning in what you said, and I take you Prisoner.
Nay, nay, good Gentlemen!
No, no, by your Manner and Disguise, you must needs be Squire, whom we are in quest of; let's away with him to.
Oh sad! Oh sad! I'm doom'd to be hang'd then, at last.
Mr., for my sake, I conjure you not to carry him to Prison.
'Tis impossible --
Come, I know you're a Man that will harken to Reason. Is there no way of adjusting this Matter with a few Guineas, or so?
Stand off a little.
You must give him some Money -- quick, quick.
O cursed Town!
Hold your Hand, Sir.
How much is there?
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten.
No, I can't do't; my Orders are positive.
Lard! stay.
Quick, quick, give him as much more.
But --
Lose no time, I tell you. -- Sure, you have a mind to be hang'd! -- Here, Sir, here.
I must run away with him, and live with him, then; for I durst not shew my Head again here.
Then, pray, take great care of him; I beg you will.
I promise you that.
Be gone then, quickly, Squire. -- I love you so much, that I wish you a hundred Miles off.
Good by t'ye, dear Mrs.. -- That's the only honest Body I have met with in this Town.
By t'ye, Bubble, and Fortune bless thee, for thou art one of her own Dotard Brood. -- But I'm wanted by this time somewhere else.
So, Brother, what think you of my Entertainment? Isn't it as good as a Dose of?
Ho! goodis a good thing.
Well, Brother, since this Match is now at an End, and you and your Doctor are at Variance with one another, I hope I may have the Liberty to propose the Person I was speaking of for my Niece.
No, Brother, I'm resolv'd to send her into the Country, and there confine her, for offering to oppose my Will and Pleasure. I find there's a Love-Affair under the Rose, and have discovered a certain private Interview, which they don't think I have.
Very good, Brother; and suppose there should be some little Inclination in the Case, where would be the Harm of it? You have no reason to be displeas'd, since nothing's intended but what's honourable.
Be that as it will, she shall go into the Country, that I'm resolv'd on.
I can guess, Brother, who put you on that Resolution. There's one Person in the World you'll please by it, I'm certain.
I understand you, Sir; you are always touching on that String. My Wife is a great Heartburn to you.
Yes, Brother, since 'tis necessary to be plain with you, 'tis your Wife that I mean; and I can no more bear you ridiculous Fondness for her, than that you have for Physick; nor endure to see you run hand-over-head into all the Snares she lays for you.
Ah! dear Sir, don't speak so of my Lady; she's a Woman that no body can say any thing against; a Woman without the least Grain of Artifice or Design, and loves my Master -- there's no saying how much she loves him.
Ay, ask but her now, how excessive fond she is of me.
Most excessive!
How much Concern my Illness gives her.
True -- she's always praying that she might see an End of it.
And the Care and Pains she takes about me.
Right. -- Shall we convince you now, Mr. Heartly, and shew you directly what a surprising Affection my Lady has for my Master? -- Permit me, Sir, to undeceive him, and let him see his Mistake.
As how,?
Hark, my Lady is just return'd. Do you, Sir, but stretch your self out in your Chair, and feign your self dead, you'll then see the violent Grief, she'll be in, when I tell her the News.
Hey! -- Um! -- I profess I've a mind to take her Advice. -- No, no, I can never bear to hear the Shrieks and Lamentations she'll make over me; and yet 'twill be a Comfort to me to hear them, too; to feel her virtuous Tears bedew my Face, and her sweet Lips kissing my Cheeks a thousand, thousand times, to bring me back again to Life and her. -- Ah! Ah! verily, I'll do it; verily, I'll do it. And then, Sir, what will become of your fine Surmises? -- But,, ar't thee not afraid that her very thinking me dead, will break her Heart?
To be sure, Sir, if you should keep her in her Fright too long.
Oh! let me alone for that; I'll make the Experiment this very Minute, this very Minute. -- Reach my Chair, here.
So, so.
Do you hide your self in that Closet, Sir.
But is there no Danger in feigning one's self dead?
No, no; what Danger should there be? 'Tis only shutting your Eyes, and stretching your self out. --
Now, now, Sir, we shall shew you your Error, with a Witness, and convince you how much you have injur'd the best of Wives.
'Twill be pleasant enough afterwards, Sir, to see how blank your Brother will look. -- Here's my Lady! Close, close, you've no Business with your Cane; hang your Arms a little more dangling; and look more dismal, than ordinary, if possible.
Oh Heavens! Oh fatal Misfortune! What a strange Accident is this!
What's the Matter,?
Ah! Madam. Ah! Ah!
What is it? What dost thee mean by this Blubbering, pr'ythee?
My Master's dead, Madam. Oh! Oh!
Dead!
Ay, alas! quite defunct.
Art thou sure of that?
Too sure, alas! No body yet knows any thing of this Accident; there was not a Soul but my self to help him; he sunk down in my Arms, and went off like a Child. -- See there, Madam, how he lies stretch'd out in his Chair!
Now, Heaven be prais'd for the Sight: --! what a Simpleton art thou, to cry?
Cry, Madam? Why, I thought we was to cry.
A great Loss indeed, to cry for! What good did he do above Ground? -- A grunting, grumbling, ill-shap'd, filthy Fellow; never without some poisonous Slop in his Maw; always coughing, hauking, and spitting; for ever dying, and yet too much alive to get him under Ground. -- Thou poor, pitiful, credulous Fool, farewel. -- Sweet, charmimg, wanton Widowhood, thou only Recompence for Marriage Slavery! thou only End and Aim of prudent Wives! once more, thou'rt welcome.
A very excellent Funeral Oration.
Oh! how my Heart exults at Thought of Liberty, and long neglected Joys! -- Alas! poor Dear, thou hast lost, then, the small matter of Breath thou wer't Master of. O' my Conscience, he looks better than when he was alive. This is the only time,, I ever beheld him with Pleasure. -- But, come, thou must assist me in executing my Design; and, depend on't, that in serving me, thou wilt most effectually serve thy self. Since then, by good Fortune, no body's yet acquainted with the Thing, let us carry him to his Bed, and keep his Death conceal'd 'till we have thoroughly settled our Affairs; and then,, I'll enjoy the Pleasure of Revenge too, in its turn, and make Misspay swingingly for herInsolence. Hah! here she comes, and her Fellow with her; this is a little unlucky.
Confusion! What brings them here now? What can be the Meaning of this? or, what will be the Consequence of this critical Scene? -- I wish I could give them Notice, that they might know how to behave -- but 'tis impossible; we must stand it, now.
Yes,, your Uncle has, by this time, made my Proposal to your Father; I'll therefore no longer trust my Passion to precarious Artifice, but make my Claim with Openness and Honour.
What ails thee,? Why those Tears? How does my Father do?
Ah! Madam.
What's the matter?
Alas! he's dead, Madam.
My Father dead!
Yes, you see him there; he expir'd this Moment in a Fit.
Oh!
Hah! help her,, she faints.
Tender Creature! -- But see, she recovers.
This is a cruel Stroke, indeed! to lose my Father, who was every thing in the World to me; and to lose him at a Time too, when he had conceiv'd a Displeasure against me! the Thought of this adds Stings to my Affliction.
Be comforted, Madam, nor strive to aggravate your Grief by such Reflexions;will supply the Loss of a Father.
No,, let's talk no more of any such thing; I'm determin'd to retire into the Country, and be no longer conversant in this World. -- Yes,my dear Father, if I have formerly oppos'd your Inclinations, I'll now execute one of your Intentions at least, and atone by that for the Disquiet I have given you.
You have Liberty to go, Child, as soon as you please. -- I have a Will in my Pocket, here, which takes all manner of Trouble off your Hands: and you may soon pack up, I believe, all that belongs to you.
Yes indeed, Madam, your Father has left the sole Disposal of every thing to her Ladyship.
Then my Calamity's compleat, indeed. -- My Father! No, he did not, could not do it; 'twas that artful, wicked Wife, who seduc'd him into an Action so contrary both to his Reason and Nature.
Let not that Particular, Madam, add any thing to your Distress; you have still an affluent Fortune at command, and I rejoice at this Opportunity of adding some little Merit to my Passion.
Why, you both act your Parts miraculously well!
Act, do you say? No, Madam, I'm no more a Countefeit in Grief, than you are in Joy.
Why, really, Child, we have both reason enough to be in earnest.
Barbarous Monster! to insult a Poverty, her own Treachery was the Cause of.
But I shall not resign my Right so tamely as you may think; the World shall be made acquainted with the Story, Madam. -- Yes, Madam, it shall know by what scandalous Methods you practis'd on my Father's easy Temper, to ruin, most unnaturally ruin his own Children, to glut your Appetite for Wealth -- and then, how ungratefully, how savagely you revell'd at the Death of this good deluded Husband, whose only Crime was being fond of such a Wife.
Whilst you entertain yourself with these fine Reflexions, Child, I'll beg leave to go andsettle a little necessary Business.
But hold, in the first Place, let me search for his Keys, for there's Money and Papers I ought to secure.
Softly, softly, Madam.
Hah!
So, Mrs. Wife, is this your Extreme Love and Fondness for me?
Bless us! the dead Man alive again!
Ah! my dear Girl, come to my Arms, let me embrace thee, my Child. Thou art my own Daughter, my own Flesh and Blood, and I'm overjoy'd to discover so much Good-nature in thee.
How welcome and agreeable is this Surprize!
I'm very glad, Madam, I've discover'd your Affection, too, and heard the fine Panegyrick you made upon me. -- A grunting, grumbling, filthy Fellow; always hauking, coughing, and spitting. -- Hey! Mistress. Ah! this is such a Lesson as will make me wiser for the future, I believe.
'Tis such a Lesson, Fool, as I shall make thee repent having ever got from me. Thou shalt pay so dear for thy Wisdom, as shall make thee wish thy self in easy Delusion again.
Mercy o' me! What a Woman 'tis! -- Hark ye, Madam, don't threaten, for I shall now make you go seek your Fortune, instead of my Daughter.
Wilt thou so, Man?
I shall procure a Will to take all manner of Trouble off your Hands; so you may soon pack up, I believe, all that belongs to you.
Ha, ha, ha!
Say'st thou so, my Soul? Hast thou forgot, then, the Five Thousand Guineas, and asmuch more in Notes, that were hid behind the Wainscot?
Ods my Heart! what a Fool have I been!
And now, thou shalt be altogether as great a Wretch; for I'll so chastise thee for this Curiosity! I'll so trample on thee, Worm!
Out o' my House, I say.
Ha, ha, ha! You talk wildly, my Dear; you are light-headed, and don't know it. -- To bed, to bed, Child, and send for a Doctor and Nurse, in an Instant.
How, Madam! I can no longer bear to see my Father abus'd in this manner; and must tell you --
Peace, Peace, Child, and shut your Mouth again; you'll say some foolish thing else, that will make one blush for you.
Blush! Fy on you! you are an audacious wicked Woman.
Hold, Madam, 'tis in vain to make any Opposition; where all Sense of Shame and Decency is lost, Reproof is but thrown away.
Oh! your Servant, Sir! by your sage Looks and profound Silence, I really mistook you for a rational Creature; but an Ass is soon known when he offers to bray.
I'gad, she'll prove too many for them all.
Was there ever such Impudence! I shall go mad indeed! I -- I -- I'm all on Fire!
Then set open the Windows, and cool your self, my Love, whilst I go abroad in pursuit of Pleasure. I have been coop'd in an Hospital long enough; 'tis but just I should now enjoy the Fruit of my Labour. -- Oh! I shall so harass you, my Dear, that you shall wish your self as dead as you pretended to be.
Will you so, Mistress? Will you so, Mistress? I'll take care howyou make use of your insolent Tongue in this House any more, tho'. -- I -- I --
Why, why, what a shameless, terrible Tigress, am I yok'd to?
So, Brother, now you see --
Yes, yes; and hear too with a Vengeance.
I swear solemnly, I could never have imagin'd this.
However, Brother, the Stratagem has not
been amiss, since by this means you have discover'd the 
real Sentiments of your Family, and learnt where to
place your Affection and Favours.<|endoftext|>Sir, Mr..
Very well, -- do you step again, and wait for an Answer to my Letter.
Well, why so much Care in thy Countenance? Is there any thing in this World deserves it? You, who used to be so Gay, so Open, so Vacant!
I think we have of late chang'd Complexions. You, who us'd to be much the graver Man, are now all Air in your Behaviour -- But the Cause of my Concern, may, for ought I know, be the same Object that gives you all this Satisfaction. In a word, I am told that you are this very Day (and your Dress confirms me in it) to be married to.
You are not misinform'd. -- Nay, put not on the Terrors of a Rival, till you hear me out. I shall disoblige the best of Fathers, if I don't seem ready to marry: And you know I have ever told you, you might make use of my secret Resolution never to marry her, for your own service, as you please. But I am now driven to the extremity of immediatelyrefusing, or complying, unless you help me to escape the Match.
Escape? Sir, neither her Merit or her Fortune are below your Acceptance. -- Escaping, do you call it!
Dear Sir, do you wish I should desire the Match?
No -- but such is my humorous and sickly state of Mind, since it has been able to relish nothing but, that tho' I must owe my Happiness to your Aversion to this Marriage, I can't bear to hear her spoken of with Levity or Unconcern.
Pardon me, Sir; I shall transgress that way no more. She has Understanding, Beauty, Shape, Complexion, Wit --
Nay, dear, don't speak of her as if you lov'd her, neither.
Why then, to give you Ease at once, tho' I allowto have good Sense, Wit, Beauty and Virtue; I know another, in whom these Qualities appear to me more amiable than in her.
There you spoke like a reasonable and good-natur'd Friend. When you acknowledge her Merit, and own your Prepossession for another, at once, you gratify my Fondness, and cure my Jealousie.
But all this while you take no notice, you have no Apprehension of another Man, that has twice the Fortune of either of us.
Hang him, a Formal, Philosophical, Pedantick Coxcomb -- For the Sot, with all these crude notions of divers things, under the direction of great Vanity, and very little Judgment, shews his strongest Bias is Avarice; which is so predominant in him, that he will examine the Limbs of his Mistress with the Caution of a Jockey, and pays no more Compliment to her personal Charms, than if she were a meer breeding Animal.
Are you sure that is not affected? I have known some Women sooner set on fire by that sort of Negligence, than by --
No, no; hang him, the Rogue has no Art, it is pure simple Insolence and Stupidity.
Yet, with all this, I don't take him for a Fool.
I own the Man is not a Natural; he has a very quick Sense, tho' very slow Understanding. -- He says indeed many things, that want only the circumstances of Time and Place to be very just and agreeable.
Well, you may be sure of me, if you can disappoint him; but my Intelligence says, the Mother has actually sent for the Conveyancer, to draw Articles for his Marriage with; tho' those for mine with her, are, by her Father's Order, ready for signing: but it seems she has not thought fit to consult either him or his Daughter in the matter.
Pshaw! A poor troublesome Woman -- Neithernor her Father will ever be brought to comply with it, -- besides, I am surecan make no Settlement upon her, without the Concurrence of his great Uncle Sirin the West.
Well Sir, and I can tell you, that's the very Point that is now laid before her Council; to know whether a firm Settlement can be made, without this Uncle's actual joyning in it. -- Now pray consider, Sir, when my Affair withcomes, as it soon must, to an open Rupture, how are you sure thatFortune may not then tempt her Father too, to hear his Proposals?
There you are right indeed, that must be provided against. -- Do you know who are her Council?
Yes, for your Service I have found out that too, they are Serjeantand Old-- by the way, they are neither of 'em known in theFamily; now I was thinking why you might not put a couple of false Council upon her, to delay and confound matters a little -- besides, it may probably let you into the bottom of her whole Design against you.
As how pray?
Why, can't you slip on a Black Whig and a Gown, and be Oldyour self?
Ha! I don't dislike it -- but what shall I do for a Brother in the Case?
What think you of my Fellow,? the Rogue's intelligent, and is a good Mimick; all his part will be but to stutter heartily, for that's OldCase -- Nay, it would be an immoral thing to mock him, were it not that his Impertinence is the occasion of its breaking out to that degree -- the Conduct of the Scene will chiefly lye upon you.
I like it of all things; if you'll sendto my Chambers, I will give him full Instructions: This will certainly give me occasion to raise Difficulties, to puzzle, or confound her Project for a while, at least.
I'll warrant you Success: so far we are right then: And now,, your apprehension of my marrying her, is all you have to get over.
Dear! tho' I know you are my Friend, yet when I abstract my self from my own interest in the thing, I know no Objection she can make to you, or you to her, and therefore hope --
Dear, I am as much obliged to you for the Cause of your Suspicion, as I am offended at the Effect: but be assured, I am taking measures for your certain Security, and that all things with regard to me will end in your entire Satisfaction.
Well, I'll promise you to be as easy and as confident as I can; tho' I cannot but remember that I have more than Life at stake on your Fidelity.
Then depend upon it, you have no Chance against you.
Nay, no Ceremony, you know I must be going.
Well! this is another Instance of the Perplexities which arise too, in faithful Friendship: We must often, in this Life, go on in our good Offices, even under the Displeasure of those to whom we do them, in Compassion to their Weaknesses and Mistakes -- But all this while pooris tortured with the Doubt of me! she has no Support or Comfort, but in my Fidelity, yet sees me daily press'd to Marriage with another! How painful, in such a Crisis, must be every Hour she thinks on me? I'll let her see, at least, my Conduct to her is not chang'd: I'll take this Opportunity to visit her; for tho' the Religious Vow, I have made to my Father, restrains me from ever marrying, without his Approbation, yet that confines me not from seeing a virtuous Woman, that is the pure Delight of my Eyes, and the guiltless Joy of my Heart: But the best Condition of Human Life is but a gentler Misery. To hope for perfect Happiness is vain, And Love has ever its Allays of Pain.
Yes -- I say 'tis Artifice, dear Child; I say to thee again and again, 'tis all Skill and Management.
Will you persuade me there can be an ill Design, in supporting me in the Condition of a Woman of Quality? attended, dress'd, and lodg'd like one; in my Appearance abroad, and my Furniture at home, every way in the most sumptuous manner, and he that does it has an Artifice, a Design in it?
Yes, yes.
And all this without so much as explaining to me, that all about me comes from him!
Ay, ay, -- the more for that -- that keeps the Title to all you have, the more in Him.
The more in Him! -- He scorns the Thought --
Then He -- He -- He --
Well, be not so eager. -- If he is an ill Man, let us look into his Stratagems. Here is another of them.
Here's two hundred and fifty Pound in Bank Notes, with these Words, 'To pay for the Set of Dressing-plate, which will be brought home To-morrow,' Why dear Aunt, now here's another Piece of Skill for you, which I own I cannot comprehend -- and it is with a bleeding Heart I hear you say any thing to the Disadvantage of Mr.. When he is present, I look upon him as one to whom I owe my Life, and the Support of it; Then again, as the Man who loves me with Sincerity and Honour. When his Eyes are cast another way, and I dare survey him, my Heart is painfully divided between Shame and Love -- Oh! cou'd I tell you: --
Ah! You need not: I imagine all this for you.
This is my State of Mind in his Presence; and when he is absent, you are ever dinning my Ears with Notions of the Arts of Men; that his hidden Bounty, his respectful Conduct, his careful Provision for me, after his preserving me from utmost Misery, are certain Signs he means nothing, but to make I know not what of me?
Oh! You have a sweet Opinion of him, truly.
I have, when I am with him, ten thousand Things, besides my Sex's natural Decency and Shame, to suppress my Heart, that yearns to thank, to praise, to say it loves him: I say, thus it is with me while I see him; and in his Absence I am entertain'd with nothing but your Endeavours to tear this amiable Image from my Heart; and, in its stead, to place a base Dissembler, an artful Invader of my Happiness, my Innocence, my Honour.
Ah poor Soul! has not his Plot taken? don't you die for him? has not the way he has taken, been the most proper with you? Oh! ho! He has Sense, and has judg'd the thing right.
Go on then, since nothing can answer you: say what you will of him. Heigh! ho!
Heigh! ho! indeed. It is better to say so, as you are now, than as many others are. There are, among the Destroyers of Women, the Gentle, the Generous, the Mild, the Affable, the Humble, who all, soon after their Success in their Designs, turn to the contrary of those Characters. I will own to you, Mr.carries his Hypocrisie the best of any Man living, but still he is a Man, and therefore a Hypocrite. They have usurp'd an Exemption from Shame, for any Baseness, any Cruelty towards us. They embrace without Love; they make Vows, without Conscience of Obligation; they are Partners, nay, Seducers to the Crime, wherein they pretend to be less guilty.
That's truly observ'd.
But what's all this to?
This it is to, and all Mankind. Trust not those, who will think the worse of you for your Confidence in them. Serpents, who lie in wait for Doves. Won't you be on your Guard against those who would betray you? Won't you doubt those who would contemn you for believing 'em? Take it from me: Fair and natural Dealing is to invite Injuries, 'tis bleating to escape Wolves who would devour you! Such is the World, -- and such (since the Behaviour of one Man to my self) have I believ'd all the rest of the Sex.
I will not doubt the Truth of, I will not doubt it; He has not spoke it by an Organ that is given to lying: His Eyes are all that have ever told me that he was mine: I know his Virtue, I know his filial Piety, and ought to trust his Managementwith a Father, to whom he has uncommon Obligations. What have I to be concern'd for? my Lesson is very short. If he takes me for ever, my purpose of Life is only to please him. If he leaves me (which Heaven avert) I know he'll do it nobly; and I shall have nothing to do but to learn to die, after worse than Death has happen'd to me.
Ay do, persist in your Credulity! flatter your self that a Man of his Figure and Fortune will make himself the Jest of the Town, and marry a handsome Beggar for Love.
The Town! I must tell you, Madam, the Fools that laugh at Mr., will but make themselves more ridiculous; his Actions are the Result of Thinking, and he has Sense enough to make even Virtue fashionable.
O' my Conscience he has turn'd her Head -- Come, come; if he were the honest Fool you take him for, why has he kept you here these three Weeks, without sending you to, in search of your Father, your Family, and your Relations?
I am convinc'd he still designs it; and that nothing keeps him here, but the Necessity of not coming to a Breach with his Father, in regard to the Match he has propos'd him: Beside, has he not writ to? and has not he Advice that my Father has not been heard of there, almost these twenty Years?
All Sham, meer Evasion; he is afraid, if he should carry you thither, your honest Relations may take you out of his hands, and so blow up all his wicked Hopes at once.
Wicked Hopes! did I ever give him any such?
Has he ever given you any honest ones? can you say, in your Conscience, he has ever once offer'd to marry you?
No! but by his Behaviour I am convinc'd he will offer it, the Moment 'tis in his Power, or consistent with his Honour, to make such a Promise good to me.
His Honour!
I will rely upon it; therefore desire you will not make my Life uneasie, by these ungrateful Jealousies of one, to whom I am, and wish to be oblig'd: For from his Integrity alone, I have resolv'd to hope for Happiness.
Nay, I have done my Duty; if you won't see, at your Peril be it --
Let it be -- This is his hour of visiting me.
Oh! to be sure, keep up your Form; don't see him in a Bed-chamber: This is pure Prudence, when she is liable, where-ever he meets her, to be convey'd where-e'er he pleases.
All the rest of my Life is but waiting 'till he comes: I live only when I'm with him.
Well, go thy ways, thou willful Innocent! I once had almost as much Love for a Man, who poorly left me, to marry an Estate -- And I am now, against my Will, what they call an Old Maid -- but I will not let the Peevishness of that Condition grow upon me -- only keep up the Suspicion of it, to prevent this Creature's being any other than a Virgin, except upon proper Terms.
Desire Mr.to walk in -- Design! impossible! A base designing Mind could never think of what he hourly puts in practice -- And yet, since the late Rumour of his Marriage, he seems more reserv'd than formerly -- he sends in too, before he sees me, to know if I am at leisure -- such new Respect may cover Coldness in the Heart -- itcertainly makes me thoughtful -- I'll know the worst, at once; I'll lay such fair Occasions in his way, that it shall be impossible to avoid an Explanation -- for these Doubts are insupportable! -- But see! he comes, and clears them all.
Madam, your most Obedient -- I am afraid I broke in upon your Rest last Night -- 'twas very late before we parted; but 'twas your own Fault; I never saw you in such agreeable Humour.
I am extremely glad we were both pleas'd; for I thought I never saw you better Company.
Me, Madam! you rally; I said very little.
But, I am afraid, you heard me say a great deal; and when a Woman is in the talking Vein, the most agreeable thing a Man can do, you know, is to have Patience, to hear her.
Then it's pity, Madam, you should ever be silent, that we might be always agreeable to one another.
If I had your Talent, or Power, to make my Actions speak for me, I might indeed be silent, and yet pretend to something more than the Agreeable.
If I might be vain of any thing, in my Power, Madam, 'tis that my Understanding, from all your Sex, has mark'd you out, as the most deserving Object of my Esteem.
Should I think I deserve this, 'twere enough to make my Vanity forfeit the very Esteem you offer me.
How so, Madam?
Because Esteem is the Result of Reason, and to deserve it from good Sense, the Height of Human Glory: Nay, I had rather a Man of Honour should pay me that, than all the Homage of a sincere and humble Love.
You certainly distinguish right, Madam; Love often kindles from external Merit only --
But Esteem arises from a higher Source, the Merit of the Soul --
True -- And great Souls only can deserve it.
Now, I think, they are greater still, that can so charitably part with it.
Now, Madam, you make me vain, since the utmost Pride, and Pleasure of my Life is, that I esteem you -- as I ought.
As he ought! still more perplexing! he neither saves, nor kills my Hope.
But Madam, we grow grave methinks -- Let's find some other Subject -- Pray how did you like the Opera last Night?
First give me leave to thank you, for my Tickets.
O! your Servant, Madam -- But pray tell me, you now, who are never partial to the Fashion, I fancy, must be the properest Judge of a mighty Dispute among the Ladies, that is, whetheroris the more agreeable Entertainment.
With submission now, I cannot be a proper Judge of this Question.
How so, Madam?
Because I find I have a Partiality for one of them.
Pray which is that?
I do not know -- there's something in that Rural Cottage of, her forlorn Condition, her Poverty, her Solitude, her Resignation, her Innocent Slumbers, and that lullingthat's sung over her; it had an Effect upon me, that -- in short I never was so well deceiv'd, at any of them.
Oh! Now then, I can account for the Dispute:, it seems, is the Distress of an injur'd Innocent Woman:, that only of a Manin the same Condition; therefore the Men are mostly concern'd for, and, by a Natural Indulgence, both Sexes for.
So that Judgment, you think, ought to be for one, tho' Fancy and Complaisance have got ground for the other. Well! I believe you will never give me leave to dispute with you on any Subject; for I own,has its Charms for me too: Though in the main, all the Pleasure the best Opera gives us, is but meer Sensation. -- Methinks it's Pity the Mind can't have a little more Share in the Entertainment. -- The Musick's certainly fine; but, in my Thoughts, there's none of your Composers come up to Oldand.
How, Madam! why if a Woman of your Sense were to say this in the Drawing-Room --
Sir, here's Signiorsays he waits your Commands, in the next Room.
You were saying Yesterday, Madam, you had a mind to hear him -- will you give him leave to entertain you now?
By all means: desire the Gentleman to walk in.
I fancy you will find something in this Hand, that is uncommon.
You are always finding ways, Mr., to make Life seem less tedious to me. --
When the Gentleman pleases.
You smile, Madam, to see me so Complaisant to one, whom I pay for his Visit: Now, Iown, I think it is not enough barely to pay those, whose Talents are superior to our own (I mean such Talents, as would become our Condition, if we had them.) Methinks we ought to do something more, than barely gratify them, for what they do at our Command, only because their Fortune is below us.
You say I smile: I assure you it was a Smile of Approbation; for indeed, I cannot but think it the distinguishing part of a Gentleman, to make his Superiority of Fortune as easy to his Inferiors, as he can. -- Now once more to try him.
-- I was saying just now, I believed you would never let me dispute with you, and I dare say, it will always be so: However I must have your Opinion upon a Subject, which created a Debate between my Aunt and me, just before you came hither; she would needs have it, that no Man ever does any extraordinary Kindness or Service for a Woman, but for his own sake.
Well Madam! Indeed I can't but be of her Mind.
What, tho' he should maintain, and support her, without demanding any thing of her, on her part?
Why, Madam, is making an Expence, in the Service of a Valuable Woman (for such I must suppose her) though she should never do him any Favour, nay, though she should never know who did her such Service, such a mighty Heroick Business?
Certainly! I should think he must be a Man of an uncommon Mold.
Dear Madam, why so? 'tis but, at best, a better Taste in Expence: To bestow upon one, whom he may think one of the Ornaments of the whole Creation, to be conscious, that from his Superfluity, an Innocent, a Virtuous Spirit is supported above the Temptations and Sorrows of Life! That he sees Satisfaction, Health and Gladness in her Countenance,while he enjoys the Happiness of seeing her (as that I will suppose too, or he must be too abstracted, too insensible) I say, if he is allowed to delight in that Prospect; alas! what mighty matter is there, in all this?
No mighty matter, in so disinterested a Friendship!
Disinterested! I can't think him so; your Hero, Madam, is no more, than what every Gentleman ought to be, and I believe very many are -- He is only one, who takes more delight in Reflections, than in Sensations: He is more pleased with Thinking, than Eating; that's the utmost you can say of him -- Why, Madam, a greater Expence, than all this, Men lay out upon an unnecessary Stable of Horses.
Can you be sincere, in what you say?
You may depend upon it, if you know any such Man, he does not love Dogs inordinately.
No, that he does not.
Nor Cards, nor Dice.
No.
Nor Bottle Companions.
No.
Nor loose Women.
No, I'm sure he does not.
Take my Word then, if your admired Hero is not liable to any of these kind of Demands, there's no such Preheminence in this, as you imagine: Nay this way of Expence you speak of, is what exalts and raises him, that has a Taste for it: And, at the same time, his Delight is incapable of Satiety, Disgust, or Penitence.
But still I insist his having no private Interest in the Action, makes it prodigious, almost Incredible.
Dear Madam, I never knew you more mistaken: Why, who can be more an Usurer, than he,who lays out his Money in such Valuable Purchases? If Pleasure be worth purchasing, how great a Pleasure is it to him, who has a true Taste of Life, to ease an Aking Heart, to see the humane Countenance lighted up, into Smiles of Joy, on the Receipt of a Bit of Oar, which is superfluous, and otherwise useless in a Man's own Pocket? What could a Man do better with his Cash? This is the Effect of an humane Disposition, where there is only a general Tye of Nature, and common Necessity. What then must it be, when we serve an Object of Merit, of Admiration!
Well! the more you argue against it, the more I shall admire the Generosity.
Nay, nay -- Then, Madam, 'tis time to fly, after a Declaration, that my Opinion strengthens my Adversary's Argument -- I had best hasten to my Appointment with Mr., and begone, while we are Friends, and -- before things are brought to an Extremity --
Well, Madam, what think you of him now pray?
I protest, I begin to fear he is wholly disinterested, in what he does for me. On my Heart, he has no other View, but the meer Pleasure of doing it, and has neither Good or Bad Designs upon me.
Ah! dear Neice! don't be in fear of both! I'll warrant you, you will know time enough, that he is not indifferent.
You please me, when you tell me so: For, if he has any Wishes towards me, I know he will not pursue them, but with Honour.
I wish, I were as confident of one, as t'other -- I saw the respectful Downcast of his Eye, when you catcht him gazing at you during the Musick: He, I warrant, was surpriz'd, as if he had been taken stealing your Watch. O! the undissembled Guilty Look!
But did you observe any such thing, Really? I thought he look'd most Charmingly Graceful! How engaging is Modesty, in a Man, when one knows there is a great Mind within -- So tender a Confusion! and yet, in other Respects, so much himself, so collected, so dauntless, so determin'd!
Ah! Neice! there is a sort of Bashfulness, which is the best Engine to carry on a shameless Purpose: some Men's Modesty serves their Wickedness, as Hypocrisy gains the Respect due to Piety: But I will own to you, there is one hopeful Symptom, if there could be such a thing, as a disinterested Lover; But it's all a Perplexity, till -- till -- till --
Till what?
Till I know whether Mr.and Mr.are really Friends, or Foes -- And that I will be convinced of, before I sleep: For you shall not be deceiv'd.
I'm sure, I never shall, if your Fears can guard me: In the mean time, I'll wrap my self up, in the Integrity of my own Heart, nor dare to doubt of his. As Conscious Honour all his Actions steers; So Conscious Innocence dispels my Fears.
Well,! -- what, with a Face, as if you had never seen me before -- What a Work have I to do now? She has seen some new Visitant, at their House, whose Airs she has catch'd, and is resolv'd to practise them upon me. Numberless are the Changes she'll dance thro', before she'll answer this plain Question;, Have you deliver'd my Master's Letter to your Lady? Nay, I know her too well, to ask an Account of it, in an ordinary Way; I'll be in my Airs as well as she.
-- Well, Madam, as unhappy as you are, at present, pleased to make me, I would not, in the general, be any other than what I am; I would not be a bit wiser, a bit richer, a bit taller, a bit shorter, than I am at this Instant.
Did ever any body doubt, Master, but that you were extremely satisfied with your sweet self?
I am indeed -- The thing I have least reason to be satisfied with, is my Fortune, and I am glad of my Poverty; Perhaps, if I were rich, I shouldoverlook the finest Woman in the World, that wants nothing but Riches, to be thought so.
How prettily was that said? But, I'll have a great deal more, before I'll say one Word.
I should, perhaps, have been stupidly above her, had I not been her Equal; and by not being her Equal, never had Opportunity of being her Slave. I am my Master's Servant, for Hire; I am my Mistress's, from Choice; wou'd she but approve my Passion.
I think, it's the first Time I ever heard you speak of it, with any Sense of the Anguish, if you really do suffer any.
Ah!, can you doubt, after what you have seen?
I know not what I have seen, nor what I have heard; but since I'm at Leisure, you may tell me, When you fell in Love with me; How you fell in Love with me; and what you have suffer'd, or are ready to suffer for me.
Oh! the unmerciful Jade! when I'm in haste about my Master's Letter -- But, I must go thro' it.
-- Ah! too well I remember when, and how, and on what Occasion I was first surpriz'd. It was on the first of, one thousand seven hundred and fifteen, I came into Mr.Service; I was then a Hobble-de-Hoy, and you a pretty little tight Girl, a favourite Handmaid of the Housekeeper. -- At that Time, we neither of us knew what was in us: I remember, I was order'd to get out of the Window, one pair of Stairs, to rub the Sashes clean, -- the Person employ'd, on the innerside, was your Charming self, whom I had never seen before.
I think, I remember the silly Accident: What made ye, you Oaf, ready to fall down into the Street?
You know not, I warrant you -- You could not guess what surpriz'd me. You took no Delight,when you immediately grew wanton, in your Conquest, and put your Lips close, and breath'd upon the Glass, and when my Lips approach'd, a dirty Cloth you rubb'd against my Face, and hid your beauteous Form; when I again drew near, you spit, and rubb'd, and smil'd at my Undoing.
What silly Thoughts you Men have!
We wereand-- but ten times harder was my Fate;could peep only through a Wall, I saw her, saw myin all her Beauty, but as much kept from her as if a hundred Walls between, for there was more, there was her Will against me -- Would she but yet relent! -- Oh,!! shorten my Torment, and declare you pity me.
I believe, it's very sufferable; the Pain is not so exquisite, but that you may bear it, a little longer.
Oh! my charming, if all depended on my Fair One's Will, I could with Glory suffer -- But, dearest Creature, consider our miserable State.
How! Miserable!
We are miserable to be in Love, and under the Command of others than those we love -- with that generous Passion in the Heart, to be sent to and fro on Errands, call'd, check'd and rated for the meanest Trifles. Oh,! you don't know how manyCups, and Glasses, my Passion for you has made me break: You have broke my Fortune, as well as my Heart.
Well, Mr., I cannot but own to you, that I believe, your Master writes and you speak the best of any Men in the World. Never was Woman so well pleas'd with a Letter, as my young Lady was with his, and this is an Answer to it.
This was well done, my Dearest; consider, we must strike out some pretty Livelyhood for ourselves, by closing their Affairs: It will be nothing for them to give us a little Being of our own, some small Tenement, out of their large Possessions: whatever they give us, 'twill be more than what they keep for themselves: one Acre, with, wou'd be worth a whole County without her.
O, could I but believe you!
If not the Utterance, believe the Touch of my Lips.
There's no contradicting you; how closely you argue,!
And will closer, in due time. But I must hasten with this Letter, to hasten towards the Possession of you. -- Then,, consider, how I must be reveng'd, look to it, of all your Skittishness, shy Looks, and at best but coy Compliances.
Oh!, you grow wanton, and sensual, as my Lady calls it, I must not endure it; Oh! Foh! you are a Man, an odious filthy Male Creature; you should behave, if you had a right Sense, or were a Man of Sense, like Mr., with Distance, and Indifference; or let me see some other becoming hard Word, with seeming in-in-inadvertency, and not rush on one as if you were seizing a Prey. But Hush -- the Ladies are coming -- God, don't kiss me above once, and be gone -- Lard, we have been Fooling and Toying, and not consider'd the main Business of our Masters and Mistresses.
Why, their Business is to be Fooling and Toying, as soon as the Parchments are ready.
Well remember'd -- Parchments -- my Lady, to my Knowledge, is preparing Writings between her Coxcomb Cousin, and my Mistress; though my Master has an Eye to the Parchments already prepar'd between your Master Mr., and my Mistress; and I believe, my Mistress herself has sign'd, and seal'd, in her Heart, to Mr.. -- Did I not bid you kiss me but once, and be gone? but I know you won't be satisfy'd.
No, you smooth Creature, how should I!
Well, since you are so humble, or so cool, as to ravish my Hand only, I'll take my Leave of you like a great Lady, and you a Man of Quality.
Pox of all this State.
No, pr'ythee,, mind your Business. We must follow that Interest which will take; but endeavour at that which will be most for us, and we like most -- O here's my young Mistress!
Go, ye liquorish Fool.
Who was that you was hurrying away?
One that I had no mind to part with.
Why did you turn him away then?
For your Ladyship's Service, to carry your Ladyship's Letter to his Master: I could hardly get the Rogue away.
Why, has he so little Love for his Master?
No; but he has so much Love for his Mistress.
But, I thought, I heard him kiss you. Why do you suffer that?
Why, Madam, we Vulgar take it to be a Sign of Love; we Servants, we poor People, that have nothing but our Persons to bestow, or treat for, are forc'd to deal, and bargain by way of Sample; and therefore, as we have no Parchments, or Wax necessary in our Agreements, we squeeze with our Hands, and seal with our Lips, to ratifie Vows and Promises.
But can't you trust one another, without such Earnest down?
We don't think it safe, any more than you Gentry, to come together without Deeds executed.
Thou art a pert merry Hussy.
I wish, Madam, your Lover and you were as happy, asand your Servant are.
You grow impertinent.
I have done, Madam; and I won't ask you, what you intend to do with Mr., what your Father will do with Mr., nor what you all, especially my Lady, mean by admitting Mr.as particularly here, as if he were married to you already; nay, you are married actually as far as People of Quality are.
How's that?
You have different Beds in the same House.
Pshaw! I have a very great Value for Mr., but have absolutely put an End to his Pretensions, in the Letter I gave you for him: But, my Father, in his Heart, still has a mind to him, were it not for this Woman they talk of; and, I am apt to imagine he is married to her, or never designs to marry at all.
Then Mr.--
He had my Parents Leave to apply to me, and by that he has won me, and my Affections: who is to have this Body of mine, without 'em, it seems, is nothing to me; my Mother says, it's indecent for me to let my Thoughts stray about the Person of my Husband: nay, she says, a Maid, rigidly Virtuous, tho' she may have been where her Lover was a thousand times, should not have made Observations enough, to know him from another Man, when she sees him in a third Place.
That is more than the Severity of a Nun, for not to see, when one may, is hardly possible; not to see when one can't, is very easy: at this rate, Madam, there are a great many whom you have not seen who --
Mamma says, the first time you see your Husband should be at that Instant he is made so; when your Father, with the help of the Minister, gives you to him; then you are to see him; then you are to Observe and take Notice of him, because then you are to Obey him.
But does not my Lady remember, you are to Love, as well as Obey?
To Love is a Passion, 'tis a Desire, and we must have no Desires. Oh! I cannot endure the Reflection! With what Insensibility on my Part, with what more than Patience, have I been expos'd, and offer'd to some aukward Booby or other, in every County of?
Indeed, Madam, I wonder, I never heard you speak of it before, with this Indignation.
Every Corner of the Land has presented me with a wealthy Coxcomb. As fast as one Treaty has gone off, another has come on, 'till my Name and Person have been the Tittle Tattle of the whole Town: What is this World come to! No Shame left! To be barter'd for, like the Beasts of the Fields, and that, in such an Instance, as coming together, to an intire Familiarity, and Union of Soul and Body; Oh! and this, without being so much as Well-wishers to each other, but for encrease of Fortune.
But, Madam, all these Vexations will end, very soon, in one for all: Mr.is your Mother's Kinsman, and three hundred Years an older Gentleman than any Lover you ever had; for which Reason, with that of his prodigious large Estate, she is resolved on him, and has sent to consult the Lawyers accordingly. Nay, has (whether you know it or no) been in Treaty with Sir, who, to join in the Settlement, has accepted of a Sum to do it, and is every Moment expected in Town for that Purpose.
How do you get all this Intelligence?
By an Art I have, I thank my Stars, beyond all the Waiting-maids in; the Art of List'ning, Madam, for your Ladyship's Service.
I shall soon know as much as you do; leave me, leave me,, be gone: Here, here, I'll turn you out. My Mother says I must not converse with my Servants; tho' I must converse with no one else.
How unhappy are we, who are born to great Fortunes! No one looks at us, with Indifference, or acts towards us on the Foot of Plain Dealing; yet, by all I have been heretofore offer'd to, or treated for, I have been us'd with the most agreeable of all Abuses, Flattery; but now, by this Flegmatick Fool, I am us'd as nothing, or a meer Thing; He, forsooth! is too wise, too learned to have any regard to Desires, and, I know not what the learned Oaf calls Sentiments of Love and Passion -- Here he comes with my Mother -- It's much if he looks at me; or if he does, takes no more Notice of me, than of any other Moveable in the Room.
How do I admire this noble, this learned Taste of yours, and the worthy Regard you have to our own ancient and honourable House, in consulting a Means, to keep the Blood as pure, and as regularly descended as may be.
Why, really Madam, the young Women of this Age are treated with Discourses of such a Tendency, and their Imaginations so bewilder'd in Flesh and Blood, that a Man of Reason can't talk to be understood: They have no Ideas of Happiness, but what are more gross than the Gratification of Hunger and Thirst.
With how much Reflection he is a Coxcomb?
And in Truth, Madam, I have consider'd it,as a most brutal Custom, that Persons, of the first Character in the World, should go as ordinarily, and with as little Shame, to Bed, as to Dinner with one another. They proceed to the Propagation of the Species, as openly, as to the Preservation of the Individual.
She that willingly goes to Bed to thee, must have no Shame, I'm sure.
Oh Cousin! Cousin! how abstracted, how refin'd, is your Sense of Things! But, indeed, it is too true, there is nothing so ordinary as to say, in the best govern'd Families, my Master and Lady are gone to Bed; one does not know but it might have been said of one's self.
, Madam, instituted otherwise; among the, the whole Female World was pregnant, but none, but the Mothers themselves, knew by whom; their Meetings were secret, and the Amorous Congress always by Stealth; and no such professed Doings between the Sexes, as are tolerated among us, under the audacious Word, Marriage.
Oh! had I liv'd, in those Days, and been a Matron of, one might, with less Indecency, have had ten Children, according to that modest Institution, than one, under the Confusion of our modern, barefac'd manner.
And yet, poor Woman, she has gone thro' the whole Ceremony, and here I stand a melancholy Proof of it.
We will talk then of Business. That Girl walking about the Room there is to be your Wife. She has, I confess, no Ideas, no Sentiments, that speak her born of a thinking Mother.
I have observ'd her; her lively Look, free Air, and disengag'd Countenance speak her very --
Very, What?
If you please, Madam -- to set her a little that way.
, say nothing to him, you are not a Match for him; when you are married, you may speak to such a Husband, when you're spoken to. But, I am disposing of you, above your self, every way.
Madam, you cannot but observe the Inconveniences I expose my self to, in hopes that your Ladyship will be the Consort of my better Part: As for the young Woman, she is rather an Impediment, than a Help, to a Man of Letters and Speculation. Madam, there is no Reflection, no Philosophy, can, at all times, subdue the Sensitive Life, but the Animal shall sometimes carry away the Man: Ha! ay, the Vermilion of her Lips.
Pray, don't talk of me thus.
The pretty enough -- Pant of her Bosom.
Sir; Madam, don't you hear him?
Her forward Chest.
Intollerable!
High Health.
The grave, easy Impudence of him!
Proud Heart.
Stupid Coxcomb!
I say, Madam, her Impatience, while we are looking at her, throws out all Attractions -- her Arms -- her Neck -- what a Spring in her Step!
Don't you run me over thus, you strange Unaccountable!
What an Elasticity in her Veins and Arteries!
I have no Veins, no Arteries.
Oh, Child, hear him, he talks finely, he's a Scholar, he knows what you have.
The speaking Invitation of her Shape, the Gathering of her self up, and the Indignation you see in the pretty little thing -- now, I amconsidering her, on this Occasion, but as one that is to be pregnant.
The familiar, learned, unseasonable Puppy!
And pregnant undoubtedly she will be yearly. I fear, I shan't, for many Years, have Discretion enough to give her one fallow Season.
Monster! there's no bearing it. The hideous Sot! -- there's no enduring it, to be thus survey'd like a Steed at Sale.
At Sale! she's very illiterate -- But she's very well limb'd too; turn her in; I see what she is.
Go, you Creature, I am asham'd of you.
No harm done -- you know, Madam, the better sort of People, as I observ'd to you, treat by their Lawyers of Weddings
and the Woman in the Bargain, like the Mansion-House in the Sale of the Estate, is thrown in, and what that is, whether good or bad, is not at all consider'd.
I grant it, and therefore make no Demand for her Youth, and Beauty, and every other Accomplishment, as the common World think 'em, because she is not Polite.
Madam, I know, your exalted Understanding, abstracted, as it is, from vulgar Prejudices, will not be offended, when I declare to you, I Marry to have an Heir to my Estate, and not to beget a Colony, or a Plantation: This young Woman's Beauty, and Constitution, will demand Provision for a tenth Child at least.
With all that Wit, and Learning, how considerate! What an Oeconomist!
-- Sir, I cannot make her any other than she is; or say she is much better than the other young Women of this Age, or fit for much, besides being a Mother; but I have given Directions for the Marriage Settlements,and SirCouncil is to meet ours here, at this Hour, concerning his joyning in the Deed, which when executed, makes you capable of settling what is due toFortune: Her self, as I told you, I say nothing of.
No, no, no, indeed, Madam, it is not usual, and I must depend upon my own Reflection, and Philosophy, not to overstock my Family.
I cannot help her, Cousin; but she is, for ought I see, as well as the Daughter of any body else.
That is very true, Madam.
The Lawyers are come, and now we are to hear what they have resolv'd as to the point whether it's necessary that Sirshould join in the Settlement, as being what they call in the Remainder. But, good Cousin, you must have Patience with 'em. These Lawyers, I am told, are of a different kind, one is what they call a Chamber-Council, the other a Pleader: The Conveyancer is slow, from an Imperfection in his Speech, and therefore shun'd the Bar, but extremely Passionate, and impatient of Contradiction: The other is as warm as he; but has a Tongue so voluble, and a Head so conceited, he will suffer no body to speak but himself.
You mean old Serjeant, and Counsellor? I have heard of 'em.
The same: shew in the Gentlemen.
Gentlemen, this is the Party concern'd, Mr.; and I hope you have consider'd of the matter.
Yes, Madam, we have agreed that it must be by Indent-dent-dent-dent-
Yes, Madam, Mr. Serjeant and my self have agreed, as he is pleas'd to inform you, that it must be an Indenture Tripartite, and Tripartite let it be, for Sirmust needs be a Party; old, in the Year 1619, says, in that ancient Roll, in Mr. Serjeant's Hands, as recourse thereto being had, will more at large appear --
Yes, and by the Deeds in your Hands, it appears, that --
Mr. Serjeant, I beg of you to make no Inferences upon what is in our Custody; but speak to the Titles in your own Deeds -- I shall not show that Deed till my Client is in Town.
You know best your own Methods.
The single Question is, whether the Intail is such, that my Cousin Siris necessary in this Affair?
Yes, as to the Lordship of, but not as to the Messuage of.
I say thatthatis in us. That is to say the remainder thereof, as well as that of.
You go upon the Deed of Sir, made in the middle of the last Century, precedent to that in which oldmade over the Remainder, and made it pass to the Heirs general, by which your Client comes in; and I question whether the Remainder even ofis in him -- But we are willing to wave that, and give him a valuable Consideration. But we shall not purchase what is in us for ever, asis, at the rate as we guard against the Contingent of Mr.having no Son -- Then we know Siris the first of the Collateral Male Line in this Family -- Yet --
Sir,is --
I apprehend you very well, and your Argument might be of Force, and we would be inclin'd to hear that in all its Parts -- But, Sir, I see veryplainly what you are going into -- I tell you, it is as probable a Contingent that Sirmay die before Mr., as that he may outlive him.
Sir, we are not ripe for that yet, but I must say --
Sir, I allow you the whole extent of that Argument; but that will go no farther than as to the Claimants under old, -- I am of Opinion, that according to the Instruction of Sir, he could not dock the Entail, and then create a new Estate for the Heirs General.
Sir, I have not patience to be told that, when
I will allow it you, Mr Serjeant; but there must be the word Heirs for ever, to make such an Estate as you pretend.
I must be impartial, tho' you are Council for my side of the Question -- Were it not that you are so good as to allow him what he has not said, I should think it very hard you should answer him without hearing him -- But Gentlemen, I believe you have both consider'd this matter, and are firm in your different Opinions: 'Twere better therefore you proceeded according to the particular Sense of each of you, and gave your Thoughts distinctly in Writing -- And do you see, Sirs, pray let me have a Copy of what you say, in.
Why, what is all we have been saying? -- In! Oh! but I forgot my self, you're a Wit -- But however, to please you, Sir, you shall have it, in as plain terms, as the Law will admit of.
But I would have it, Sir, without delay.
That, Sir, the Law will not admit of: the Courts are sitting at, and I am this moment oblig'd to be at every one of them, and t'would be wrong if I should not be in the Hall to attend one of 'em at least, the rest would take it ill else -- Therefore, I must leave what I have said to Mr.Serjeant's Consideration, and I will digest his Arguments on my part, and you shall hear from me again, Sir.
Agreed, agreed.
Mr.is very quick -- He parted a little abruptly.
He could not bear my Argument, I pincht him to the quick about that.
I saw that, for he durst not so much as hear you -- I shall send to you, Mr. Serjeant, as soon as Sircomes to Town, and then I hope all may be adjusted.
I shall be at my Chambers, at my usual Hours.
Madam, if you please, I'll now attend you to the Tea-Table, where I shall hear from your Ladyship, Reason, and good Sense, after all this Law and Gibberish.
'Tis a wonderful thing, Sir, that Men of Professions do not study to talk the Substance of what they have to say, in the Language of the rest of the World: Sure, they'd find their Account in it.
They might, perhaps, Madam, with People of your good Sense; but, with the generality 'twould never do: The Vulgar would have no respect for Truth and Knowledge, if they were exposed to naked View. Truth is too simple, of all Art bereav'd: Since the World will -- why let it be deceiv'd.<|endoftext|>Who's at the
Door?
 It is I, Sir, what
would you be
pleas'd to have?
 What a Clock is it?
 It is seven.
 A Quarter past seven?
 Half an Hour past
seven.
 Three Quarters past
seven.
 Upon the Stroke of 
eight.
 Has it struck
already?
 If it ha'n't struck,
it is not far from
it.It can't be so late.
 You must be
mistaken.
 Where are my 
Slippers?
 They stand under the
Bed.
 Give me my
Night-Gown.
 It lies upon the Bed.
 Have you made a
Fire?
 It has burnt above
an Hour.
 Give me a clean Shirt,
my Shoes & Stockings.
 Shall I warm your
Shirt?
 No, the Air is warm
to Day.
 Give me my Shoes
and Stockings.
 Will you dress your
self already?
 Yes, I expect
Strangers.
 What Cloths will
you put on?
 My black Suit.
 How is the Weather?Fair, rainy, cloudy,
windy.
 It is cold, warm.
 It rains, snows, hails.
 It freezes, thaws.
 It is a thick Fog.
 Give me some clean
Water.
 And a clean
Neck-cloth.
 Has Mr. N. been
here.
 Yes, and will come
again an Hour hence.
 I can't stay for him,
I must go out.
 Would you have any,
Thing else, Sir?
 Yes, my Gloves, Hat,
Sword, Cane, and
Cloke.
 Somebody knocks at
the Door.
 See who it is.
 It is Mr. N.
 Let him come in. Good Morrow to
you Sir.
 How do you do,
Sir?
 Very well, at your
Service.
 Not very well.
 I did not sleep well
last Night.
 My Head akes.
 I have the
Tooth-ake.
 And pray how do
you do, Sir?
 Thank God, very
well.
 Never better in my 
Life.
 Always at your 
Service.
 I am obliged to you
Sir.
 I am infinitely
beholden to you.I am wholly yours.
 You are too
complaisant.
 I rejoice at the
Honour of seeing you
so well.
 The Honour is mine.
 I am as glad to see
you.
 I have not had the
Satisfaction a long
while.
 Pray Sir, sit down.
 I thank you Sir, my
Time is short.
 You shall not go
yet.
 You'll do me the
Favour to breakfast
with me.
 Pray don't trouble
your self on my
Account.
 I never eat in a
Morning.
 I shall give you
nothing but a Dish of
Tea or Coffee.It is more than
sufficient.
 But I must be going.
 You are always full
of Business.
 The Days are short,
and Business will
be minded.
 I won't hinder you
now, but I don't
reckon this a Visit.
 You have laid a great
Obligation on me.
 I am your most 
humble Servant, Sir.
 I am yours with all
my Heart.
 My Service to all
Friends at Home. Can you make me
a handsome Suit of
Cloaths, after the
newest Fashion?Sir, you need not
doubt of that, I
have work'd these
twenty Years for
Persons of the best
Quality.
 What will you have
it made of?
 You shall first make
me a Suit of the
finest Cloth, and
then a Summer
Suit.
 Have you bought the
Cloth already?
 Yes, there it is.
 How much is there,
Sir?
 Five Yards.
 It will hardly be
enough.
 Pardon me, enough
in Conscience.
 You must consider,
Sir, they wear
their Cloaths long
now.
 However I'll see.
 What Lining shall I
take?
 East-India Sattin.And what Buttons?
 Plain silk Buttons.
 Gold (Silver)
Buttons.
 Shall I find them?
 Yes, but don't charge
me too dear.
 When must you have
it?
 At furthest on
Sunday.
 What is to Day?
 Thursday.
 You shall have it.
 Don't promise, unless
you design to keep
your Word.
 You may depend on
it. Well, have you
brought my Cloaths?Yes, Sir, here they
are.
 Try them on.
 Be pleas'd, Sir, to put
on the Coat.
 Let me see if it be
well made.
 I believe, Sir, you will
be very well
satisfy'd with it.
 Methinks it's very 
long.
 It is the Fashion.
 Button it.
 It is too streight for
me.
 It fits you exactly.
 The Sleeves are too
wide.
 Not at all, they are as
they should be.
 The Breeches are
very streight.
 They must be so, it
is the newest 
Fashion.
 The Suit becomes
you very well.
 Where are the
Remnants of my Cloth?There are none at all
left.
 Have you made your
Bill?
 No, Sir, I han't had
Time to do it.
 Bring it to Morrow
and I'll pay you
your Money. Have you any Shoes
that will fit me?
 I'll see, if you please
to sit down a
little.
 What Shoes will you
have, Sir?
 Good strong Shoes
this dirty Weather.
 With wooden or
leathern Heels?
 Wooden.
 This Pair will fit
you.
 They are too little,
they pinch me.What do you think
of these?
 I don't like them at
all, they are
clownish.
 Then you must
bespeak a Pair.
 But I must have 'em
to Morrow.
 You shall, Sir. Here are your Shoes.
 They are not
fashionable, they are too
long.
 Make me another
Pair.
 I have brought
another Pair with me.
 These are better than
the other.
 These are good.
 What's the Price of
them?
 Six Shillings.They are too dear.
 There's a Crown for
you. Mistress, what must
I give you to wash
my Linnen?
 How will you have
it wash'd, Sir?
 By the Dozen, by the
Piece, or by the
Quarter?
 What do you take a
Dozen?
 According to the
Fineness, Sir.
 Eight Pence, or
twelve Pence the
Dozen.
 But you must pay for
your Shirts and
Neckcloths apart.
 How much?According as they
are, Sir.
 A Penny, or two
Pence a Neckcloth,
and a Groat a
Shirt.
 I'll give you six Pence
a Dozen, three
Pence a Shirt, and
a Penny a 
Neckcloth.
 I won't stand with
you, Sir.
 Bring it again on
Saturday. Sir, here's your
Linnen.
 What makes it look
so yellow?
 I hardly know it.
 You have quite
spoil'd it.Sir, you must pardon 
me this Time.
 It never is so white
this dirty Weather
as in Summer.
 It is not well iron'd.
 I'll do it better
another Time.
 Pray don't be angry,
Sir.
 How much does it
come to?
 Six Shillings.
 Come again on
Monday, then I'll pay
you, and give you
more foul
Linnen.
 Your Servant, Sir. Coachman.Your Pleasure, Sir?
 Are you hired?
 No, Sir, whither
would you have
me drive?
 To Court.
 What must I give
you to carry me
thither?
 Two Shillings.
 Two Shillings from
hence to Court?
 It is my Fare.
 Make Haste then.
 Hold Coachman, I
must stay here a
little.
 Pray, Sir, don't stay
long.
 I'll come again
immediately.
 I must stay here some
Time, I'll pay you
by the Hour.
 What must I give
you an Hour?
 Eighteen Pence.
 That's too much.
 We won't disagree,
Sir.Hold Coachman, I
must go out here.
 Shall I stay for you,
Sir?
 No, there's your
Money. What will you buy,
Sir?
 What do you look
for, Sir?
 A Piece of good
Spanish Cloth for a
Suit of Cloaths.
 Be pleas'd to come in
Sir, I have the best
in Town.
 Shew me a Piece of
the best black or
colour'd.
 There's a fine Piece,
Sir, if you like theColour.The Cloth is good,
but I don't like the
Colour;
 It is too dark.
 There's a lighter
Colour.
 I like the Colour, but
the Cloth is too
coarse.
 There's no finer to be
had for Money.
 What's this a Yard?
 The very lowest is
eighteen Shillings.
 How! eighteen
Shillings? sure you take
me for a Stranger.
 No, Sir, we make
no Difference.
 I'm not us'd to make
Words, I'll give
you 3 Crowns.
 Indeed it cost more.
 It is too dear, come
I'll give you t'other
Shilling.I can't give it one
Penny under 17
Shillings.
 Well, cut off 5 Yards,
and give me good
Measure.
 You shall have due
Measure, but I do
not get a Shilling
by you.
 Have you good Hats,
and Silk Stockings?
 Yes, Sir, the best
in Town, of all
Sorts.
 Let me see them.
 I do not like your
Hats, they are too
thin.
 I have thicker and
stronger if you
desire them.
 I'll consider of it,
and come again
to Morrow.
 You will not find
better, Sir, in the
whole Town.What do you ask for
these Silk
Stockings? They are
very light.
 I have heavier, but
they are knit.
 No, I like these
better, what shall I
give you a Pair?
 The lowest is sixteen
Shillings.
 I'll give you twelve:
 And will take 3 Pair.
 Truly, Sir, I cannot
give them for that
Price.
 Well, I'll give you
40 Shillings for 3
Pair.
 Come, Sir, I won't
stand with you.
 Will you have your
Goods carried
home, Sir?
 Yes, and send me
half a Dozen ofwhite Gloves, and
your Bill with
them.
 I am obliged to you,
Sir.
 I hope you'll be my
Customer another
Time.
 With all my Heart. Master, whither are
you bound?
 For Hambro'.
 When do you design
to sail?
 As soon as the Wind
serves.
 With the first fair
Wind.
 Where does your
Ship lye.
 Here just by, you
may see it if you
please.
 Have you got any
Passengers?Yes, Sir, I have a
great many.
 What shall I give you
for my Passage?
 Three Guineas is the
common Price.
 Must I find my own
Provision?
 Yes, Sir, and pay for
your Servants
besides, if you have 
any.
 You are too dear with
me.
 I'll give you two
Guineas, and one for
my Servant.
 I won't disagree with
you, Sir.
 You must let me have
a good Cabbin.
 You shall have good
Convenience.
 Sir, the Wind is
good.
 I'll send my Goods on
Board 
immediately, and go downmy self towards
Evening.
 Methinks the Wind
is come about.
 It is a great Storm.
 The Wind is yet very
fair, as good as we
can wish.
 It is 
South-South-West.
 South West and by
West.
 If the Wind continues
so, we shall soon
get a Sight of
Helgoland.
 What Land is that?
 An Island at the
Mouth of the Elve.
 There you may see
the Island, Sir.
 How far have we
now to the River?
 Four German Miles.
 And how far from
thence to
Hambro'?
 Eighteen Miles.How soon may we
hope to be in 
Hambro'?
 To Morrow Night
if the Wind don't
fail us. Landlord, can we
have a Lodging
with you to Night?
 Yes, Sir, we have
Rooms enough, and
very good Beds.
 Will ye be pleas'd,
Gentlemen, to 
alight?
 Shew us a Room.
 Will ye take the
Trouble to walk
up, Gentlemen?
 What have you got
to eat?We have a Piece of
Beef on the Spit.
 Bring it up as soon as
it is enough.
 Will you have
nothing else,
Gentlemen?
 Yes, a Fricassy of
Chickens, and a
Couple of boil'd
Rabbits.
 But make Haste.
 Immediately Sir.
 Give us in the mean
Time a Bottle of
good old Hock for
a Whet?
 What will you be
pleas'd to drink at
Table?
 A good Glass of Beer,
and a Flask of
Burgundy.
 You shall have every
Thing to your
Satisfaction.
 Gentlemen, be pleas'd
to sit down, the
Meat is upon the
Table.Give us first some
Water to wash our
Hands.
 Pray, Sir, sit down.
 Shall I help you to
some of the
Fricassy.
 It is very good, but
a little too much
seasoned.
 The Beef is roasted
too much.
 It has neither Gravy
nor Moisture left
in it.
 Your Health, Sir.
 Sir, I thank you.
 Is the Wine good?
 So, so.
 It is none of the best.
 It is very good.
 You don't eat, Sir.
 I have no great
Appetite.
 I am tired with the
Journey.
 I am fitter for the
Bed, than the
Table.Are our Beds made?
 Yes, Sir.
 Let them be well
air'd.
 Where is your
necessary House?
 There in that Corner.
 Let us have
Looking-glasses.
 I wish you a good
Night, Sir.
 I wish you a good
Nights Rest. Good Morrow to
you, Gentlemen.
 How do you do
Landlord?
 Is it time to rise?
 It is five a Clock.You desir'd to be
wak'd early.
 Is the Stage-Coach
gone?
 An Hour ago.
 At Break of Day.
 Get up Cousin, it is
Time to be going.
 Have you slept well?
 Not very well, I am
not us'd to 
travelling.
 Shall we breakfast
first, or shall we go
out fasting?
 If you please, Sir,
we'll first drink a
Dish of Coffee, and
eat a Mouthful of
Bread and Butter.
 And in the mean
Time pay our
Landlord.
 What have we to
pay, Landlord?Your Reckoning is
none of the largest.
 Altogether 30
Shillings.
 Is not that too much?
 No, Gentlemen, I 
have reckon'd
every Thing as low 
as possible.
 There's a Guinea and
a half for you, and
then we have a
Bottle of old Hock
to come in.
 I won't stand with
you for that.
 You are welcome,
Gentlemen.
 Favour me with
your Company
again quickly.
 Farewel Landlord.
 A good Journey to
you Gentlemen. Mistress, have you
Lodgings to Let.
 Yes, Sir, at your
Service.
 Will you have them
below, or up one
Pair of Stairs?
 Towards the Street,
or backwards?
 Furnish'd or
unfurnish'd?
 A Parlour and
Bed-Chamber up one
Pair of Stairs, next
the Street, and
ready furnish'd.
 Be pleas'd to walk
up, Sir.
 Here is a very
handsome Parlour, with
a Bed-Chamber
adjoining.
 What do you ask for 
these Rooms?Will you hire them
by the Year, the
Month, or the
Week?
 By the Week.
 The lowest is five
Shillings a Week.
 I'll give you four.
 I never had less than
I ask you.
 I'll give no more.
 It is too little, unless
you find your own
Fire and Candles.
 We shan't differ.
 Are your Beds good?
 Be pleas'd to see 
them, Sir.
 Make every Thing
ready; I'll fetch my
Goods, and come
again presently.What do you call
this Street?
 St. James's-Street.
 What Sign have you?
 The King's Arms. Your most obedient
Servant, Sir.
 I am yours, Sir, with
all my Heart.
 How am I so
fortunate to meet with
you here, Sir?
 I think my self very
happy to meet
with so good a
Friend in a Foreign
Country.
 How long have you
been in Hambro'?
 Since last Night.
 Where do you lodge,
Sir?In the Emperor's
Court.
 You are well lodg'd.
 Do you come from
England now, Sir?
 No, Sir, I come out
of Germany.
 How long have you
been from England?
 Upwards of 2 Years.
 Then you are Master
of the German
Language, I suppose.
 I staid some Time at
Leipsick to learn
it.
 I presume you speak
German too, Sir?
 I am but a Beginner,
and should be glad
of your Assistance.
 My help will be but
of little Service to
you.
 Pardon me, I should
be glad of anHour's 
Conversation with you on
that Head.
 When you please, Sir.
 Over a Bottle.
 Where can we have
a Glass of good
Wine?
 We have an excellent
Flask of Burgundy
in my Quarters.
 I'll wait on you this
Evening, with your
Permission.
 You will infinitely
oblige me, Sir. According to my
Promise, Sir, I take
the Freedom of
paying my
Respects to you.I take it as a great
Favour.
 Pray, Sir, sit down.
 You'll give me Leave,
Sir, to put you in
Mind of your last
Promise.
 What was it, pray?
 To lend me your
Assistance towards
learning the
German Language.
 I am a Scholar my
self yet.
 You are arriv'd to a
great Perfection.
 Had you a Master of
Languages?
 Yes, Sir, and I make
Use of him yet.
 What do you give him
a Month?
 Three Dollars.
 How often does he
come to you?Three Times a Week.
 How do you like the
German Language?
 Very well, it is an
ancient, noble, and
copious Language.
 Is it difficult to learn?
 Very difficult.
 Wherein consists the
Difficulty, in the
Pronunciation?
 No, the
Pronunciation is very easie:
 For the Germans
write no more
Letters than they
pronounce.
 The Germanandare the most
difficult for an
Englishman.
 Because they are
pronounc'd so deep in
the Throat.
 What other
Difficulties do you find in
the German
Language?The great Variety of
Terminations in
the Declension of
the Articles and
Substantives.
 The threefold
Terminations of the
Adjectives.
 And the Government
of the Cases by the
Prepositions.
 Are the Verbs
difficult?
 No, for the Germans
have but one
Conjugation, and but
two simple Tenses,
as we have.
 The irregular Verbs
are indeed
something hard,
numerous and very
variable.
 Is the Position easie?
 No, that is another
great Difficulty.
 Especially to one who
is us'd to a natural
Construction.What Grammar do
you make use of?
 That is what is
wanting.
 How! have the
Germans no
Grammar?
 Yes, they have indeed
some.
 But as the
German is
explained, and the Rules
given in German,
they are of little
Use to an English
Beginner.
 Pray send me your
Master of
Languages.
 He shall wait on you
to Morrow.
 I thank you, Sir.
 When shall I have the
Honour of your
Visit?
 I'll pay my Respects
to you to
Morrow Evening.I shall expect the
Honour. Did you send for
me, Sir?
 Yes, Sir, I should be
glad of some
Instruction in the
English Tongue.
 Have you a spare
Hour?
 Yes, Sir, this Hour
from 11, to 12.
 What must I give
you a Month?
 Two Ducats.
 How often do you
come a Week?
 I reckon 16 Hours
a Month.I'll give you your
Price, but pray be
diligent.
 I hope I shall give
you Satisfaction.
 When shall we
begin?
 Now if you please.
 What shall we begin
with?
 Can you speak any
English?
 I made a Beginning
some Years ago.
 Pray let me hear you
read.
 How do you like my
Pronunciation?
 Indifferent, did you
learn by Rule?
 By Rote.
 The common Fault
of most Masters of
Languages.
 Do you know any
Thing of the
English Grammar?
 Very little, I can only
repeat the auxiliaryVerbs, and form
a regular Verb
Active.
 And then I know the
irregular Verbs by
Heart.
 That is a good
Beginning.
 Do you know any
Thing of the Use
and Construction
of the Cases and
Tenses?
 Nothing at all.
 Nor the particular
Use of sundry
Verbs?
 No, Sir, I know
nothing but what I
have learn'd by
Rote.
 Now I know how far
you are advanc'd I
can the better tell
what Method to
take.
 Pray, what Method
shall we make Use
of?
 We will spend the
first half of our
Hour in Reading,and explaining at
the same Time.
 What Book shal I
read?
 As you already in part
understand what
you read, you shall
begin with
modern Comedies.
 There you will find
the most concise,
beautiful, and
expressive Phrases
of the English
Tongue.
 How shall we employ
the Remainder of 
our Time?
 In making the
necessary Observations
upon the
Etymology and
Construction of the different
Parts of Speech.
 And sometimes in
correcting or
examining what you
do in my Absence.
 What shall I do in
your Absence?First learn the
Vocabulary.
 Then the short
familiar Phrases.
 Afterwards the
Proverbs and familiar
Dialogues.
 At Times, the Rules
of Syntax and their
Examples.
 And then proceed to
Translation.
 What shall I
translate?
 Some short Italian
or French Letters.
 Why not German?
 Because the other,
especially the French,
are more adapt to
the English
Epistolary Style.
 Wherein consists the
Beauty of the
English Epistolary
Style?That it be short,
natural, easie, pithy,
and expressive.
 I shall follow your
Directions in every
Thing.
 I'll wait on you again
to Morrow.
 You'll oblige me.
 Your humble 
Servant, Sir.
 Farewel. Sir, I took the
Liberty of sending
for you;
 And am oblig'd to
you for your ready
Attendance.
 It is the least part of
my Duty,especially to so good a
Friend.
 But pray, Sir, what
ails you?
 I am very much out
of Order.
 I am very much
indispos'd.
 I have a violent
Head-ake:
 And a great Pain in
my Stomach.
 How long have you
been so?
 Since Yesterday.
 Did you sleep well
last Night?
 Not a Wink, I am
very restless.
 Have you an
Appetite?
 Not the least.
 I have an Aversion
to all Meat:
 But I have a
continual Thirst.
 Let me feel your
Pulse?
 You have a Fever.You must be let
Blood.
 Be sure you don't go
out.
 Keep your self warm,
and as much as
you can to Bed.
 Give me a Pen and
Ink.
 I will prescribe you
something.
 Send for this from 
the Apothecary's.
 Take it at ten a
Clock, & compose
your self to rest.
 Be blooded early in
the Morning:
 And about Ten I'll
wait on you again.
 I am oblig'd to you,
your Orders shall
be punctually
obey'd. How do you do to
Day, Sir?Somewhat better.
 I have had some
Rest.
 Have you been let
Blood?
 Yes, Sir, the Surgeon
is just gone.
 Let me see the Blood.
 There it is in the
Window.
 It was high Time.
 Your whole Mass of
Blood is corrupted.
 You must take a
Vomit to cleanse your
Stomach.
 And to Morrow I'll
give you a Purge.
 Does your Head ake
yet?
 Not so much as
Yesterday.
 More than this 
Morning.
 Your Fever has 
almost left you.
 The worst is past.You won't die this
Time.
 I hope to see you
abroad again in a
Day or two.
 I have a Stomach to
eat.
 May I eat a roasted
Chicken?
 That can't hurt you.
 What shall I drink?
 Some small Beer, and
after Dinner a Dish
of Tea.
 May I drink no Wine?
 The less the Better.
 However, you may
put a Glass of Sack
into your Beer.
 I'll see you again to
Morrow, & then I 
hope you will have
no further
Occasion for me.
 I am infinitely oblig'd
to you. Do you know that
young Lady, who
is walking there?
 No, I don't
remember I ever saw her:
 But she is very
handsome.
 She is reckoned a
great Beauty.
 She is the Tost of
the Town.
 How do you like
her?
 She is very beautiful.
Her Shape and Gate
are lovely and 
charming.
 She has fine Eyes,
and an excellent
Carriage.She has a free easie
Air, which is very
taking.
 Her Hair is as black
as a Coal.
 Her Skin is as white
as the driven Snow:
 And yet she has a
lively, fresh, and
ruddy Complexion.
 Her Lips are as red
as Coral, and her
Teeth as white as
Ivory.
 She has a well set
Neck.
 Her Breasts are of a
good Size;
 And as clear as 
Chrystal.
 Her Arms are like
Alabaster.
 What do you think
of her?
 I think she is a
perfect Beauty.
 She is incomparable.
 And yet with all this
Treasure of Beauty
she can't get a
Husband.Perhaps her Temper
does not answer
her Beauty.
 In every Respect.
 She is wise, discreet,
meek & courteous.
 Religious and
virtuous.
 Punctual in her
Duty to God and
Man.
 Skill'd in all Sciences.
 And pray what can
hinder this
excellent Person from
being sought by
every Body?
 What governs the
World.<|endoftext|>Well, Friend, what think you now of our Preachers?
They seem to have a deal of Fervour, and what you call Zeal; and I hope are honest Men and mean well; but truly I think 'em a little touch'd in their Heads, and are going into a Distemper call'd by Physicians.
I am sorry, Friend, you shou'd take in such an Opinion of them; for I judge them to be not only good Men, but to be endowed with a large Measure of the.
The Spirit of God is a Wise, Calm, reasonable Spirit; and the Author of none but wise and reasonable Discourses, Gestures and Actions. I hope you will not charge their Grimaces, Gesticulations, bodily Heats, weak and rash Speeches and strange Doctrines on the Spirit of God; nor any thing that is false and absurd, Uncharitable or Ridiculous.
I acknowledge the Spirit which isis wise, gentle, meek and mild, charitable and kind; yet we read of very odd Things the Prophets of God did when filled by his Spirit, and animated by holy Zeal.
WhatProphets did in an Age and Country when and where it was customary to teach Men by Types, Figures and Signs is not to be drawn into Imitation by Christians. Nor do we find that the Apostles and first Preachers, sent out by Christ, practised any such Things. And the Discourses of the Prophets and of Christ and his Apostles are wise, calm, charitable, just and strong. Nor can I think their Behaviour was any way odd, scenical and antick, such as becomes a Stage rather than the Pulpit.Besides, your Preachers give not the least Proof that they have more of the Spirit of God than other Men.
You know that by the Foolishness of Preaching God saveth Souls, and chooseth weak Things to confound the Mighty.
There is a wide difference between, and the. The Gentile Philosophers and Wise Men called all Preaching of the heavenly Doctrines of a crucified Saviour, even the rational and noble Sermons ofand. But wasto rise from the Dead and hear at what a rate your Ministers murdered and mangled the Gospel of his Master, he wou'd call it.
If God convert Souls by it, this will justify it against all your Satyr.
May not a Friend say, if God convert Souls byand, by broad Hats and Coats cut to the Quick, and by silent Meetings, will not this justify them? Conversion is the change of Men's Hearts and Lives, and their Living according to the Gospel; which is quite another Thing, and far better than raising the Passions, striking the Imaginations of weak Women and Enthusiastick Men.Besides, what Aptitude have bodily Motions, wry Faces, distorted Limbs, and tuneful Nonsense to convert Souls?
I hope you wou'd not have our Preachers to stand stock still in the Pulpit, and deliver their Sermons like so many speaking Posts. I love to see and hear a Man talk with Life and Concern, as if he was in Earnest.
I do not likeany better than you. But great is the Difference between the silly Motions and Gestures, Screwings and Tones of your Preachers; and that Action and Gesture which carrieth Dignity in it, and which becometh the Awfulness of the Gospel Doctrine, and the Gravity of the Pulpit. Tho' I approve of neither, yet I had rather see ain the Pulpit than aor a: As I had rather see Peopleunder a dull Sermon, thanat the ridiculous Behaviour of the Preacher.
You represent our Preachers as a parcel of Fools, I think very unjustly; and that you mistake the Fruits of the Spirit of God, for the Effects of Folly and Enthusiasm.
Your Preachers may have common Sense upon other Subjects and in other Places, but they seem to leave it all behind them when they get into the Pulpit, and begin to talk Divinity. And if I am mistaken in 'em, I cannot help it. My Reason and the Gospel tell me, That the Fruits of the Spirit are Wisdom, Prudence, Meekness, Goodness, strong Arguments, warm Perswasions, Sincerity of Heart and Beneficence of Life; such as we find in the Life and Sermons of St.,and of his Master. --- Not bodily Passions and Postures, wild and furious Zeal, Uncharitable Censures, damnatory Sentences, and Unscriptural Doctrines.
You run on to great Lengths; if some of our Preachers are not quite so prudent and modest as we cou'd wish 'em; I am sure they are veryPreachers, andDivines, and on this Score we value 'em.
InSense every Man is sound andwho preaches up thedelivered in theand; or who perhaps publish the gross Errors of Dr., and otherWriters. But in the Judgment ofevery Man is sound and orthodox, who isand; that is, who seeks the Truth with all his Heart, and lives agreeably to the Gospel. That one Text proves it.Psal.cxi.10. This notion of Orthodoxy is supported by the whole Body of the, which every where pronouncesandChristians blessed. It is also consonant to the dictates of, that a wise and good God shou'd not require of any Man more thanto find out the Truth, andin practising it. The plain Language of Scripture and Reason is, that everyis a sound Man, and everyOrthodox.
But I mean, that our Ministers preach sound Doctrine, and are themselves sound in the Faith.
So does every faithful Preacher, preach sound Doctrine; and every upright Christian is sound in the Faith. Upright and honest Men, unless under the strong Prejudices of a false Education, cannot mistake the great Doctrines and Laws of Jesus Christ; if, instead of searching the Books of Men, they look for them in God's own Book. But as you are wonderful Dealers in these two Wordsand, let us briefly consider in what Sense St.uses the word. ByI apprehend St.means Doctrine that condemns Whoring and Lewdness, Lying and Stealing, Malice and Murder, that is, the greatof Religion and Morality. Now what Ministers best preach this sort of, I leave you to Judge. Ais a Mind steddy to Christ and Christianity; or a being. Psal cxix. 8. Themention'dsurely does not mean the. nor any, nor any Words which Man's Wisdom (or Folly) have taught; but Words which the Holy Ghost hath taught, Words of Scripture. Men who will not indureare Men who love not to hear, and will not be governed by the Laws of Jesus Christ; Men who (with all their Faith) walk after their own Lusts; who have itching Ears, and run from Preacher to Preacher, being fond of every new Doctrine. These are the People who can't indure sound Doctrine; and you know who they are.inare Gospel motives and strong Arguments, fit for Exhortation and Conviction., v. 13. Men's living up to their Knowledge, Faith and Profession; not attending to Fables, and human Doctrines; owning God, as well as with the Mouth. ver. 16.is preaching and giving Rules of Practise, of Virtue and Morality to both Sexes, to the Aged and the Young suitable to their State.means to be faithful; asmeans to be sincerely Charitable.is just and rational Speech, which cannot be confuted and condemned;by human Doctrines;delivered, not comically; from a, not an inflamed Head. Thus I have gone thro' all the Texts in thewhich speak of; and leave you to judge whether your new tantivy Preachers, who come riding in from all Parts of the Country, are theyou boast them to be.
I own the Contexts of these several Texts seem to countenance your Exposition of them. Therefore to let the Wordsandlye by; I think our Ministers teach veryDoctrine, and that there was great need of 'em in Town to put a stop to those Errors which begin to spread so fast.
I am willing, Neighbour, as far as my Ability goes, to try the Matter with you, on which side the Truth lies. To this end let me know what are those peculiar Doctrines your Teachers come here in such Numbers to support, or what Errors do they come to oppose.
One of the principal Doctrines they come to maintain is the Doctrine of the ever blessed.
If by the Doctrine of theyou mean the Doctrine ofand; they might have stay'd at home; in regard, as far as I know the Town, this Doctrine is firmly believ'd by every Preacher in Town, and by all their Hearers.
I chiefly mean the.
I know no Christian, much less any Christian Preacher who denieth it. Is it therefore well done in you and your Preachers to spread such false Reports of your Fellow-Christians? I hope you thinka great Sin; anda Work of the Devil. Can you therefore justify your Teachers in such a Charge, before they know it to be true and are able to prove it; and which perhaps they know to be false?
I cannot justify Lying and Falsehood, Calumny and Clamour in any Cause. I am sensible the Cause of Christ and Truth do not need them. But they mean that some Preachers and People in Town deny theof Jesus Christ, and his Equality with the Father.
Is not this a very wicked way of proceeding, to charge Men with denying the Divinityof Jesus Christ, who only deny hisandwith the Father. For my Part, I hold Jesus Christ to be God, or a God, because the Father hath given him divine Perfections, and universal Dominion, or Headship, Authority to judge, and has commanded all Men to worship him. But I can't bring my self to believe his, because I believe in the same supreme Deity of God the Father; and it appears to me a plain contradiction to say there are two Persons or Beings who are both of 'emor; and I never yet had Faith eno' to believe two contradictory Propositions. As my Reason, my Understanding, the Candle of the Lord within me, telleth me there can be but oneor: So I think the whole Scriptures lead me to think that thisis the; and not the Son of God the Father. Before the Lord Jesus Christ became Man, or had a Body prepared for him, he came from the Father, was sent by Him, and imployed by him; But can thebe sent or commissioned by another? Shou'd we not abhor so absurd and blasphemous a Thought? Therefore it is impossible that Jesus Christ shou'd be the; and wou'd you have me believe Impossibilities?
But does not St.affirm that Christ thoughtit. Phil. ii. 6.
That Translation is, I think, given up by most learned Men; because it corresponds not tothe Original Greek. However I think it must be wrong. 1. Because it no way suiteth the, which speaks of the same Person as, Image or Likeness of God, asto God, andby him. 2. Because it is contradictory to the Reason God has given us as our highest Guide, to conceive that the Son, who was begotten by the Father, whohim, who hath his Life, Power, Dominion, Glory as a Gift and Reward from the Father, should beto, who came from none, nor can receive any Thing, which he had not originally and underived in himself. This appears to me another Contradiction to make a derived and an underived being equal. 3. Because it is a Sense contrary to all those plain Texts which speak of Christ as the expressof the Father asby him; ashis Will, as seeking his Glory, as praying to him to be taken back into his original Glory, as appointed by God universal Head and Judge.
But does not Christ himself say,, John x. 30.
Christ says,(as one Person);(as another Person) wou'd you have him contradict himself in the same Breath, by saying we two Persons are. And this too, after he had just affirm'd that all his Miracles he wrote, and that his. 'Tis an easy, natural and just Sense, thatand thewere one, as he did the Father's Will,and acted by Commission from him, and pursued the same End and Design; this suits the whole Context. Why then shou'd we attempt to force upon the Words a sense unnatural, unintelligible and contradictory, that is to make Nonsense of it. When Christ says,also; You'll notall Believers or Apostles upon such a Text.
But our Ancient Divine have always taken it for a.
Some ancient Divines, I am told, have taken it otherwise. And as toit is a Word I scarce well understand, but as far I do understand it I can't think that a begotten and an unbegotten Essence are the same. And the Sense I have given appears to me so just, that we need not seek any other.
Tho' there may be some Difficulties in this Matter not easily got over; yet I think we cannot speak too honourably of the Son of God; nor can I bear to hear any thing lessening said of him.
Are you not, at least ought you not to be as Zealous for the Glory of, who so loved the World as to send histo save it? Is not God the Father greatly dishonoured by setting up a Rival with him in supreme Empire? Can any thing be more affronting and dishonourable to the Son of God, than to suppose that he is this Rival, who declares he always sought the Father's Honour? Can any Conduct more displease him than toas thedid, by saying He made himselfwithGod, because he said he was the? Are not the Scriptures the Measure of the Honours to be paid to the Son of God? Shou'd not we follow his Example, and make his Father's Honour our chief End? For my Part I never heard any of our Divines speak a dishonouring Word of the Son of God; and it is a very bad Office in your little nibling Teachers to accuse them of it. If Jesus Christ be honoured as the only begotten Son of God, as a Teacher sent from God, as the promised Messiah and Saviour, as the only appointed Mediator and Intercessor, as universal Lord and as final Judge: Is not this all the Honour the Scriptures claim for him? Did he ever challenge more? Does a string of great swelling Words, hard and unintelligible Names,, do him any Honour? Or, is not the doing his Will, and keeping his Commands the truest Honour? Will he own any others as his Friends, but such as do whatsoever he commands them? Will crying,, or any pretended Honours paid him with the Lips be accepted while He is denied in Works?
These you mention as only chiming Words, are great andPoints, above our Comprehension; yet we ought to believe them, tho' we do not understand them.
All your Contradictions and Jargon you cover with the sacred Name of; they are indeed Incomprehensible, just asis, nothing in them is comprehensible but the Absurdity of them. If I cou'd comprehend any Truth in them, I shou'd readily believe it; but to tell me I must believe what I do notunderstand, is to tell me I must believe. This blind Belief you are taught. But Jesus Christ acted in another Manner; and has not required us to believe any Doctrine, but what he first clearly revealed and explained. If any Doctrine was a Mystery before, his Revealing it has made it no longer a Mystery.
I hope I can convince you that you are wrong here by one plain Instance. You believe the Doctrine of the, yet I hope you do not pretend to understand it.
I believe no more about it than I do understand; I believe the Dead shall rise and live, and I very well understand what Rising from the Dead and Living again means, as well as I do what Rising from Sleep, and Living again means. But as to theor Manner of the Resurrection, nothing about it being, revealed, I have no Ideas about it; and therefore can believe nothing about what I understand nothing.
The Doctrine of the, &c. of the Son of God is a Doctrine indeed, but not; therefore if revealed, ought to be received.
If it be, we have nothing to do with it as I have shewed, and can believe nothing about it: If it, it is revealed, and may be understood and believed; otherwise it is not revealed. And, I think, I have proved that this Doctrine, as your Teachers represent it, isby Jesus Christ and his Apostles; and that itfrom the God of Truth, being not only above, butto our Ideas of God, and to all the Dictates of Reason.
However I cannot think it safe to go off the antient Protestant Doctrine in this Article of our Faith.
Nor can I think it safe to go off the much more ancient Gospel Doctrine; nor to be governed by blind, implicit Faith in any of our Teachers?
Will you set up your Judgment against your Teachers?
All the Protestants did so, when they left the Churchof; you Dissenters do so, in leaving our Church. Thedid so in followingandand. Our best Protestant Divines teach us to do so, when ever our Teachers depart from God's Word and teach for Doctrines of God the Words of Men. Now when any Preachers preach theof the Son of God, according to my Understanding they preach the Doctrines of Men instead of the Truths of God. Ought I not then to follow my own private Judgment, or to believe and act according to my own Understanding and Conscience after I have obtained all the Light and Help I can? Do not you act thus, and every honest Man? If I have God's Word on my side, is not that enough? But besides I have our most learned Divines, and those I count the best Preachers on my side also; and I do not intend to forsake them to follow a Parcel of bold Fellows, who might do well enough at their, but make sad work of it in the.
I'll reply to all your Reasoning only this, That. 1 Cor. ii. 14.
This is a Text which every Enthusiast and Impudent Prater maketh the last Refuge. You do not consider Neighbour, what a spirit of Pride and Presumption it discovers to suppose all who differ from you; and all on your own side. Have not we the sameof the Spirit to be our Guide that you have; and where has God promised your Teachers morefrom the Spirit than other Men who seek it as earnestly as they. But your Teachers are as remarkable forin the Pulpit as for thethey deliver there. But enough of this. Pray what other Fundamental Doctrines do these new Preachers come now to Propagate?
That great and most comfortable Doctrine of God's electing from all eternity a certain Number out of the fallen Race of Mankind, to everlasting Life.
But did not God, from all Eternity, foreseein a fallen and helpless Condition?
Yes.
And did he decree Help only for a very few of these?
Yes, only for a few.
Are not the Rest for whom he ordained no Help equally his Off-spring, his Creatures and Children?
Yes, He is the Maker of All.
Where then is his, his, thesounding of his Bowels over those Millions of undone Creatures, whom he resolved not to help?
The Grace of God is, and He may do what he will with his own.
If God's Grace be, upon your Principles it is very. What can we think of a Father, who seeth all his Children in Misery, and who has Ability enough to help them all, and yet resolves to send Help to a very few only. Will that Rule bring him off, "that he may do what He will with his own?" Instead of a merciful, good and tender hearted Father, will not the World Judge him a hard hearted Wretch; who saw the Ship split in Pieces, and all his Children like to be drown'd; and while he had Boats enough to save them all, yet sent them out only to save two or three out of a hundred perishing Children. You talk a deal ofand, but when your dark Scheme is examined, and your hideous Doctrine opened, there appears little Grace and Charity in it; God is robbed by it of his chief Glory.
But God's Grace is free to the Elect.
These you say are very few; none of the; perhaps none of the; amongst thenone but such as hold your Fundamentals; so that thewill be reduc'd to a few. As ifwas a Region of Enthusiasm, Error, Bigotry, and Uncharitableness; and the Elect a parcel of proud, self-conceited Separatists.
You grow warm, Friend, and carry your Reflection too far.
If Warmth can ever be justified, it may in such a Cause as this. To see and hear Doctrines published and defended which obscure the richest Grace of God, and represent him as thein the Universe; who, when He cou'd easily and honourably Help the infinite Race of his fallen Off-spring, decreed Help only for a very few, and that withoutat all on his Children's Part, those being previouslythan the Rest who are left to perish under his unpitying Eye. Will it not excuse a little Warmth, to hear the good and blessed God represented not only as the mostand, but as the most; who tho' he hasno saving Help for the greatest Part of his lost Children, yet pretendsthem Help; and also a mostwho threatens a severer Damnation if they accept not his offers, which he knows they cannot accept? Is not this ahis Creatures already Helpless, and anover their Miseries; in stead of shewing them any Mercy? Will any wise, just and good Father act at this rate? And shall we ascribe all this Folly, partiality and unkind Dealing to God?
We must not measure God by Man; nor the Ways of God by the Ways of Men, his thoughts and ways are far above ours.
They areours in Mercy, Goodness, Grace, Wisdom and Justice, notours. If we must judge at all of God's Wisdom, Justice and Charity, we must judge of 'emand, as we do of Men's bytheirs. Does not God call Men to judge of the Equity and Kindness of his Ways, and to compare them with Men's? Must we not judge of them by the best Ideas of Justice and Kindness we have? Now can we possibly judgeto be Wise, Just and Merciful ifare not so? And can we possibly, while we conceive of him as no way lovely?
God hath Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth; and what is Man to contend with God; hath not thepower over his own Clay?
Pray cease abusing and misapplying Scripture; quote not God's own Word against Himself, to prove him without any Mercy towards Millions of his perishing Creatures. God was at Liberty to shew Mercy to the lost Nations of the World, when therejected offered Grace. He acted, both in callinginto his Kingdom, and in rejecting the, according to; but he willed both these Events according to Reason and Justice. Nor did God hardenHeart any other way that we know of, but by kindness to, and reprieves to Himself; and leaving him to pursue the wicked Counsels of his Heart. But you make Godthan any, and morethan; He set Taskmasters overto torment them and diminish them for a few Years: But upon your Principles, God torments his own Creatures and Children Millions of Years and Ages for what they; and this only to shew what his Power and Wrath can do, or from pureillnature; whereasacted from a Principle of Self-Preservation.
But Sinners may help many of their Sins; and therefore are justly condemn'd for doing what they shou'd not have done, and for not doing what they cou'd do.
Many of your Preachers say they are decreed to be damned for being; and I am sure they. And is not this a cruel, unwise, and unjust Decree? Can any but a Devil make such a Decree?
You talk strangely, and run great Lengths; I hope our Principles are not chargeable at this Rate?
It is plain they are, I go not a tittle farther than your own Principles carry me. If God has decreed to damn Millions of Men for being fallen in, he has made the most unjust Decree that ever was made, a thousand Times more unjust than the Decree ofto drown all the Male Children, because they were born ofParents, or were born; neither of which cou'd the Children help. This is horrid Doctrine.
I own as you represent it, this appears horrid Doctrine, I cannot think thus of the ever blessed God, our Preachers do not talk in this way.
No, they hide the horrid Consequences from you, and cheat you with Contradictions.
I have heard them often say, that Men will be damned for not believing and rejecting Christ; and for not being converted to God.
If God; has decreed to damn Men, for not believing in a Christ, who never died for them:If he has decreed to damn Men for not being converted, when he has decreed not to convert them: Is not this decreeing to damn them for not believing Contradictions, or Falshoods; and for not doing Impossibilities? Is this that God who is, and whose tender Mercies are over all his Works? Can a wise, a just, a merciful God order weak Men to remove Mountains, and then damn them if they do not?
Since God offers Salvation to all, Men are justly condemn'd if they never try to accept it.
Thus you make God the greatest of all Cheats when he offers to Sinners a Salvationfor them, and which he has absolutely decreed never to give them: And when he offers itthey cannot comply with, without, and he has decreed never to give them that Grace: And when he threatens ato them if they do not believe and obey the Gospel, which he knows they cannot do. Is this the Divinity of your Preachers! This is indeed a new Gospel, just as unlike the kind and merciful Gospel of Jesus Christ; as a false and merciless Devil is unlike the true and merciful God.
Tho' I am not for these Extreams; yet I can't but think the Doctrine of God'sa veryDoctrine.
Must not He be a perfect Visionary, or a hard-hearted Son, who cou'd take any Comfort from a Decree of his Father to give him his whole Estate, while all the rest of his Children are left to endless Beggary? Can a wife and good Child take any Comfort from a Thoughtwhich wou'd represent his Father as a partial Tyrant, relentlessly cruel to the greatest Part of his Off-spring? Can any wife and good Man comfort himself in a Doctrine which paints God in so unlovely and horrid an Image; and which leaves Millions of God's Creatures in helpless Misery for ever? Can any Man justly take Comfort in a Doctrine which makes itthat he is not elected, but must be for ever damn'd? Doth not the Gospel give better Grounds of Comfort arising from God's Universal Love to a lost World, and the general offers of Mercy?
But if Sinners will notand use their best Endeavours, they will deserve Punishment.
Why shou'd Men try at Impossibilities? Will their best Endeavours change God's Decrees? If Men must stand or fall, there is Room for Endeavours, and for Perswasions to use them; but if according to, there is room for neither.
If Men have lost their Ability to repent, believe and obey, may not God justly punish them for not using it?
If they have wilfully lost it, they may be punished as far as that Crime deserveth; but then to require them to do what they haveto do, is; and to punish them again for not doing it, is; and to make them fine offers on Condition they will do, what they have no Ability to do, isand. Is this Gospel? Are these glad Tidings? Is Satan more unlike an Angel of Light, than these Articles are to the Gospel of Truth and Love? But praywhen and how did Men lose their Ability to repent, to believe and obey the Gospel?
They lost it in; and by and at the Fall.
I suppose the Women lost it in, and the Men in. And did they indeed lose it near 6000 Years before they had it, or before they had a Being? I wonder to hear a Man who can talk good Sense about Trade, Civil Justice, Affairs of State, talk so point-blank Nonsense in Divinity. But supposelost a Power to repent, believe and obey the Gospel, before he had it; and lost it from us many Ages before we had a Being; Is it Just to condemn to Hell Fire innocent Children for what their great Ancestor did 4 or 6000 Years before they were born? Or can you think God is at all Angry withfor whatdid; if we approve of, and imitateTransgression, we may be punish'd for such Approbation and Imitation; but not for his Transgression.
Tho' I cannot say, that God is Angry with us for whatdid, yet the Scripture says, That; and that.
But must we interpret these Texts against all Rules of Reason; and against the Unchangeable Law of God? That Children shall not die for the Iniquity of the Father. Seexviii. 20. I own we suffer loss thro'Fall; and have an Hereditary Disease conveyed to us, which worketh Death; as many Children lose Estates and Healththro' the Iniquity of their Parents; That St.bymeansis plain not only from Reason, for no other Sense can be true; but from his own Explication.But as Menthose who are made unhappy thro' the Fault of others, so does God; He pities the human Race and in his Love and Pity has sent his Son to redeem and save them.
Tho' I shou'd allow that we are not properly guilty ofSin; yet may not God impute it to us, as he was our Representative?
If we had been in Being, had been Principals in the Affair, andhad acted by our Order, his Action might justly be so far imputed to us. But will a just and good God impute to you and me what we never did, or possibly cou'd do; what we knew nothing of, nor possibly cou'd know; what we never consented to, or approved of? Will He charge to our Account what we are as Innocent of as the Child unborn is of his Father's Crimes and Follies? Shall we thus quit our Understandings, and give up all the Principles of Reason, Truth and Justice, in order to compose an absurd and unrighteous Scheme of Divinity!
Tho' these Things seem so contrary to human Reason; they are agreeable to the Holy Scriptures.
A fine Complement upon the Holy Scriptures, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ; as if it was the most irrational and absurd Book in the World. Is this the way to recommend your Notions to Men of Sense and Reason, to allow that they are irrational and absurd? Is not this blaspheming theHoly Bible, to suppose the Doctrines of God, the great Author of Reason, are contradictory to Reason? For my Part, I receive the Gospel, because I believe it to be the most wise, reasonable, just, sincere and friendly Institution in the World. If, upon Examination, it appear an Unreasonable Gospel, I ought to reject it, because such a Gospel can never come from God. There are manyin it which are easily misunderstood and abused by fanciful Men. But is any Thing more rational, more agreeable to human Reason than the Preaching of Christ and his Apostles?
I own their Discourses are becoming Men of Sense, and who had the Spirit of God. But what will you make of those several Texts which so plainly assert aandin the Epistles ofand.
Those Texts have been strangely applied to God's choosing from Eternity a few particular Persons to everlasting Life, without any Respect to their Behaviour, and for no Reason at all; contrary to the whole Stream and Design of the Bible, and contrary to all wise Rules of Government; and in contradiction to a Judgment to come, when Men will be saved or condemned, not according to absolute, but according to their.
Pray, Friend, how will you understand these Texts, if not in the Sense of our Divines.
As far as my Reading and Judgment go, and as some, whom I esteem the best Writers and Preachers teach. Those Texts are to be understood of God's first Electing and Adopting theSeed of; and then upon their crucifying the Son of God and rejecting his Gospel, God's choosing, electing or adopting all the spiritual Seed oftho' amongst the, all virtuous and good Men, all who believ'd the Gospel; and this agreeable to his ancient Designs, before he laid the Foundation of theAges.
I own this is a plausible Account, agreeable enough to the History of the Old and New Testament; and carrieth in it a grand Scheme of Providence, and is free of all Absurdities. But it is not the Sense given by our old Protestant Divines, Men who had the Spirit of God.
I have as great a Respect for our old Divines as you; but not a blind Faith in any Man. They brought a great deal of Light, and did a great deal of good; but shall we restrain the Spirit of God to them; or must we make no Progress in Knowledge? Or if God raise up other Lights, must we refuse their Help? I doubt not, if our old Divines were now alive, they wou'd agree to the Sense I have given.
Nothwithstanding, I think we ought not too suddenly to depart from the Principles and Faith, for which our Father's suffered.
They suffered for a Scripture Religion, and the Rights of Conscience and private Judgment, and used their own Understandings and Reason, as we do ours. They suffered, because they cou'd notas their Fathers did; and wou'd not, in Matters of Religion and Conscience, as their superiors required. They did not suffer for the peculiar Opinions of a Party, but for thecommon Rights of Mankind, and the Doctrines in which all good Christians agree.
To pass over these Points; how will you defend the hated Doctrine of, so dishonourable to theof God?
You are great Boasters of, and yet are the greatest Enemies to it in the World. Is itin God to have no Pity on Millions of his helpless Creatures, but decree them to Hell for being unhappily born? Is itin God to order his Son to die for a very small part of Mankind only, when without suffering any more he might have died for all? Is itin God to send abroad his Gospel and Ministers to spread the News of a Saviour; when hereby the Number of thecannot be diminished, nor theincreased? Is itin God to command Men to do, what he never gave them Power to do? Is itin God to offer Men a Saviour, whom he knows they cannot accept? Is itto condemn Men for not believing in a Christ who never died for them, and in whom they never cou'd believe without irresistible Grace, which is yet denied them? Are your Ministers thethen? Are they not the chief Disparagers of it?
However you represent the Matter, our Ministers preachandmore than any other Men, and for this Reason we admire and like 'em.
I know they have about twenty or thirty hackney Words and Phrases, which come into almost every Sermon; take these from them and they are at a full stand, and can't make anotherSermon.is one of this precious List. But, in my Opinion, they are the best Preachers ofand, who open, inforce and apply the whole Gospel, of which the Sermons ofare doubtless a Principal Part.
You seem to put off the Article of. as if afraid to meddle with it.
If byyou mean a Faculty or Power in Man, to turn his Thoughts to this subject, or another; to do good or ill Actions, to choose the way of Life or of Death, when both are set before him; to receive or reject the offers of Christ, when fairly made; I can't but think every Man hath this sort ofBut your Preachers. have made aof the Word, and try to fright Women and Children out of their Senses by it. And the sound ofterrifies some weak-headed Men almost as much as the sight of a.
You seem to raise the Creature very high: This exalting of Man tempts him to be proud of himself.
I raise him higher than the Stones of the Field, and the Beasts of the Earth, because God has rais'd him higher. Nor is it any Temptation to Pride for a Man to believe himself a, and a; but that he is a reasonable Creature is a Motive to admiring Thankfulness; and that he is a Free-Agent is a Motive to Watchfulness, Diligence and Caution. Besides you who declaim against, act upon this Principle as much as other Men: You expect to be praised when you do well; you blame Men who cheat you; you call toAccount your Servants and Children, reward and punish as you think they deserve; you exhort and perswade to Religion and good Works: Thus you act and live upon the Principle of, while in Words you deny it. Thus do Antinomian Notions in Divinity turn Men's Heads, and quite intoxicate their Brains; so that tho' on any other subject they talk sensibly, as soon as they enter the subject of Divinity, they begin to rave and talk wildly.
I allow Men, but not to Good.
Unhappy Case! better for us we had never been made, than made under a necessity of Sinning. Is Man the Workmanship of a wise and merciful God, who has only given him a Power to, but no Power to help himself? Besides, is like the Rest of your Divinity, Self-contradictory; what Freedom is there, without a Power to do good. God's Law is,; does not this imply a Power to do it, or as much Freedom to do Well as to do Ill; unless bad Habits and Custom in Sin have, in a moral Sense weakened this Power? Besides, if Men have no Power to do good, how are they, whether they will behave well or ill? And if they have no Power over their own Actions, how will they beat last? Why are Menand exhorted to do good, if they have no Power, or no Direction of that Power? Is any thing, which is impossible? Is not yours strange Doctrine, which at once over-throws the grand Doctrine of a future Judgment; and renders needless and ridiculous all Preaching?
Man had a Power to do good, but lost it in, and God is not obliged to restore it.
This is the old senseless Story confuted before, and which indeed confutes it self. Are you conscious of any Being or Powers you had four or six thousand Years ago? Letbear his own Guilt, and every Man his. But supposing this Doctrine as possilble, true and just; as it is impossible, false and unjust; yet is it fair to, as if I had a Power which I have not; and toandfor what the Judge knows I have no Power to do.
You talk as if Man had a Power to, without the Almighty and irresistible Grace of God.
A Man may go on so long in a Course of Sin, till he is grown hard and inflexible, and has lost all Inclination to turn to God and a new Life. But to say a Manunder the Light, Calls and Aids of the Gospel, is to represent God as very weak and unjust, to be at so much Expence in calling Men to Impossibilities. It is to make the Gospel not only a useless, but a deceitful Institution. It is an intolerable Abuse of Mankind, and makes their Case almost desperate. Will a good God thus tantalize his own Children? Is this the Doctrine of?
But our Teachers all say, That no Man can come to God unless irresistible Grace draw him.
And then He cannot help turning, then there can bein not turning; andin turning to God. A fine Account of the Gospel! Are Menfor not having irresistibleGrace? Orfor not resisting Almighty Power? Will GodMen for ever in Hell for, which was his own Act, not theirs; or for, which was to be effected by his Power, not theirs? Or will GodMen for ever in Heaven, for doing what they cou'd not help doing; or for what they really did not, but what God himself did in them? Is this judging Men according to their Works?
I have heard our Divines say, God will reward his own Work, and crown his Grace with Glory.
Your Preachers have got the wonderful Art of perswading their Hearers, that all their mysterious Nonsense is sublime Divinity. God will reward Men according, not according to his; And if Men improve well the Grace of the Gospel, their Piety and Virtue, Labours and Faithfulness shall be crown'd with Glory. This is the Doctrine of the Bible, plain, intelligible Doctrine.
Still I can't believe that any Man can come to Christ except God the Father draw him.
And is not God drawing all Men, who live under the Gospel, by Cords of a Man, and Bands of Love? But Men do resist the Holy Ghost, and when God wou'd heal them will not be healed, nor come to Christ for Life; being unfruitful, and disobedient.
You are still for exalting Man, and laying stress upon his Righteousness and good Works; whereas all our Righteousness is as filthy Rags; and I expect to be saved only for the Righteousness of Christ imputed to me and received by Faith.
I allow the false and deceitful, the out-side and ceremonial Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ofand Christian Hypocrites; their Fastings, Tears and long-whining Prayers, their furious and blind Zeal for dry Opinions and Doctrines of Men, may well enough be compar'd to. But I hope the Righteousness of the Saints, their Love and good Works, their Holiness and Obedience, their Mercy and Charity; their living soberly, justly, devoutly, is not Filthiness and Rags; unless you will call the Image of God, and Imitation of Christ Filthiness. Is not Righteousness and Loving Kindness, being Good, and doing Good, the Glory of God? and is it not the highest Perfection of Man? Does not this render Men, procure them a, and intitle them toandat the coming of Jesus Christ? And will you dare to call it alland Rags? Take care, Neighbour how you fling Dirt on God's Image, affront the Spirit of Holiness, contradict the whole Gospel, confound Holiness and Unholiness.
Butrenounced his own Righteousness, which is of the Law, and trusted to that which is thro' the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith.
HisRighteousness, or Conformity to the Ceremonial Law, he did renounce; he trusted not in Circumcision, his Relation to, his bitter persecuting Zeal.But hisRighteousness, his Conformity to the Gospel, he did not, he cou'd not renounce. No, this was his chief Endeavour, to conform to Christ in Sufferings and a new Life, in pressingafter the Mark, by holy Obedience, in walking by the Rule of the Gospel, and in a heavenly Conversation.
I dare trust to no Righteousness and good Works of my own for Acceptance with God.
But dare you trust God's Word, that if you continue in well-doing, and seek, in that way Honour, Glory and Immortality, you shall have eternal Life? Trusting in God to be saved in the Way of Faithfulness and Gospel Obedience, at the End, (and as the Crown) of a Sober, Just, Charitable, Religious Life, is not trusting.
I am sensible I am a guilty Creature, and can plead nothing of my own, therefore I trust in the imputed Righteousness of Christ.
We are all guilty before God; but if renewed by Repentance, we are incouraged by the Gospel to plead that Repentance as a Qualification for, and Title to Pardon. As to the, it is a Phrase no where to be found in God's Book, nor is easy to be understood, and I wonder you shou'd be so fond of it, and lay such stress upon it.
Our Divines have always spoke of this as a Fundamental Doctrine, and I cannot give it up.
Your Divines have used themselves to talk wild and strange Things; have bewitched People with their Sorceries, and led Captive silly Women by sugared Phrases, but at the Bottom a poysonous Doctrine.
I wonder you shou'd thus represent so great a Gospel Doctrine.
As there is not a Word of it in the Gospel; so
it is an Encouragement to bad Men and loose
Women, who, tho' destitute of Virtue and
Goodness, tho' without Sobriety, Chastity and a good
Life, yet hope to be saved by the Righteousness
of another, while they have none of their own.
Thus are the Hands of the wicked strengthened,
and Virtue and Vice confounded. This Doctrine
is also a Discouragement to good Men; as if all
their Labours of Love, their Obedience,
Faithfulness, Diligence, Self-denial, Charity, Goodness
were nothing Worth; unless they also believe in
the unscriptural and unintelligible Doctrine of
the Righteousness of another imputed to them.<|endoftext|>Mr. --, I sent for you, to consult in what Fund it will be most proper to lay out some Money, that I have just now received of the Legacy left me by my Uncle, Mr. --
'Tis a great Pity, Sir, you did not receive it two or three Months ago, the Stocks being of late considerably risen upon the Preliminaries settled between the Emperor and the King of; and, without doubt, will be higher when they are published, provided there is nothing in them like what is reported about the Secret Articles.
Pray what may they be?
But no-body will believe it.
Nor can I believe it; therefore let us confine ourselves to the Point, What is the most proper thing to lay out some Money in?
Stock against the World; and you may believe I advise you as a Friend, since I speak against my Interest; for should you lay out your Money in any other Fund, my Brokage would come to more, because it would buy more Capital.
You were wont to exclaim against that Stock as a Bubble, and was for your Solids, as you call them: How comes it, that you have thus altered your Opinion?
For a very good Reason; because there is a Scheme going forward in it, which cannot fail succeeding, it being calculated as well for the Good of the Publick, as for the Benefit of the Company; and therefore when it comes before Parliament, will surely be approved: Upon which moral Certainty I have invested my little Capital in the said Stock, and have persuaded several of my Friends,that had Money by them, to lay it out therein; and such of them as had not, I borrowed it for them at Interest, upon Security of the same Stock: There are a great many other Gentlemen (that were early in the Secret) that have done the same for very large Parcels.
If you are not under Promise of Secrecy, pray open the said Scheme to me, that I may give you my Thoughts upon it?
That I will with all my heart, and debate it with you too, Sir, for 'tis now no Secret. The Case, in a few Words, is no more than this: -- The Company is to apply this next Sessions to Parliament for some Regulation or Reduction of the Duties that are payable upon Teas, which, as the Law at present stands, are so very great, as to tempt the smuggling very large Parcels of that Commodity; and as it carries with it that popular Intention of preventing that iniquitous Practice, so prejudicial to the Fair Trader, there is no room left to doubt but that Success will attend such Application.
And is it thought that the Parliament will gratify the Company, without turning this Thing also to the Advantage of the Nation?
The Nation will be greatly Gainers by it, because if Smuggling be effectually prevented, by lowering the Excise, of consequence more Tea will pay the said Duty.
That's begging the Question, and that I can't grant, nor I believe will that august Assembly; because it seems a Paradox, that lessening the Duty should be the Means of bringing in larger Sums upon the same.
Experience hath demonstrated it in other Commodities; as Spices, Cocoa Nuts, &c.
I can't say any thing to that, only that what happens to be the Case in one Commodity, may not prove so in another; therefore it is very probable, that the Parliament will turn this Project to a certain National Advantage, by reducing the Company's Annuity to 3for by that the Nation will be sure to save 32000a Year; and if the Company will get that yearly Sum by their Scheme, is with me Matter of Doubt.
I am amazed, Sir, at your Doubt! tho' should the Parliament make the Company pay such Tribute for such an Act (which, by-the-by, there is a Chance they won't) it will be the best Bargain the Company ever made, for they'll get thrice that Sum annually by it, as you may see by theof the 9th of.
I don't give Credit to every thing that's printed, any more than I do to every thing that's said; it may be so, or may not be; 'tis at best but a Chance, till tried. We will let this Point rest for the present, and now talk a little about the State of the Company, that I may, if possible, come at the intrinsick Value of their Stock. Know you what Sum in Bonds they have out-standing?
This is, without Exception, the most difficult Question you could ask, to meet with a satisfactory Answer: I own I am not able to resolve it with Certainty, being informed it is a Secret known to but few of the D--rs; but by general Report they are supposed to have as many as they are (by their Charter or Act of Parliament) permitted to issue,to the Amount of their Capital, which is about 3,200,000
I have heard so before; and some People think there is that Sum out in the three and halfBonds, over and above between 4 or 500, 000(at which the Company's Forts and Castles are valued) in 3Bonds, besides sometimes considerable Sums in Loan of the: The Truth of these two last Articles I much doubt, and may have been given out formerly by yourBears (when such were tolerated) to depreciate the said Stock: But upon supposing only the former, we shall find this Point brought into a very narrow Compass,what the Government owes to the Company for their Fund, we'll suppose they owe to their Bond Creditors; and of course the Stock Proprietors have nothing for what they buy, but the Company's Effects in Trade, and their Charter: And do you think these Articles worth above five Millions, which the whole Capital comes to at the present Market Price?
I agree with you there, Sir, and may be they have not half the Sum in Trade, and possibly they would not distribute 100for 100Capital, were they now to break up; and that all the rest, and may be more, isgiven for the probable Advantages of theexclusive Trade for the Term of thirty Years to come: But few People make such a nice Scrutiny into theState of the Company as you; and rather believe, for the generality, that the Capital due from the Government, and also the Stock in Trade, are both the sole Property of the Proprietors.
For this very Reason I am of Opinion, that when the Company comes before the Parliament (who constantly endeavoured to prevent the Unwary being misled) they will immediately reduce the Annuity payable to the Company to 3and will apply the Produce of the Sinking Fund (as soon as the same shall be at Liberty) to pay off entirely the said Company's Fund, and to compel them to discharge therewith the whole Bond Debt (if they can, if not, as far as it will go) that the true Amount thereof may no longer be a Mystery; and the Purchasers of the said Stock will then know, that they give so much (whatever be the Price) only for the Effects in Hand, and Liberty of the Trade.
All what you have said may be very reasonable, and perhaps may come to pass; but I verily believe no body thinks of it but yourself, and therefore you may venture now with a seeming very goodProspect, and get out again with Profit time enough, even before the Scheme is brought into Parliament, and let the Devil take the hindmost; for 'tis remarkable, that the Expectation of any Scheme hath, for the generality, greater Influence on the Stocks, than its Accomplishment.
I don't intend to lay out my Money for a Job only, but with a View to live upon the Income or Dividend (of such Fund as I shall now invest it in. And therefore, considering all our Debate, together with the Precariousness and Uncertainty of their Dividend (the Company being rivalled in Trade by all the Maritime Powers) I am determined not to be concerned in their Stock, but leave it entirely to those that are constantly upon the Spot, and know when are the proper Times to get in or out.
I have told you, Sir, my Opinion; and, since you do not think well ofStock at this Price, am ready to obey your Orders in any other Fund, that may be more to your Satisfaction.
What think you ofStock?
Old Women and Foreigners are very fond of it.
Why are they so?
I believe because they are very well satisfied with the Management of the Directors.
You might have added some other Reasons; such as, because they were never guilty of Exceedings in Dividends; and because they have no Bonds against them carrying the Canker of Interest, they being Money-lenders, and not Borrowers; and because --
There may be a great many good Reasons more: But you was pleased to object against the greatgiven upon purchasingStock, whose exclusive Charter hath upwards of thirty Years to run: Will not the same Objection lie against thegiven forStock, since theirs expires so soon as the Year 1742?
'Tis so most certainly; and therefore I'll let that Stock alone also. Pray give me your Thoughts upon theStock
I really believe it is in a flourishing Condition, which is greatly owing to the Frugality and Application of the present Set of Directors, who have restored the Company's Credit, by putting their Trade under good Regulations, and lessened very considerably the Bond Debt.
Pray what may be the Sum that the Company actually owe?
According to the Account laid before the General Court inlast (the Veracity of which is not to be question'd) only about 650,000
How much is thatupon their Capital?
As near as I can compute about 17but they have more than that Sum due to them in, upon Account of old Dependencies.
I have formerly heard much Talk of those old Debts, but believe what of them were good have (by the indefatigable Pains taken by the present Directors) been e'er now recovered; and for the Sum still out-standing I look upon it only as a Cypher; and the more, because I have heard in Conversation, the K-- ofhath such large Demands upon the Company, as would swallow up that Sum, or more.
'Tis true the K-- ofdoth make some Demands upon the Company, and so doth the Company upon the K-- of; but no Mortal can tell when they will be adjusted.
I declare I am for something clear of all Incumbrances, as well present as future; therefore cannot resolve to lay outmy Money in this Stock neither: Besides, considering that 17ought to be deducted out of the Capital to make it whole, that brings it down to 83; and to give the present Market Price for it, is equal to the buying 3at 112.
You are so very nice, Sir, that I don't know what you can do with your Money. You must e'en lay it out in theAnnuities, since the Trading Companies don't please you.
I don't think I shall do that either, because I have seen a Scheme for a general Reduction of the Funds to 3and if that should come to pass, I shall be likewise bit by coming into them at this high.
I have indeed heard some idle Talk of that kind; but I think it impracticable, and find but very few People (if any) under such Apprehensions.
We have seen it done with all the Ease imaginable from 6 to 5, and from 5 to 4at once upon the whole redeemable Debt; and that, at a Time, when the Sinking Fund and the National Credit were (as one may say) but in their Infancy: Therefore how much more probable is it to be now accomplished gradually, by the very Increase of Credit, andPlenty of Money in the Funds, aided by the large annual Surplus of the S-- F--?
You said just now, that you had seen that Reduction Scheme: Pray communicate to me some of the Particulars?
It lies in a very narrow Compass: It is therein supposed, that theCompany will apply to Parliament (as you was saying in the Beginning of our Discourse) about the Tea Duties; and supposes their Request to be granted, upon Condition of submitting their Fund to be reduced to 3That being done, themay be sent for, and a new Lease granted them for a longer Term, upon the same Conditions, and so on to the other Funds, not doubting that when any of the great Corporations have complied, the remaining will accept Neighbour's Fare.
This is all fine Talking; but it cannot be done without a round Sum of Money in Hand, ready to pay off such obstinate Proprietors as will not be content with such low Interest.
The Scheme hath provided for that likewise, by proposing a Loan to be opened at the, at 3Interest, upon the Credit of the S-- F-- for two or three Years to come, payable inCourse, expecting that large Sums will soon be brought in, rather than invest in Bonds, &c. at such extravagant.
I can't tell what to say to it; it may or may not succeed; but if it should, it will make rare Workfor; from all Buyers, they will become all Sellers, because the respective Dividends will be lessened in Consequence thereof,
Why, do you suppose 1 1/4Reduction of Dividend upon theStock, and only 1upon all the other Funds?
Because thehave 1,600,000original Capital, now carrying 6and 8,500,000additional Capital, attended with 4and consequently 3off the former, and 1off the latter Sum, amount to 133,000a Year, which taken out of about 9,000,000Stock in the Hands of the Proprietors, is more than 1 1/4
Upon the whole, all that I can conclude from our Discourse is, that the Funds are under a very odd. If the Peace should be settled, 3is like to be their Portion; and if the Swordshould again be drawn, they will fall considerably; and much more if we should take Part in the Quarrel. Therefore I'll not concern myself in any for the present; but since so many Estates are advertized for Sale, I'll look out for some agreeable Purchase, and lay out my Money in Land.
And I'll go and give my Friends the Whisper (before the Town and the Foreigners take the Alarm) that they may not be left behind; and wishing you good Success (for the present) I take my Leave of you, hoping, when you have any Commands in my Way, you will not forget me.
You may depend upon my
Friendship. -- Adieu.<|endoftext|>Whoseare you?
Your's.
Why do you think so?
Because you teach me to call you, and are fond of me, and maintain me.
'Tis true, my Dear, I provide you Food to satisfy your Hunger; Cloaths to cover you, and keep you warm; a House to shelter you from the Severities of the Weather; an easy Bed to sleep on; a Variety of innocent Amusements to divert you; and proper Advice and Physick to cure you when you are not well. At my Cost you have been properly attended in your most helplessInfant State, when you could neither go nor stand, nor tell your Wants; have been preserved from all Sorts of Injuries, kept clean, and wholesome, and healthful, and taught by Degrees to go, and speak, and any Thing else you were capable of learning, that might be useful to you. Now what do you think induces me to do all this for you? Did you ever do any Thing, or any Thing equivalent to this, for me?
No. But I will do whatever I can for you as long as I live, and whatever you would have me do; and always love and honour you; and shall never think I can make you Amends for such Kindness to me.
You promise fair, and I hope will be as good as your Word; and assure you, you shall never be a Loser by such Dutifulness. Whatever I require of you shall be as much for your own Good as mine, and more; even those Things wherein I may be obliged to deny your Inclinations.
Will my dear Father ever deny me any Thing I have a mind to?
Not willingly, my Dear, but out of Kindness to you. I have seen more of the World, and the Consequences of Things than you; and may perceive Danger, even to yourself, where you apprehend none, but only Pleasure and Delight; should I see you running headlong towards a deep Pit, or Precipice, or Place where I knew were wild Beasts or an infectious Distemper; would it not be a real Kindness to stop you, tho' it were by Violence, and ever so much against your Will?
The greatest Kindness you could do me; and I will confide in the Wisdom, Experience, and good Intentions of one who was born so long before me; and from whom I have received already so many indubitable Proofs of good Will.
O My dear Papa, I have thought over and over of what you said to me Yesterday, and dreamt of it in the Night, and long to talk with you again, and ask you Questions.
Come then, my Child, what Question have you to ask? I shall answer them with Pleasure.
You made me sensible how much I am indebted to you for my Being, and Protection, and innumerable Benefits, particularly during my Infancy. Were you once a Child like me, and had you such a Father to take Care of you?
Yes, I remember him with Pleasure, tho' he died before you were born.
And your Father had a Father, I suppose; and his Father, perhaps, the like before him.
True, my Dear.
But was it always so? When, and how did this Relation, and Succession of Parents and Children begin?
It must of Necessity have had a Beginning, and it had so. Thatyou hear strike one, then two, then three,at certain Distances of Time, from Day to Day, did not always do so; but was contrived, and made, and set on going, some Years since, by an ingenious Artist, who still looks after it, and keeps it in Order. And he that contriv'd, and made all the World; the Sun, Moon, and Stars of Heaven, that rise, and set, and distinguish Night and Day; the Earth, and all the Trees, and Plants, and Grass that grow out of it; and all the Creatures that inhabit it; and Manat the Head of them all; and preserves them all in their Places, Courses, and Successions; he is the first Origin, theof the whole Universe; even, who never had a Beginning, but always was, always must be unchangeably the same.
O! I am astonished at the Thought, and yet it must be so. But where is this? Cannot I go to him, and see him, and converse with him, as I do with you?
Where is he, Child! Where is he not! He is every where; he is always present with you, and with every one of his Children, and every one of his Creatures; more nearly, more intimately so, than it is possible for me to be with you. He continually upholds and preserves every Faculty we have of Action, Perception, Speech, or Thought, and sees, and knows every Thing that passes in the World; or in the very Heart of Man.
Does he know my Thoughts before I speak them?
Most assuredly he does; for he is the Father of Spirits. He endowed you with the Power of Thought, and constantly preserves every Faculty of your Mind; and therefore knows every the least Motion or Affection thereof.
You surprize me. I thought I had no other Eye to stand in Awe of so much as your's; but find there is one, who sees what you see not, even my secret Thoughts; I cannot help being greatly concerned about my Behaviour towards so great a Being. I want to know more of him; what Power he has to do me Good or Hurt; what are his Dispositions towards me; what will be pleasing or displeasing to him; wherein he resembles, and wherein he may differ from you, my immediate Father, whom I know, and love, and confide in.But, in short, I scarce know what Questions to ask you about him.
I will save my dear Child the Labour of studying for Questions upon this Head, by giving you as short and plain an Account as I can, of what is most material for you to know concerning him; and at the same Time answer any Questions you may interpose as well as I can, and you are able to understand Things. But this must be some other Time, because my Business calls me off at present.
Let it be soon, my dear Papa.
God bless you.
Now, my dear Child, I have a leisure Hour at your Service: Can you leave your Play, to talk on serious Subjects with your Father?
If I could not I should be very unworthy of such a, and of such. Besides, the Subject you are now by Promise to go upon, is of all the Subjects the most engaging. To be acquainted with another, even greater than you, promises me new, and high Delight.
You cannot promise yourself too much from it. He is infinitely greater and better than I, or any Man, or any Being besides himself; the greatest, and the best of all Beings, and of Fathers. He can do whatever he pleases; can make, or destroy the Earth, the Sun, the World, in an Instant, as easily as you can move a Finger: But he is as good as he is wise and powerful. He consults anddelights in the Happiness and Perfections of his Creatures. There is no Creature, not a Sparrow or a Worm, but shares his Protection, Bounty, Care, and Goodness. Whatever little Good, or Protection you may seem to receive from me, or any other Creature, comes ultimately, and chiefly from him; nor can any Thing, or Person else, be more than an Instrument in his Hand, of conveying Benefits to you. He makes the Earth to yield us Food; and makes that Food wholesome, nourishing, and pleasant to us. 'Tis his Wine, and Milk, and Meat we feed on; his Wool and Flax that furnishes us with comfortable and decent Garments. He causes us to breathe, and live, and move; to sleep, and awake again; or, as the Scriptures speak,. 'Tis for this Reason you are taught to thank him for your Food, and ask his Blessing on it; to commit yourself to his Protection every Night, and thank him for it every Morning.
And is he pleased with these my Prayers and Praises?
Yes, if they come from your Heart; from a grateful, humble, dutiful Sense of your Dependance upon him; because such a Temper of Mind, so cherished, kept up continually, and improved, is for your Good; therefore he is pleased with it; for no one can wish you so well as your Heavenly Father doth.
Not you?
No, not I, nor you yourself.
Why does he wish me well?
Because you are his Offspring, whom he has made a reasonable Creature too, and so much liker, and nearer to himself, than the Brute Creatures; and yet he wishes well to all hisCreatures, in their Places, and does them good; he designed them for Good, and obliges them to do one another Good; and rational Creatures to do it of Choice, and with Pleasure, as he himself does. As God is every where, knows all Things, and can do whatever he pleases in Heaven, and in Earth; so he constantly over-rules all Things and Events, for the Good of the whole, or the greatest Good; for. His Goodness so infinitely exceeds the Goodness of allother Beings, and all their comparitively little Goodness is so entirely owing to his, that our blessed Saviour might well say,.
I said I wou'd do every Thing in my Power to serve, and please you, on Account of your Goodness to me; but O! what do I then owe to this best of Beings, my Heavenly Father, of whom you tell me?
Be sure you owe him the highest possible Degree of Gratitude and Love; so to love him, as to love nothing else in Comparison of him; or to love every Thing else that is good chiefly for his Sake, from whence, even from whose Goodness, it proceeds; who makes it so good, and so good to you.
I would be very solicitous to please so great and good a God and Father; and especially not to displease him; and therefore want to know wherein I may be liable ever to do that. Is he ever angry, as you sometimes have been, when I or any one else has done amiss?
No one can be so perfectly averse to Evil as God is; and tho' he is not of like Passions with us, is not angry in such a Way as to imploy any Weakness, or Imperfection; yet may he be said to be angry, and very angry too, with theWicked, or those who do amiss; and the Anger of so great a Being must be very dreadful; and not less, but more so (to an ingenuous Mind) for his Goodness; for even his Anger arises from his Goodness.
How can that be?
All Evil is naturally hurtful, not to God, but to his Creatures, whom he wishes well, and on that Account is most displeasing to him. If you do amiss, you hurt yourself at least, and perhaps others also; and this must needs displease your Friend, who desires your highest Welfare, and that of every other Being too, which your Misconduct may possibly injure.
This is indeed the greatest Reason, that can be, why I should fear to offend him.
And it is a Reason, too, why you should trust in him. For if you hurt not yourself, he will never hurt you, nor suffer others to hurt you any farther than he will turn it to your real Advantage, and punish them for it.
If I could be secure from their injuring me any more, methinks I should be sorry to have those who have injured me severely punished.
You do well to cherish such a forgiving Temper; and if you forgive your Enemy, and he sincerely repent, God will forgive him likewise. In that Case, his Repentance is Punishment sufficient, and may give you the juster Pleasure, as it will not only sufficiently avenge you, but also prove a sure Means of reforming him, and doing him, in the End, the greatest Good.
Since you have said so much about Evil, pray inform me what is Evil, that I may know precisely what will offend my heavenly Father, and what, on the other Hand, he approves.
That is a very pertinent and important Enquiry, and, that I may answer it the more distinctly, I will take another Opportunity for it, having already over-stayed my Time. Farewell, my Dear.
Farewell, Papa, and thank you for spending so much of your precious Time upon me.
Pray, Mamma, where is my Father? Is he gone from Home?
Yes, my Dear, he went out this Morning very early.
When will he return?
I hope in the Evening, at farthest; and sooner, if he can dispatch his Business. Why do you ask after him? But I know it is because you love your Father.
I do indeed, and honour him, and you too very much, as I am in Duty and in Gratitude bound. Methinks I see, even now, by my little Sister in your Arms, something of the Care and Trouble you took with me before I was able to set my Foot to the Ground, or help myself in the least; since that I have been made sensible of yourcontinued Care and Kindness towards me, in innumerable Instances; but in nothing else so much as in the Pains you both take to instruct and form my Mind.
I am glad, my Dear, you are sensible of that, because you will be the likelier to improve by such Instructions, the more you apprehend the Kindness and Importance of them. But why did you think your Father was gone Abroad?
Because you perform'd Divine Service in the Family this Morning; which you don't use to do when he is at Home.
since you took such Notice who officiated in that Service, I hope, my Dear, you went yet farther, and took Notice also what was said, and joined in it with the concurring Sentiments and Desires of your own Heart.
I assure you, I did; and; and after what my Dear Father has told me concerning, 'tis impossible I should ever hear that Divine Being spoken of, or spoken to, without being greatly concerned in it. I heard this Morning, to my Grief, some Children in the Street use the Name of God with great Freedom, Irreverence, and Indecency: Father forgive them(thought I) they know not what they do; but what Parents must they have the while? And how distinguishedly bless'd am I in both mine? Sure there are no other Parents like you.
Many, I hope, Child, that are much better; and yet I am afraid there are more who are worse. Do you pray daily to God to dispose Parents more universally to instil into their Children early the Knowledge and Fear of God; and to bless our Endeavours of this Kind for you. -- O! here is your Papa returned already.
I am glad, then God has prosper'd him in the Business he went about, perhaps, Mamma, in Answer to your Prayers.
And his own and your's too, perhaps.
Is it possible he should have any Regardto such a Child's Desires as mine?
Yes, or to the Cries, or Groans, or Sighs, or other Tokens of Distress, made by Creatures incapable of Thought, or Speech, or conscious Application to him, as you are: But let us go welcome your Father Home.
Now, Sir, will you instruct me how to behave aright?
I will, my Dear.;
I would first know my Duty to God.
In one Sense all Duty, is Duty towards God; as you may apprehend from what I have already said. But there are some Duties more immediately and distinctly owing to him; as that you set him always before you; consider him as always present with you; think of him with the profoundest Reverence, and Respect, Trust, Delight, and Joy; Thankfulness for his Mercies, and Resignation to his Will; and exercise and cherish this Regard of your Heart to him, by frequent, affectionate, and humble Worship of him: That before all Things you obey him.
What rather than you?
Yes, if I should command you any Thing contrary to, or inconsistent with his Commands; which I hope I never shall, and then your Obedience to me will be Obedience to him, which is the Perfection of filial Duty.
What are his Commands?
The deliberate Determination of our own Judgment and Conscience concerning what we ought to do, and to forbear, is; and for our yet better, and readier Direction, wehave hiswhich I shall instruct you in more particularly another Time, whichhas summed up in a few comprehensive Words, that will give you at present a general Idea of them, namely,: By which you see our Duty to others, and ourselves too, is to be done as Duty to God, being included in his Commands.
Is there any other Duty or Regard I owe to God?
Yes, that you imitate, as much as possible, his moral Excellencies; his Uprightness, Truth, and Goodness. This is paying him a due Regard, to make him your highest, choicest Pattern, and it is at the same Time a Duty you owe yourself, to make a right Use of such a Help to Virtue.
Can I be under Obligations to myself?
Certainly, very great ones; and if you neglect them, or act contrary to them, you'll find something within you will call you to a severe Account; I mean your own affronted. God has given you these high Powers, and thereby raised you above the Brute Creation, and to a Life far above the mere Animal Life. You have Appetites and Passions in common with the Brutes; but you have also a rational Soul to direct, and govern those Appetites, and Passions. If you thus use your Reason, you'll improve it; but if you neglect it, you'll weaken it, and give an unnatural, and destructive Force and Strength to your animal, brutal Appetites and Passions, and degrade yourself into something much worse than a, and much more miserable; nothing can be more degrading, more disgraceful, and detestable, than for a reasonable Creature not to be Master of himself, and his own Appetites and Passions.
In what Respects am I, or any other Person, liable to be deficient in this Self-Government?
In many Instances. Whenever your, or, are much excited, you will be liable to disregard the still, small Voice of, or even the warmer Remonstrances, and Expostulations of.
Can you give me any particular Instances?
How so?
Because it will weaken your Reason, and Resolution, and heighten such Appetites and Passions into a kind of, or. Haveyou never observed little Master, -- what violent Passions he goes into, if he may not have, and do whatever he list; or seen our unhappy Neighbour -- drunk in the Street?
Yes, but I always took them, and others like them, to be.
You judge, indeed, very right: They are the worst of; but then they are not naturally so, but become so by indulging, or being indulged in their Humours. They have Reason as well as you, or I, but have lost the Use of it, and you may easily do the same.
I hope I never shall.
I hope so too; but then it must be by proper Care. Your Mother and I have hitherto endeavoured to guard you against any dangerous Efforts of Appetite, Humour or Passion; but you must learn to guard yourself against them by that Time you go out into the World, or we may be taken from you by Death, and you owe thus much to yourself, to your Interest, and Comfort, Reputation, and Respect among Men, and to him that made you, and gave you Understanding for this Purpose. Both God and Man, and all intellectual Beings, must look down with the utmost Contempt upon a Wretch, that has lost that Government of himself, he was once endowed with; and even he himself, if ever he thinks at all, must despise, and loath, and be a Torment to himself. Therefore, my Dear Child, think well of this.
I will.
Farewell.
Have you thought of what I said to you last?
I have, and prayed to God to be the Guardian of my Understanding as long as I live, and to continue long to me the Benefit of your's, and my Dear Mother's excellent Instructions, and Example. But you intimated, that there were Duties owing to others, as well as more immediately to God and myself. What may these be?
O! I long to exercise, and shew such a Sweetness and Greatness of Mind as this.
All these Duties you have mentioned, or hinted at, to, are highly reasonable at first View. Methinks no-body should ever act contrary to them, at least, I hope, I never shall.
Let not my Dear Child, however, be too secure, because many a very promising Person has failed in his Duty in such Instances, and to such a Degree, as not even themselves could once have expected, or believed they would have done some Time before-hand. When the Prophet of the Lord, with Tears in his Eyes, foretold what Crueltieswould commit on the Children of; burn and demolish their Cities; slay their young Men with the Sword; dash their Children; and rip up their Women with Child;Answer was, Is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do this? Yet such a Dog he proved, after he had first murder'd his Sovereign, and usurped his Throne. Whenforetold his Disciple, just before his last Suffering,made Answer,: But he did before the next Morning.
These Instances are surprizing, and alarming indeed. But what should ever induce me to act a Part I at present so much, and so justly abhor, or forsake the fair, and flowery Paths of Virtue?
I will take another Time to lay before my Dear Child the principal Dangers of this Kind for your timely Warning. In the mean while, think of the, and set your Heart upon it. God bless you.
I Am now to inform my Dear Child of the manyfold Dangers you are encompassed with, of gradually impairing, and loseing that Innocence, and those virtuous Principles, of which you seem at present happily possessed, that being, you may be.
For that very Purpose I desire to know them, and hope I shall make that Use of the Information.
But it seems easy to prevent all this by never letting loose the Reins.
True, my Dear, that is the most effectual Way, and you may think it easy at present to deny, and govern those Appetites, and Passions, whichhave hitherto had a watchful Eye over, and kept under the best Regimen they could. Now that Care must devolve by Degrees upon yourself, and if you steadily proceed, you will find it easy still, and pleasant. But if this Care and Government be ever remitted, it may become very difficult, and next to impossible to recover it. There is scarce a more useful, or comfortable Thing than, or more easily managed, within proper Bounds, kindled, or extinguished, increased, or diminished, by applying, or with-holding Fewel; but if too much increased, or neglected, and let to get hold of the Building, it may soon become too vehement to be suppressed, and consume the stateliest House or Town to Ashes. Such is the Quality, very nigh, of the human Appetites and Passions.
It would be base and foolish indeed in me to lose that Government of myself, whichandhave made so easy to me. If this is all the Danger, tho' it be considerable, I hope I am in a fair Way to escape it.
You are, thank God, but yet, be not secure. This is not all the Danger by a great deal.
Then let me know the worst.
O! my dear Father, you make me tremble too, least such a Succession, such a Complication of Temptations should, in some unguarded Moment, overcome me.
This Fear of your's revives my Heart, and will by the Grace of God preserve your Virtue. Treat it as you would your, be ever very regardful of its alarms; for they are of the utmost Necessity to your Safety.
But why has God exposed the Virtue of his poor Creatures to suchand?
For the confirming, strengthening and exalting of it. The most glorious Triumphant Creature-Virtue, is, and the more, greater, and compleater its Victories, the more confirmed, triumphant, and glorious it is. But Victory implies preceding Combat, and the greatest Victories are those over the most formidableOpposition, and that succeed the hardest Conflicts. Be alarmed therefore, but do not murmur at any such Trials as these any more than needlesly run into them, leave God to chuse your's; and along with your greatest possible Caution and Resolution, seek, and trust in him to bring you safely, and honourably off.
But now another Apprehension comes into my Mind, seizes, and almost sinks my Spirits.
What can that be, Child?
I fear least I have already broken thro' the sacred Bounds of my Duty, and so lost myand. Some Words and Actions of my past Life, as well as secret Workings of my Heart, appear to me not so perfectly agreeable to the excellent Rules you have taught me, as I could wish; nor have I Ignorance to plead, tho' not then so well instructed as since: For, well I remember, at the very Instant, something within me smote me, and suggested I did amiss. As I have already offended God, I fear he should abandon me, and then I am undone, nor do I know how he will deal with me for my past Faults.
There iswith God for worse Sinners than you.
I would willingly hope so; but are you sure of that; or do you only hope as I do?
I am very sure, and doubt not to
make you so too, when I can be at Leisure to talk
with you again on these Heads.<|endoftext|>Is this Deposition true?
Yes.
Was thenever in the Line?
No.
Was she ever within Point-blank?
No, not when I saw her.
What time did you see her?
I saw her several times that Day.
Did you see the Fireship go down?
Yes.
Did theattempt to cover her?
No.
Did she ever attempt to cover the?
She went down to theat Night, when we wore, but not before.
Was she near you when you brought up?
Yes, she presently fell farther a-stern of us and to leeward, but not so far as to form the Line.
Was she ever within Point-blank?
No.
What time was theengaged with the threeShips?
I cannot tell.
Do you remember any thing of theanddriving away the first Ship they engaged before the Wind?
No, I never saw any of theShips a-stern of their Admiral, but before the Wind.
Did you see theengage them?
Yes.
Where was thethen?
To windward of the.
How far to windward?
A long Mile from, but not so far to windward.
Was thethen engag'd?
No, thewas then farther from the Enemy than theby a Mile.
When did you see theengaged?
I believe an Hour after the Admiral began.
Was there any Ship for you to engage at first?
Yes, if we had gone into our Station.
When you haul'd your Wind was there any Ship before your Beam?
No.
Did thebear away before the Admiral wore?
Yes.
How long before?
I can't tell exactly.
Was she in a Line with thethen?
I can't say; she was not so far to Leeward as the Admiral was when he began to engage.
Was theconsiderably to windward of thethen?
Yes.
When was that?
Just before the Admiral made the Signal and wore.
How much before?
About half an Hour.
Was thefiring then?
Yes.
Was she within Gun-shot?
No.
What time was that?
When she bore away, half an Hour before the Admiral wore.
Was she then engaging briskly?
Yes.
Did you ever see theengage within Point-blank?
She was pretty near it.
Was it in thePower to have gone down with her?
Yes, I saw nothing to hinder her.
Was theany way disabled?
No, she cou'd not be disabled, because she had had no Engagement before that.
When you saw thefiring smartly, where was the headmost of the five of the Enemy coming up in respect of the?
It was when one or two of the headmost Ships fired at the Fireship, and they were then shot past the.
How was thethen in respect to you?
Abreast of us, half a Mile nearer the Enemy.
Did you fire a Gun then?
Yes.
What time of the Day was it?
About four.
Did your Shot fall short?
Yes.
Was thethen half a Mile nearer the Enemy than you?
Yes.
Did the Enemy return any Shot to you?
No.
Did any Shot go over the?
Not at that time; when we wore there did.
If theandhad engaged those Ships as closely as they ought to have done, wou'd they have stoppedthose Ships from annoying ours, and hinder'dthem from getting up till the Vice-Admiral's Division had got up?
We have a Right to ask any Questions we think fit, and you are at liberty to ask any Question you think proper, and we have shewn you a particular Indulgence in that respect.
We wou'd have attack'd them with five of our Ships, that is, the,,,,; but I can't say whether theandonly cou'd have stop'd them.
Were the, ornear enough to attack them?
If they had gone into their Station, they would have been near enough.
Did you ever see thego near to assist the Ship attack'd by theand?
No.
Did you see any Shot go over the?
Not till we wore.
What distance was the headmost from the, andfrom the?
I can't tell.
Did you ever see thebear under theStern?
Yes, just before we wore, and she fired at the Enemy under thestarboard Quarter.
When you saw theunder theStern, where was the?
This was just before we wore, she was then firing at the Enemy.
Do you remember, when the Admiral wore, how many of the four or five Sail of the Enemy had past before theBeam?
I can't tell exactly.
You was a-head and could see.
I don't remember whether any of them open'd a-head of the.
Was any of them a-head of you?
When I fired a Shot, I don't remember whether the two headmost were a-head or a-stern of the.
Was thethen directly to leeward of you?
Yes, half a Mile nearer the Enemy, it cou'd not be more, because of our wearing soon after, and we had not Room to wear short of her, but soon fell on board of her, which obliged us to shift our Helm, by which we were jostleddown very near the Enemy; the Fire from the Muzzel of our Guns set her Spritsail on fire.
Was thedirectly a-breast of you then?
Yes.
How was the Admiral in respect of you when thewas a-breast of you?
Upon our Lee-Bow.
Was thebetween you and the Enemy when you fired?
Yes, I fired two single Shot from our lower Deck, with the Guns laid down in the Carriage, both which I saw fall short.
Did the five of the Enemy continue their Course under the same Sail?
Yes.
Supposing thehad bore down in a Line with the Admiral, and brought up in a Line when he did, how long would it have been before thewould have had any Ship to engage?
If thehad gone down and brought up in a Line with the Admiral, she would have been in a proper Position to engage the five Sail of the Enemy coming up.
Did thestop those Ships from getting up?
No, I believe not.
From the beginning of the Engagement till the Admiral wore, did you ever observe theannoy the Enemy in any Shape whatever?
No, she fired a good deal, but not within a Distance to do Execution.
Did you see any Shot of the Enemy come over the, when she was a-breast of you?
No.
Did you see the Fireship go down?
Yes.
Did any of the Enemy fire at her?
The headmost of the five Sail did.
Was the Rupert within Gun-shot of them then?
No.
Was the?
No.
Was thealways to windward of the?
Yes.
Did any Shot of the Enemy reach you?
Yes, at first.
How was theoff you then?
To leeward of us.
Did you from the time the Shot reach'd you, continuehauling off?
Yes.
Did thehaul off too?
Yes.
What was the meaning of your hauling off?
Had you received any Damage, or had the?
No.
Did thecontinue hauling off?
Yes, till she bore away again, and begun to fire briskly in the Evening.
How long was it from thefirst bearing up, till she bore down again?
I never saw that she bore away again from the Beginning, till half an Hour before the Admiral wore.
Did you ever see thehad received any Damage to prevent her going into her Station?
No, at no time of the Day.
In the Evening, when you wore, did not you engage the fiveShips a-stern, and how was it possible, if once they got a-head of the, for theto wear and engage them in passing?
Thehad bore away, and was firing at those Ships upon the Admiral's wearing; it was then that I observed the.
If the five Ships once past me, how could I go under the Stern of the Admiral and all the other Ships, and engage those five Ships in passing?
They were not a-breast of you when you fired at them.
You say that I was engaged with the five Ships, that I was half a Mile from you, and that I was out of point-blank, then how could I shoot up to you in the Wearing, and engage the five Ships in passing?
You did not shoot up to us, we came down to you.
Did you ever see theengage a single Ship?
No.
How far were the five Ships of the Enemy from you when the Admiral first engaged?
Three Miles, as near as I can judge, not so far a-stern, rather upon our lee-quarter.
How many Ships were there a-stern of the?
Five.
What Sail had the five Ships out?
I can't say particularly, the two headmost had all their Sails set.
Did they all come up in a Line?
They appeared to me so.
How did they bear from you then, and how did your Head lye?
We were lying to, close to the Wind, and they were right a-stern of us by springing our Luff from them.
Did thefire before the?
Yes.
Were theandfiring together at the same Time?
Yes, in the Evening, when you was firing briskly.
As thewas between you and the Enemy, how could you distinguish whether I was near enough to do Execution?
I could judge of the Distance as it appeared to me, and by our Shot falling short by the Distance you were from us, and the Distance we were from the Enemy; I think we in thewere two Miles from them, and you half a Mile nearer than we.
Then I was a Mile and a half off?
Yes.
From the Situation you lay to windward, could you judge whether thewas in a Line with the Admiral?
Yes, because you was so near us, therefore I am sure you was not in a Line.
If thehad gone down in a proper Line at first, would there have been any Ship for her to engage?
If you had continued going down with an easy Sail till you had compleated the Line from the, I judge you would have fell in a-breast of the Headmost Ship of the Five; for the, by continuing her Course down, fell a-breast of the Second; a little more of her Port-helm in going down, would have laid her along-side of the Third, you might have taken the Second, and we in thethe First.
If I had gone down to the Headmost of the Five Ships, how far should I have been from you, supposing you had gone in the Line?
At a proper Distance; a Quarter of a Mile.
How was thefrom the other three Ships?
Three Miles the most at first; but had you gone down with an easy Sail, as that Space was growing less and less, when you had got down so far as to be in a Line, you would have been a-breast of the Headmost of those Ships.
Was you far out of your Station at your first bringing to?
No.
Then how could I have any Ship to engage?
But we were a great Way from the Enemy when that Shot reached us; I judge theDistance from thewas about two Miles, and her Weather Guns would carry a Shot that Distance.
Do you think in the Situation I was in, if the five Sail of the Enemy had held their Course they first steer'd, could they have fetch'd me?
No, they steer'd for their Admiral; if they had kept their Wind close, they might have fetch'd you.
Did you wear a-head or a-stern of the fiveShips in the Rear, when you wore?
We wore and past a-stern of them; when we wore they were put before the Wind.
Did you engage them as you past?
We engaged with our Larboard Guns when we wore.
As all these Gentlemen have been already examined, and cross-examined upon former Tryals, it will be impossible for me to find out any Mistakes they are guilty of; and therefore I would beg of every Gentleman that is a Member of the Court, to destroy the Minutes they have taken upon the former Tryals, that they may have no Influence in regard to the Sentence that may be pass'd upon my Conduct.
I believe every Gentleman that is a Member of the Court, will not only destroy the Minutes taken upon former Tryals, but endeavour to forget as much as possible, every thing that has pass'd upon former Tryals.
I mention this, not that I have the least Suspicion of the Court, but because I hope to prove that you never yet had a right understanding of the Matter.
You are not to dictate to the Court; every Body here are Persons of Honour, and will do you Justice; and therefore I think that Speech of yours very ungenteel.
Did thehaul up to windward of the Admiral?
Yes.
Did she fire?
Yes, between three and four.
At what Ship?
At the Sternmost Ships coming up.
Was she within point-blank?
No, I think not.
Did you see thewhen her Masts went away?
Yes.
Did theassist her?
No.
Did you see the Fireship go down?
Yes.
Where was thethen?
To windward.
Did she cover the Fireship?
No, not that I saw.
Did you ever see thein the Line?
No, I don't know how she might have been in the Evening.
Did you ever see thewithin point-blank, from the Beginning of the Engagement till the Admiral wore?
No.
If she had gone within point-blank, would she have been to leeward of the?
At what Time?
When the Headmost of the five Ships came up?
I can't judge.
How far was you to windward of the Line?
A good Way; three Quarters of a Mile, or more.
How far was theto leeward of you?
Two Cables length and a half.
What Time did you observe thefire smartly?
Between three and four.
What Ship did she fire at?
At the five Sail coming up.
At which of them?
Faith I can't tell.
Did you ever observe the five Sail pass before the Beam of the?
I can't tell whether they did or no.
Did they ever alter their Course, or shorten Sail when they fired at any of our Ships?
No, our Ships were at too great a Distance for that.
Was there Wind sufficient for theto have gone down near enough to have engaged them properly?
Yes.
When themade a warm Fire, did any of the Enemy's Shot come over her?
No.
Did you see any of them fall short?
No.
Did you see thefire?
Yes.
Did you see thethen?
I must have seen her.
How far was theto windward of the?
Two Cables length.
To windward or a-head?
Upon her Weather-bow, to windward and a-head.
Was she as much farther from the Enemy?
Yes.
When you fired the Guns from your Ship, could you see the?
No.
When you haul'd your Wind, did thedo so too?
I can't be positive; I did not observe; but when theMasts were gone, she was to windward.
During what Time did you see the?
I was most of the Time upon the Quarter-deckand must have seen her often.
At what Ship did you fire your Guns?
At the.
Did you fire any at the SternmostShips?
No.
When you haul'd off, did thedo so too?
I can't say.
Did you observe thebear down nearer than you at first?
Yes.
Did she ever bear down nearer than that?
Not till the Admiral wore.
Did the Shot reach you from the Enemy?
Yes, at the first of the Engagement.
Was thethe next Ship to you?
Yes.
If thehad bore down at first, might not she have engaged the?
It was in her Power, there was Wind enough.
How long did you keep firing at the?
Till after theMasts were gone.
Did your Shot reach?
I think not.
Did their Shot reach you?
Yes, at first; but we kept hauling off; and when thelost her Masts we left off firing.
Was there any Ship for theto engage, if she had come down at first?
Not unless she had gone to the.
Was thefiring upon the?
She fired sometimes.
If you had commanded the, do you think it would not have been better to have engaged the Ships coming up, than to have gone to engage theand assist the?
That was not a proper Question, we can best judge of that.
Did you see any of my Shot fall short?
No, I never saw any.
Were the five Sail coming up, to leeward of their Admiral?
I believe, rather to leeward, but very little.
When you saw theandengaging, were they to leeward of the Admiral and?
No.
Were they near one another?
No.
If theShips had held the Course they came up when theandwere engaging them, could not they have weather'd the?
I believe they could have gone very near to have done it.
As thewas at first under your Lee-quarter, how came she afterwards to be so far to leeward of you; was it by your hauling off, or her bearing away?
I can't judge of that.
Was theengaging the five Sail, and between them and the Fireship, when the Fireship blew up?
She was not immediately between them.
Was thea-head stemming for the Fireship, when the Fireship blew up?
I can't say.
Was thenearer the Fireship than the five Ships?
They were nearer when the Fireship blew up.
Did they pass me?
I can't say.
As these Ships came up to annoy the Fireship, I must have stop'd them?
When thewas engaging those Ships, were they upon her Quarter, or upon her Beam?
Rather upon her Quarter.
I think you say my Shot fell short?
I did not say so.
Where was you quartered?
Upon the lower Gun-deck.
Did you see thewhen she first haul'd up?
Yes.
Was she in a Line with the Admiral?
No, to windward.
Did you ever see theengaged?
Yes, she fired.
At what Time was it?
A little after the Admiral did.
At what Ship did she fire?
I took it to be the.
At what Distance?
A Mile and a half, or better.
Did you see thewhen her Masts went away?
Yes.
Did theassist her?
No.
When the Fireship bore away, did theassist her, or cover her from the Enemy?
No.
Was she never within point-blank?
Not till we wore.
Did you ever see thein a Line with the Admiral?
No.
How do you know she was not in a Line with the Admiral?
Because I saw both her and the Admiral.
Was you in the Line?
No.
How far to windward of the Line?
A Mile.
How far was thefrom you?
Better than a Quarter of a Mile.
Was thea Quarter of a Mile to leeward or a-stern of you?
To leeward.
Could thehave engaged theif she had bore down properly?
To be sure.
Was there any Ship between theand, to take up the?
Thewas between, but she was to windward.
If thehad bore down to the, must not she have shot a-head of theand?
Yes, but they were to leeward.
At the first of the Action, if thehad bore down and brought up in a Line, was there any Ship for her to engage?
She might have engaged if she had gone to theAssistance.
If she had brought up in a Line with the Admiral, cou'd she have engaged?
No.
If she had brought up at first, could she have brought any of her Guns upon the?
Yes, she did fire at the.
Had she gone down nearer, cou'd she have engaged theproperly?
Yes.
If thehad bore down in a proper Line, and kept there; how long wou'd it have been before the headmost of theShips could have come up within Gun-shot of her, supposing they cou'd have crowded sail?
Half an Hour, or three quarters of an Hour.
Did she fire at the?
Yes.
When these Ships came up, was thein a proper stationto engage the headmost of them?
No, she fired, and her Shot all fell short.
Did you see them fall short?
Yes, both the Enemy's and hers fell short; the Enemy's fell nearer the, than thedid the Enemy.
When you first brought up, what distance was you from the?
Better than a quarter of a Mile.
How was thefrom you?
To leeward.
How was thethen?
In a Line with the.
During any part of the Day before the Admiral wore, were the five Sail shot a-head of the?
No.
Did thehaul her Wind?
Yes.
Did any of the five Sail shorten Sail or alter their Course from the Fire of any of our Ships?
No, none of them a-stern did.
Was you in a Line with thewhen she was haul'd off toward the latter part of the Action?
No, never.
If thehad brought up in a Line, wou'd she have been within Point-blank of the Enemy?
Yes.
If thehad haul'd up in a Line with the Admiral, where wou'd the headmost of the five Sail have been from her?
Within Point-blank.
Did you ever see the five sail pass the?
No.
Did thebring up when the Admiral did?
Yes.
Are you sure that thedid not keep bearing down after the Admiral haul'd up?
I think he brought up then.
Did thebring up when the Admiral did?
Yes.
Did you take notice of the Enemy's Ships, a short time before the Admiral wore?
Yes.
How many of them had pass'd the Beam of the?
I think they all had pass'd
When the Admiral wore, had any of the Enemy's shot before the Beam of the?
They had shot up nearer their Admiral.
How many of them?
All the five.
Were they all nearer the Fireship than thewas?
I think they were.
When the Admiral wore, were the five Ships a-breast, a-head, or a-stern of the?
I believe a-breast of her.
If I had bore down with the Admiral at first, and brought up in a Line, how long wou'd it have been before the five Sail wou'd have been within Gun-shot?
Three quarters of an Hour.
How long must I have been in going into a Line with the Admiral, if I had put the Helm a-weather, after I had brought up?
Half an Hour, or better.
When he had got there, wou'd there have been any Ship for him to engage?
Yes, he must have been within Point-blank of the sternmost Ship.
If I had not brought to when I did, how long wou'd it have been before I had got into the Line?
Half an Hour.
Did any of the Enemy's Shot reach you?
Not that I saw.
When the Half Hour that you speak of my getting into the Line was expir'd, should I have been within Point-blank of any Ship?
Yes.
Did I fire at thewhen I brought to?
Yes, but the other Ships were a great way from their Admiral.
Did any of the five Sail pass the?
I think they shot up when the Fireship bore down.
How far was thefrom the Ships coming up at the first of the Engagement?
I cannot say.
Were there four or five Ships coming up?
Five.
Did you see a singleShip, or any Ship engage her?
No.
Did I bring to to leeward of you?
Yes.
Was I in a Line with the?
It was as much as you were.
How far was you from me?
Not a great Way then, but we filled our Sails and hauled our Wind.
What did I do then?
You were firing.
What did I do at first?
You were firing.
When did you see my Shot fall short?
I saw it always fall short.
Is this Deposition true?
Yes.
Did thehaul up before she came in the Line?
Yes.
Did you ever see her engage within Point-blank?
Not till the Evening, when she wore.
Did you see when thelost her Masts?
Yes.
Did thegive her any Assistance?
No.
Did you see the Fireship go down?
Yes.
Did thecover her or attempt it?
No.
What did thedo?
She began to fire when we did.
When did she begin?
Soon after the Admiral.
At what Ship did she fire?
I cannot say; either at the, or the Ship a-stern.
What did she do after that?
She continued firing some time, and all the Shot fell short.
At what distance was she from the Enemy?
Not within Point-blank.
If she had gone down at first, was there Room for her to engage?
She must have gone a-head of us, there was nothing to hinder her.
If she had gone into her proper Station a-stern of the Admiral, would she have gone to engage the?
Yes, a-head of us.
Supposing she had left a Space for theand, wou'd she then have done Execution upon the?
No, she must then have engaged the headmost of the five Sail coming up then; but she might have brought some Guns to bear upon the.
If thehad gone down in the Line at first, cou'd she have fired at the headmost of the five Sail of the Enemy, and left a Space for theand?
Yes.
At the Beginning?
Yes.
Must not she have been to leeward of the Admiral then?
No.
When the Admiral wore in the Evening, what Position were the sternmost of the Enemy in from the?
When the Admiral wore, we were firing at them.
Did they shoot up a-head, or lie a-breast of the?
The headmost of them was upon her Beam, but not the sternmost.
Were they a-head of the?
No, when we wore, we fired our larboard Guns at them.
When you was so near the, how far was you from theShips?
Near a Mile.
Did any of theShips coming up alter their Course from theFire?
No.
Was thenever nearer theShips than she was just before you wore?
No, that was the nearest.
Did you fire any Shot at the Enemy?
Yes.
At what Distance?
A Mile.
Why do you think so, did the Shot fall short?
Yes.
Was theever in a Line with theafter she hauled off?
I cannot say.
Was you in theever as far to leeward as the?
No.
Was the?
No.
How near was you to the Admiral before you wore?
A Mile and a quarter at nearest.
How far was thefrom you?
Between a quarter and half a Mile.
Was that the nearest you was to thebefore you wore?
Yes.
Did you ever see the headmost of the fiveShips fire at the Fireship?
Yes.
Did their Shot reach?
Yes, they went both a-head and a-stern of her before they wore.
Were the five Ships to leeward of the Admiral?
I cannot say, because we were so far to windward.
I have no more Questions to ask him now, but desire he may be in the Way lest I should have Occasion to call him in my Defence.
You are to attend till this Tryal is over:
Why don't they bear down,
Is this Deposition true?
Yes.
Where was you quarter'd?
Upon the Gun-deck.
When thebegan to engage, how was thefrom her?
Half a Mile upon her Weather-bow.
Did she fire?
I did not see her fire.
Did you ever see theout of your Weather-Ports?
I was abaft the main Mast, and saw theout of the Weather-Ports, and our People cryed out;EssexRupert.
After thefired, where was the?
I saw her to windward; I looked out now and then, and always saw her to windward.
Did you see her engage?
No.
How often did you look out?
Three or four Times.
During what space of Time?
An Hour.
Did you see theto windward of you then?
Yes.
Did you see when theMasts went away?
No.
Did you see her after?
Yes.
Did thebear down to assist her?
I did not see that she did.
Did you see the Fireship go down?
No.
When you had done engaging theShips, what did thedo?
I can't say.
This Witness says nothing;
Whatdo you mean by saying he has said nothing? he says, he saw theto windward of the,
Did you ever see thein a Line with the Admiral?
I cannot tell the Situation, I was quartered below.
What Ship did you fire at in the?
The headmost of the four.
How many of those Ships past by you?
I believe all of them but the last.
Just before you wore, did youlook out at the?
No.
Did you see theShips then?
Yes.
How far were they shot a-head of you?
But a little Way.
Did they continue the same Sail as before?
Yes.
Did they alter their Course?
Not that I observed.
What Sail had they set?
Foresails, Topsails, and Top-gallant-sails; at the first of the Engagement some of them had their Top-gallant-sails lowered, and some not.
Which of them did you engage last?
They headmost of the four.
Was she before your Beam when you engaged her?
No, I think she was abaft the Beam.
Did you observe thethen?
No.
Do you think they could have pass'd the?
I cannot say.
Did you go upon Deck, before you wore Ship?
Not just before.
At the Time of the Wearing?
No, when I was ordered to cease firing, then I went up and saw the Situation of the.
From the Time the Engagement began till the Admiral wore, was theever at a proper Distance from the Enemy to do Execution and engage?
I never saw her fire at all.
Did you ever see her at a proper Distance to do Execution?
I cannot say; she was upon our Weather-bow, but she might be within proper Execution.
Was you then at a proper Distance from the Enemy?
I cannot tell.
Was thealways to windward of you?
Yes.
Did you see the Fireship come down?
No.
Do you know any thing of thehailing the?
No, nothing but what I heard afterwards.
Did you hear thehail the?
No.
Where was you quartered?
Upon the upper Deck.
Is this Deposition true?
Yes.
Did thebring up to windward of the Line of theand?
Yes.
Did you see her engage?
Yes.
With what Ship?
The Ship a-stern of the, she had none to engage at first.
Was she within point-blank?
No.
Was she in a Line with the Admiral?
No.
Did you see thewhen her Masts went away?
I saw her about that time.
Where was thethen?
A little to windward of us.
Did she bear away to assist the?
I know not that she did.
Did you see the Fireship going down?
I saw her before she blew up.
Did you ever see theproperly engaged?
No.
Was theever in the Line?
About four.
What were the Words Captainmade use of, when he hailed the?
He asked why he would not bear down, but can't tell whether there was any Answer.
Was it the Captain himself that hail'd Captain?
Yes.
Were the Words, if he would bear down, or why he would not bear down?
Why he would not bear down.
Did you ever see the, while you was engaged, engage at a proper Distance to do Execution?
No.
As you did not hear any Answer, did thebear away upon your hailing?
I cannot tell.
Did not thebear away when thedid?
I cannot tell.
At the Evening when the Signal of Battle was hauled down, were any of theShips past by the?
I do not remember any of them past the.
Do you believe thebore down when thedid?
No.
Was it in thePower to engage those Ships?
Yes.
Must she have gone to leeward of the Line, if she had gone at a proper Distance to engage them?
Yes.
What time of the Day did your first bring up?
About Two.
Where was thethen?
Close to us.
How near you?
Within a Stone's throw.
How long did you engage them?
Three quarters of an Hour.
When you left off, where was the?
We were very near her then.
Did not theengage then?
I did not see she did.
Where was the Enemy off you then?
That Ship was a-breast off us.
Had thea Ship to engage with then?
No.
When you left off engaging, how far was thefrom you?
A little way the first time.
Was it after you left off engaging, you hailed the?
Yes.
Did you make Sail after thethen?
No, we lay still.
Was it after you left off firing the first time, that you hauled up to the?
No, after we had engaged the four Ships.
Did not you hail the?
Yes.
At what time?
At Three.
Was it after engaging the first Ship?
Yes.
Did not you haul up to theafter engaging the first Ship?
No, it was after engaging the four Ships.
Was theclose by you when you engaged the first Ships?
Yes.
As the Enemy shot a-head, did not theengage her?
I cannot tell.
Was you near enough when you engaged the single Ship?
No.
Was theever to leeward of you?
Not till we wore.
Was she ever right a-head of you?
No, rather upon our Weather-Bow, if any thing.
When you haul'd off from the four of the Enemy's Ships, did you hail the?
We did hail her, but I can't be certain whether it was after we had done engaging the first Ship, or after engaging the four Ships.
Did you ever observe theShips to shorten Sail, or alter their Course from your first engaging them?
No.
Where was you quartered?
Upon the Fore-castle.
What do you know concerning the?
When the Admiral bore down we bore down, but the Admiral took a shorter round than we did, and when we brought to first, thewas to windward of us, and she brought-to before we did.
Did you engage a single Ship at first?
Yes.
At what time did you begin?
I can't remember the time of the Day, it was about half an hour after the Admiral began.
Where was the?
Upon our Larboard-Bow.
At what distance from you?
A Cable's Length.
Did she engage that Ship too?
Not immediately, she fired some time after we did, but can't say at what Ship.
Where was thewhen you had done engaging the single Ship?
Upon our Larboard-Bow.
How near you?
Pretty near us, we hauled up, and came close to her Quarter.
Did not you hail thethen?
I cannot say positively, whether it was before or after we bore down the last time.
How long did you lye there?
Half an Hour.
What did thedo afterwards?
She did not bear down with us.
What past in your hailing the?
Our Captain hailed several times, then Captaincame into his Starboard-Gallery; our Captain asked why they did not bear down nearer? Captainturn'd round, but said nothing that I heard.
Do you think that Captainwas then within Gun-shot of the Enemy?
Within random Shot he might.
Repeat the Words that past on your hailing.
When our Captain hailed, Captaincame into his Starboard-Gallery, he said, what do you say? Captainsaid, Why don't you edge nearer, Captain? or Words to that effect. Captainturn'd round, and went out of his Gallery into his Cabin.
When you hailed thedid she bear down?
No.
Did you hear CaptainWords distinctly, What do you say, Captain?
Yes.
When you were engaging the four Ships, was Captainwithin a proper Distance of the Enemy?
I believe not.
Or was he at any part of the Time during the Engagement within Point-blank?
No.
After you hailed the, did thebear down singly?
I can't tell whether it was after or before hailing, that we bore down singly.
Was you ever hail'd by Captain?
Not that I ever heard of.
Must you have heard it, if he had hailed you?
Yes, I was upon the Fore-castle all Day.
Was thewithin Point-blank, or in a Line with theand, when she fired?
No.
Which of the four Sail of the Enemy were you engaged with the last time?
Most of the four.
How far did the Headmost shoot a-head of you, before the Admiral made the Signal to leave off Chace and wore?
I don't remember whether she was before our Beam or not; if she was before our Beam, it was as much as she was.
What Sail did they come up with?
Top-gallant-sails, Top-sails, and Fore-sails; some had their Top-gallant-sails down, and some not.
Did they shorten Sail, or alter their Course upon your firing?
I don't remember they did, they edged away a little more.
Was it from your fire?
No.
How was thefrom you then?
To windward of us.
What was she doing?
I can't tell.
How far to windward of you?
A Cable's length upon our Bow.
Did you see thefire then?
Yes.
At what Ship?
I can't say.
Was she wide upon your Bow?
A Point and a Half or two Points upon our weather Bow?
Was theever within Point-blank?
I believe not till we wore in the Evening.
Did you see the Fireship go down?
Yes.
Which was nearest the Fireship, the five Sail of the Enemy, or the?
Thewas the nearest when the Fireship was coming down.
Which was the nearest when she blew up?
TheShips.
Which of our Ships was the nearest?
The.
How did the Fireship bear from you?
Upon our Starboard-bow.
How did the Fireship bear from theShips?
The headmost of them was abaft her Beam.
Did you see thewhen she lost her Masts?
Yes.
Did theassist her?
No.
When you engaged the four Ships, how were they from you?
The two sternmost upon our Quarter, and the two headmost upon our Beam.
How did these Ships come up, with the Wind large?
Two or three Points from the Wind.
How cou'd I have engaged those Ships till they came a-head of the?
You cou'd not.
Were those Ships in a Line with their Admiral?
Them seem'd to come up to close the Line with their Admiral.
Were they in a Line with their Admiral?
The Admiral was further to windward than they.
Did they come up as you did?
They edg'd away more than we did.
If Captainand I had bore away further than we did, before we brought up, wou'd not those Ships have shot us away to leeward of them?
Had we gone down as close as the Admiral anddid, if those Ships had had a Mind, some, if not all of them might have weatherd us.
Where did the Single Ship go to that you engaged?
I can't tell.
It is very odd, if you engaged a Ship an Hour, that you don't know where she went to; pray recollect your-self.
I know there was a Single Ship distant from the four which we engaged.
Did I engage as soon as I had any Ship to engage with?
I don't remember what Ship you engaged with, I saw you fire.
Did you ever see me haul off from the Enemy or endeavour to get nearer?
I never saw you endeavour to get nearer from your first hauling up.
Did I haul off?
You seem'd to keep the same Position.
Where was the Shot that you receiv'd in your Main Mast, was it the Aftermost part or one Side?
Between the two Cheeks in the Aftermost part.
Did not that Shot come from the Ship a-stern of you?
It was either from the sternmost of the Enemy, or that next to her as I believe, I am not positive.
How cou'd I get between them to fire upon them till they got out of the Way?
I don't know whether we did not receive that Shot in the hauling off, we might receive it then.
Upon your hauling off did you get your Fore-Tack on board, haul your Mizen out, and haul your Wind till you got to windward of my weather Beam?
I do not remember we got our Weather-Tack aboard till we wore.
Did you ever see me yaw Ship, put my Sails a-back in order to open the Enemy's Ships, and bring my weather Guns to bear?
I saw you once bring to.
Did I ever fire my weather Guns?
I can't say you did.
Did you ever see me yaw Ship, put the Helm sometime Port, sometime Starboard, and lay my Sails back?
I did not observe you did.
How long did you fire before I began?
Some time; I can't remember how long.
As these Ships were under their Topsails, Topgallant sails and Foresails, they must have soon pass'd you; did I not engage them then?
I can't say; the headmost just came before our Beam, I saw her firing.
Did you see any of her Shot fall short?
Yes, and several of your Shot fell short of her.
How far was I from the Enemy when you saw me fire?
Less than a Mile.
Was I within a Cable's Length of you?
Yes.
Was theandin a Line with the Fireship when she blew up?
No.
How far was the Fireship to Leeward of them?
About half a Mile.
Did any of the sternmost Ships of the Enemy ever pass the?
No, I saw none pass till we wore.
What side of the Deck did Captainstand on when he hail'd the?
Upon the Weather side of the Quarter-Deck.
All I know of her is, that the three Ships a-stern of themade an Angle to windward of the Line, thewas the leewardmost, theto windward of her, theto leeward of the; I did not see them till after two, when thewas out of Action; I did not see any thing more.
When theengaged, how did thebear from her?
I can't tell.
Did you see thewhen her Masts fell?
Yes.
Did you see the, or any of the other Ships a-stern, assist her?
No, they all then made the Angle, and were in the Position I mentioned.
Were they firing then?
I saw them firing once, but can't tell whether it was then or no.
Did you see the Fireship go down?
Yes.
Did you see her blow up?
No, but I saw her Combustibles in the Air.
Did any of those Ships go down with her?
I did not see any of them go down with her, but they went down after her.
How long after her?
The Admiral was wearing then, and they all bore down with him.
When you saw theto leeward of the other Ships, was thedisabled, or what was the Reason she did not bear down?
I can't say what might be the Reason.
Was there Wind enough?
Yes.
When thewas engaging the second Ship a-stern of theAdmiral, where were the otherShips?
A long Way a-stern, and to Windward of every Ship of AdmiralDivision.
Are you sure of that?
Yes, it is plain they were to Windward, because I was to Leeward of the,,and, and I saw those Ships to Windward of them.
At what time?
At two, and half past two, and at three: AdmiralDivision engaged them to windward of our Line at three, and when Mr.Division neared them, they edged away towards their Admiral.
Was Mr.Division to windward of the Admiral's?
Yes.<|endoftext|>The evidence you shall give, between our Sovereign Lord the King and the prisoner at the bar, shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth; so help you God. Kiss the book.
Mr Thomas, pray tell my Lord, and the Jury, what your business is.
I am clerk to Mr Jones, a Stationer, in the Temple.
Look upon this deed
Do you know the hand-writing of that engrossment; if so, tell us whose it is.
This is my hand-writing as far as to the wordsand so on.
How came you not to engross the whole?
I cannot positively say. -- We sometimes leave out the conclusion by gentlemen's desire, in order that they may add a covenant, or some such thing, if it should be thought necessary; but I cannot particularly recollect the reason why the conclusion was omitted in this case.
How many parts of this deed did you engross?
I engrossed this; and, as appears by our day-book, another part.
From whom did you receive the instructions for these engrossments?
From Mr Jones's son.
Were the parts you engrossed agreeable to the draft?
They were.
Look at the wordsengrossed at length in the reddendum and covenant, for payment of the rent in this counterpart; were they part of the original ingrossment, or were they afterwards inserted in blanks left for that purpose?
I engrossed them at the same time that I engrossed the rest, agreeable to the draft.
Prisoner, would you ask this witness any question?
We will now prove the execution of this counterpart by the prisoner. -- Call Mr Fannen.
Mr Fannen, look upon this deed;
did you see it executed, and by whom?
This deed was executed by Mr Ayliffe in my presence.
Tell us, if you can recollect, when this was, and where?
I am not sure; but to the best of my remembrance, it was sometime the beginning of December last, at Mr Fox's house.
Was there any other deed executed at the same time?
There was another part executed by Mr Fox.
Look upon the back of this deed; are you one of the subscribing witnesses?
I am; and so I was to the other part, which was executed by Mr Fox.
Had you any conversation with the prisoner touching thislease immediately after the execution of it?
I had; but I cannot say, whether it was immediately, or a day or two after the lease was executed.
Where was this?
It was in my room at Mr Fox's house; I was not sure, though I guessed, that the deed executed by Mr Fox and witnessed by me, was a lease of Rusley park; and, therefore, I asked Mr Ayliffe, whether Rusley park was let; to which he answered,that Mr Fox had been so good to let it him at the rent of thirty or thirty five pounds a year -- I am not positive which. -- And he expressed great obligations to Mr Fox for his goodness in so doing.
I should be glad to look at that deed.
You shall see it as soon as it has been read. In the mean time, would you ask this witness any question?
No, my Lord.
My Lord, we will now call a witness to prove the concluding words of this counterpartto be of the prisoner's own hand-writing -- Call Mr Ellis Dawe.
Mr Dawe, look at the concluding words in this deed, beginning with the wordsand tell us if you know the hand-writing.
I do: I am well acquainted with the prisoner Mr Ayliffe; and believe these words to be of his hand-writing.
Look upon the endorsement; I mean the title of the deedwritten upon the back of it; Whose hand-writing do you take that to be?
I believe it to be Mr Ayliffe's hand.
Are you well acquainted with his hand-writing?
I am.
Have you seen him write?
I have often seen him write.
We have now fully established this deed, and desire it may be read.
Let it be read.
My Lord, we will now proceed to prove the publication of the lease mortgaged by the prisoner to William Clewer, Esq; and which bears date the 22d of Nov. and is at the yearly rent of 5 l. and for that purpose we will first prove the mortgage, wherein that lease is recited. -- Call Walter Hargrave.
Mr Hargrave, look at your name set upon the back of this mortgage, as a witness to the execution of it; and tell us, whether that is your hand-writing?
This is my hand.
By whom did you see this mortgage executed?
By Mr Ayliffe. -- I saw him sign, seal, and deliver it, as his act and deed.
Where did you see it executed?
At Mr Priddle's chambers, in the King's-Bench-Walks, in the Inner-Temple.
Is your name, set as a subscribing witness to the receipt for the consideration-money, likewise of your hand writing?
It is: I saw Mr Ayliffe sign this receipt for 1700 l.
Did you see the prisoner, at the time of the execution of this mortgage, deliver any title-deeds to Mr Clewer?
Yes, he delivered several deeds to Mr Clewer, and that lease
was one of them.
Do you remember any request being made at this time, to keep the mortgage of that lease a secret? and if you do, tell us by whom such request was made, and who were present.
Mr Ayliffe desired Mr Bradley, Mr Green, Mr Clewer, and myself, to swear that we would keep it secret.
What answer was assigned to this?
We told him we would take no such oath.
Was any reason given for such request?
The reason Mr Ayliffe gave, was, that he would not on any account have it come to Mr Fox's ears.
Pray Sir, have you any particular reason for remembering this lease, so as to be sure, that it was one of the title-deeds delivered by the prisoner to Clewer?
Yes, I have. -- I'll show you.-- I remember it by this stamp.
Mr Jones is come. --
My Lord, with your lordship's leave, we will now go back to the leases engrossed at Mr Jones's, to which he ought regularly to have been examined before, but that he happened not to be in court. -- Mr Jones, do you remember any person's applying to you, some time in the latter end of the year 1758, to have a lease of Rusley-park, in Wiltshire, engrossed in the name of Ayliffe?
Yes; I did three parts of such lease, Fox and Ayliffe. -- My clerk Henry Thomas engrossed two of them, and Henzell the other.
Were there any particular directions given you by the person who brought the draft to your house, about omitting the common conclusion?
I can't positively say, 'till I see the deeds themselves.
We engross'd this deed down to the words,. -- But the conclusion beginning with those words is of some other person's hand. -- It was omitted to leave room forsomething to be added, and must have been ordered so by the person who brought the draft.
Mr Fannen; the last witness, has said there were three parts of the lease engrossed at his house, how many parts did you see executed?
There were only two parts executed; the original lease and counterpart; the first by Mr Fox and the other by Mr Ayliffe.
My Lord, we desire that the mortgage to Clewer, which we have proved to have been executed by the prisoner, may be read, in order to shew that the lease which Hargrave swore was delivered to Clewer, is the very lease recited in, and assigned by, that mortgage.
Let it be read.
We will now, my Lord, proceed to prove, that the lease thus recited in, and assigned by, this mortgage to Clewer, and proved to have been delivered to him by the prisoner, is forged. --
Mr Fannen, be pleased to look at this lease. --
Is the name JohnFannen, written upon the back as a subscribing witness, of your hand-writing?
No Sir, it is not my writing?
Look at the name H. Fox, subscribed at the bottom of it; is that Mr Fox's hand?
It is not.
Are you well acquainted with Mr Fox's hand-writing?
I am.
How long have you been acquainted with it?
I have known Mr Fox's hand-writing these thirteen years.
Is your name upon that deed like your hand-writing?
There is an imitation of my hand, but it is a very bad one.
Do you always write your name in the same manner?
I suppose I may not always write it exactly the same, but as nearly so as possible.
Then, how can you be positive, that this is not your hand?
Because it is a very bad imitation of it.
What reason have you for calling it a bad imitation?
Because it is not like it. It was certainly intended to imitate my hand; but compare that writing with mine upon the counterpart, and you'll see a very great difference.
Look at these
are these of your hand-writing?
They are my writing.
Can you positively swear, that your name on the back of that lease is not of your hand-writing?
I do.
The counterpart, which has been read, is dated the 27th of November: and you have said, that, at the time of the execution of it, there was but one part executed by Mr Fox; I would, therefore, ask you, whether, in that month, or within a short time before or after, you was witness to any other deed between Mr Fox and the prisoner?
No, my Lord, I was not: I remember being a witness to this counterpart executed by the prisoner, and to the original executed by Mr Fox, but to no other deeds within that year.
Call Mr Hobson.
Take that lease into your hand
is the name, James Hobson, which is written upon the back of it, of your hand-writing?
No, Sir, it is not.
Does it appear to you to have been writ with an intention to imitate your hand?
It certainly was intended to be an imitation of my hand?
Does it resemble your hand-writing?
I think very little. There are two letters particularly that are very bad; theis much wider than I write it, and the tops of theare not at all like mine.
Look at the counterpart, are you a subscribing witness to it?
I am: I remember my being a witness to the prisoner's executing this counterpart, and to Mr Fox's executing the original.
Was you ever a subscribing witness to the execution of any other deed between Mr Fox and the prisoner?
I don't recollect that I ever was.
Are you sure that you was not a witness to any such deed in the month of November last?
I am certain I was not.
Or in December?
I do not remember that I was.
When was this deed executed?
To the best of my memory it was upon the 11th of December.
Can you recollect whether you witnessed any such deed within a month or two before, or after, the month of December, 1758?
I don't remember that I was a witness to any other deed at all.
You say you was not a witness to any other deed executed by Mr Fox to the prisoner. -- Pray, look at this instrument; did you not see Mr Fox execute it, and are not you a subscribing witness?
That is my hand-writing, and I saw Mr Fox set his name to this paper.
You may not, perhaps, understand what is meant by a; and, therefore, I will ask you, whether you remember your being a witness in the months of November or December last, or at any time before or after, to the execution of any otherbyMr Fox, besides the lease and counterpart, which you have mentioned?
I do not remember that I was.
Are you acquainted with Mr Fox's hand-writing?
I am well acquainted with it.
Do you live with him?
I do.
How long have you known his hand-writing?
About eight years.
Look upon the name H. Fox subscribed to the deed
is that Mr Fox's hand-writing?
I believe not.
Tell us why you think so.
Because of the I in the H.
which Mr Fox always makes with a pointed top; whereas, the top of this is round; and because of the, the end of which is turned in a different manner from what Mr Fox usually does.
Look at these;
and tell us wherein they differ from this.
The turn of theon the parchment is rounder than in those of Mr Fox's writing.
Do you think it possible for a gentleman, in the course of his signing his name, to write always just alike?
I think it is possible for a man to write always very much alike?
Have you observed any difference in the manner of Mr Fox's signing his name to a frank, and when he subscribes it to a deed or letter?
He does make a difference.
Describe that difference.
Mr Fox uses a differentin his franks, from what he does at other times; he turns the first limb of it towards the right, and draws a strait stroke a-cross.
Pray look at his name on this paper, is this his writing?
It is.
Is not the top of that
larger than the top of this?
It is larger; but they are both pointed.
Is not that
like thesubscribed to the deed?
Compare them carefully.
If you look at them together, you will see a very great difference.
Look at the name H. Fox upon this paper.
Is not that H very like the H at the foot of that deed?
There is but very little difference except in the.
This frank may probably be one of the prisoner's making; for he used sometimes to frank in Mr Fox's name.
Do you know what business Mr Ayliffe was of formerly?
I know nothing more of him than that he was Mr Fox's steward.
My Lord, we will now corroborate the evidence of the two last witnesses, by the testimony of other gentlemen well acquainted with their hand-writing, and with Mr Fox's. -- Call Mr Netherton.
Do you know Mr Fannen?
I do; and have been intimate with him several years?
Have you seen him write?
Yes: I have seen him write many times.
Look at his name, set as a subscribing witness to the execution of this deed.
Is that his hand-writing?
This is not his hand. -- The manner in which this is wrote, particularly as to the shape of the letters, is not at all like it. -- Mr Fannen makes the strokes of his n's farther asunder, freer and rather sharper, and turns the bottom of his J much rounder.
Look at the name John Fannen on these papers;
do you believe these to be his hand?
I believe they are?
Are the tops of these
sharper than those upon the parchment?
They appear so. -- There is more similitude between thenames on those papers, than between either of them, and the name on this parchment.
Do you, or do you not, believe the name John Fannen, on that parchment, to be his hand-writing, or are you doubtful?
I am not in the least doubtful, my Lord; it is certainly forged.
Call Mr Cox.
Do you know Mr Hobson, who has just now been examined?
I do.
Are you acquainted with the manner of his hand-writing?
I am.
Then look at the name James Hobson on the back of this deed.
Do you believe that to be his hand?
That is not his hand-writing.
Are you clear in that opinion?
I am.
Pray, tell us the grounds of your objection?
I object against the, theand the. Mr Hobson makes hisvery narrow; this is very wide; theandare remarkably different.
How came you to be so well acquainted with his hand?
I have received many letters from him.
But did you ever see him write his name?
I have often.
Do you believe Hobson's name upon the back ofthat deed to be his hand-writing, or not, or are you doubtful?
My Lord, I have no doubt at all; I do believe, that this is not his hand.
We desire Mr Calcraft may be sworn.
Mr Calcraft, I need hardly ask you, if you are acquainted with Mr Fox's hand-writing?
I am very well acquainted with his hand; having often seen him write.
Then, Sir, please to look at the name H. Fox subscribed to this deed.
Is that Mr Fox's hand?
I don't take it to be his hand. I never saw him make anas this.
Some persons, from being more conversant in writing, have a more discerning eye than others; therefore, Sir, I would ask you, whether, from your particular acquaintance with Mr Fox's manner of writing, or from your knowledge of writing in general, you can take upon you to say, that you do or do not believe this name to be of Mr Fox's writing, or have you any doubt about it?
From the knowledge I have of Mr Fox's hand, I really believe that this is not of his writing; I never saw Mr Fox make such anas this.
Swear Mr Donisthorpe.
Pray, Sir, are you acquainted with Mr Fox's hand-writing?
I have been acquainted with his hand-writing above twenty-eight years.
Then look upon the name H. Fox subscribed to this deed.
Do you take that to be Mr Fox's hand?
I do not take it to be his hand.
Do you believe, that it is not Mr Fox's hand? or are you doubtful whether it is or not?
I am as certain as I can be of any thing which I did not see done myself, that this is not Mr Fox's hand-writing.
Are you in any station under Mr Fox?
I have now the honour to be his steward.
Do you know Mr Ayliffe, the prisoner at the bar?
I have known him many years.
Are you acquainted with his hand-writing, particularly his engrossing hand?
I am well acquainted with his hand-writing; but I never saw him engross.
Can you take upon you to say, whether you believe the engrossment of this deed
to be the prisoner's hand?
I don't call this an engrossing hand.
Then can you tell us of whose hand-writing you take this deed to be?
I am certain this is Mr Ayliffe's hand, as certain as I am that the name H. Fox at the bottom is not of Mr Fox's writing.
We must desire Mr Dawe to stand up again.
Mr Dawe, you are acquainted with the prisoner's hand; pray, look upon this deed,
whose hand do you take it to be?
I believe it to be Mr Ayliffe's hand.
Swear Mr Dalby.
Did you, Sir, ever see Mr Ayliffe write?
Yes: I have a great many times.
Look upon the body of this deed.
Do you believe it to be of the prisoner's hand-writing?
This is a much stronger hand than he usually writes; but the cut and turn of the letters are so exactly the same, that I believe it to be his, though I cannot say I ever saw any of his writing upon parchment before.
If you never saw any of his writing upon parchment, and you admit this to be a stronger hand than his, what reason have you to say this deed is of his writing?
I have often seen Mr Ayliffe write, and I have received many letters from him; and I say, that the turn of the letters in this deed greatly resembles the manner of his hand-writing.
Let Mr Jones stand up.
Pray, look at the engrossment of that deed.
Do you know any thing of that hand-writing?
This is not the hand-writing of any of my people. -- It is not an engrossing hand, but very badly wrote.
Are you positive that this is not the hand-writing of any of the persons whom you employ?
Yes; I am certain that this was not wrote by any of the people whom I employ, or ever did.
Have you ever seen any writing like it?
It seems to me to be the same hand with the concluding part of the counterpart engrossed at my house.
Give him the counterpart, to compare the concluding words of the two deeds.
Now from your skill and practice in writing, do you take these two conclusions, beginning at the words,to be wrote by the same hand, or by different hands?
They are exactly alike, and appear to me to have been both done by the same hand; and I believe them to have been wrote by one person.
Both what!
The whole of this deed,
and the wordsto the end in the other.
Swear Samuel Lodge.
Mr Lodge, do you know Mr Ayliffe's hand?
Yes; Sir, I have been acquainted with him many years.
Have you seen him write?
I have seen him write several times.
Did you live with him?
I used to be frequently backwards and forwards with him.
Then look at the body of that lease,
and tell us of whose hand-writing it is?
I believe it to be Mr Ayliffe's, it greatly resembles his hand.
Had you not some conversation with the prisoner some time about the month of December last, concerning a lease from Mr Fox to him of Rusley-park?
I remember I copied the draft of such a lease, in order to be carried to Mr Paterson, for his perusal.
What was the rent reserved?
I left a blank for the rent, Mr Ayliffe having told me, that he did not know what the rent was to be; he said it was to be a small one; perhaps, 5 l. a year; and possibly, but a peppercorn.
What was done with this draft?
When I had wrote it, I believe I carried it to Mr Paterson.
Do you know of the engrossing of that draft?
No, Sir, I don't.
Did the prisoner, at any time after the lease was executed, tell you what the rent was?
He told me it was five pounds a year.
Did you see the lease itself after it was executed?
I did.
When did you see it, and upon what occasion?
I can't directly say the time; but I believe it was in December last; Mr Ayliffe delivered it to me, among other writings, at Mr Priddle's chambers, or coming from thence.
Did he at that time tell you what the rent was?
No; not at that time; but I looked to see. I had to put the parcelinto my pocket; and going soon after, to the vault; and having no waste-paper, I took out the writings, which were wrapped up in a new's-paper, and tore part of it off. This gave me the opportunity of seeing that the lease of Rusley was in the parcel; upon which, I had the curiosity to look into it, and see what the rent reserved was; and then I saw that it was 35 l.
Was that lease of the prisoner's hand-writing?
No: it was a very different hand, more like the hand-writing of the counterpart which has been produced here, as far as a person can carry the resemblance of hand-writings in his mind.
Did you look at the name subscribed at the bottom?
Yes: it was signed H. Fox.
You said you had known the prisoner a long time; what was he originally?
I believe he kept a school.
What school?
A writing and reading school, I believe.
Where was it he kept a school?
At Lineham, in the county of Wilts.
You say you are acquainted with the manner of the prisoner's hand-writing; pray, look at the signature, H. Fox, at the foot of this deed,
whose hand-writing do you believe that to be?
It appears to me to have a strong resemblance of Mr Ayliffe's hand-writing.
What reason haveyou to think so; have you ever seen him sign Mr Fox's name?
I have two or three times seen him frank letters in Mr Fox's name; and this looks like Mr Ayliffe's manner of writing Mr Fox's name, though it is wrote larger than what he used to do in the franks.
Did the prisoner use to write Mr Fox's name in the manner it is signed to that lease?
Yes; except the, which he wrote like that used by Mr Fox in his franks.
Are the words, both in the reddendum and covenant of the counterpart, engrossed in words at length; and is there any razure in either of them in the lease set out in the indictment?
The rent reserved in the counter-part is engrossed in words at length, and there is no razure in the lease.
My Lord, we rest it here.
Mr Ayliffe, the counsel for the Crown have now gone through their evidence; this, therefore, is the time to make your defence.
The name to the lease is Mr Fox's own hand-writing; that is all I know.
Have you any witnesses to call.
My Lord, webeg leave to examine a few witnesses for the prisoner. -- Call Gabriel Cruse
My Lord, I was subpoena'd last Monday at Salisbury, and am come up here from the country; I have not been paid for my journey or expences; therefore, I hope I shall be considered.
That is never done in cases of felony.
Do you know Mr Fox?
I know him: but I have very little acquaintance with him.
Do you know any thing of a lease executed by him to the prisoner?
No: I know nothing of his executing a lease.
Did you not hear Mr Fox make some declaration concerning a lease he had granted to the prisoner?
He told me that he had ordered the prisoner to prepare a lease at thirty-five pounds a year; but seemed to think that he had been imposed upon; for he said the lease, which had since been produced to him, was only at five pounds a year. -- That is all I know of the matter.
Explain yourself; what was it Mr Fox said?
He said, that the draft of the lease was at thirty-five pounds a year, but that he had signed the lease without reading it.
Did you ever see the lease he was he was speaking of in Mr Fox's hands?
No: I never did.
Call Adam Brown.
Are you acquainted with Mr Fox's hand-writing?
Yes: I know it well.
How long have you been acquainted with it?
About a dozen years.
Here, take this deed.
Look at the name H. Fox at the bottom of it; do you or do you not believe that to be Mr Fox's hand?
The first glance of it shews a great aukwardness. -- This is not Mr Fox's hand, but a very bad imitation of it. -- There is a stiffness in this that I never observed in Mr Fox's writing.
Call Thomas Bonnell.
Of what profession, Sir, are you?
I am an Attorney.
Pray, look at this deed
did you ever see this in Mr Fox's hands?
No, Sir, I never saw it before.
Did not Mr Fox make some acknowledgment to you about it?
That was matter of private conversation, which I don't know whether I am at liberty to repeat.
Raise your voice; I don't hear you.
Mr Fox asked me if I knew any thing about the lease of Rusley-Park.
Where was this conversation?
I attended Mr Fox at Holland-House. -- He told me Ayliffe had grossly imposed upon him, for he had made the rent 5 l. instead of thirty-five pounds, and seem to intimate, that he looked upon it as a fraud and not a forgery.He said, he had first intended it should be at 40 l. a year; but that being desirous Mr Ayliffe should have it upon beneficial terms, he had ordered him to make it at 35 l. That was nearly the sense of what passed at that time.
What time was this?
About the latter end of July, to the best of my remembrance.
Was it before or after Mr Clewer had sent Mr Fox the lease that was in mortgage to him?
I believe it was after that. -- I think, Mr Fox told me he had seen it; -- but I will not be positive to this; -- I am sure he said it was 5 l. instead of 35 l.
Did Mr Fox appear to speak of it as an imposition upon him, or as a forgery?
I believe that Mr Fox at this time thought that he had been imposed upon, and made to execute a lease at 5 l. instead of one at 35 l. as he had agreed to.
If you build upon Mr Fox's opinion or belief concerning this matter, you may call him as a witness, and have the benefit of his evidence, although they are not at liberty to call him on the part of the Crown.
Mr Fox, my Lord, is near at hand, and will be forth-coming if they desire to examine him.
My Lord, we don't desire it?
Mr Bonnell, are you not sure that Mr Fox told you he had seen the lease in mortgage to Clewer?
I think he told me so, but am not certain.
Did he say nothing to you about the counterpart?
I think he mentioned it; but to be particular as to what he said I cannot.
My Lord, we beg leave to call some witnesses to the prisoner's character.
That seems unnecessary; for the prisoner's character before this particular fact has not been impeached; on the contrary, it appears that Mr Fox himself, 'till lately, had so good an opinion of him, as to employ him to be his steward. But proceed in your own way.
Call Francis Scull.
Do you know Mr Ayliffe?
Yes, I have known him a great many years, ever since he lived in the parish of Lineham.
What was his general character?
I generally looked upon him as an honest man. I scarcely ever heard any thing to his discredit. -- He was formerly steward to Madam Horner; and when she died he continued steward to Mr Fox.
Did he continue Mrs Horner's steward to the time of her death?
I don't know whether he did or not. -- But I have one particular reason to look upon him as a very honest man. -- He had, it seems, turned away a servant of Mr Fox's, upon which I applied to him to desire he would employ him again; -- No, says he, I'll not employ a servant, or any one, that is not a friend to Mr Fox's interest, my honour will not let me do it: for Mr Fox's interest is concerned, as several persons have made complaints of him to me.
Call JamesDoleman.
Do you know Mr Ayliffe?
I do.
How long have you known him?
I have known him a dozen or fourteen years.
What was his general character?
He bore a very good character during that time; I looked upon him as an honest man, and never heard to the contrary in all my life.
Call John Tuck.
Do you know Mr Ayliffe?
Yes, I have known him many years.
What is his general character?
As to his character, as far as ever I heard, he is a man of credit and reputation.
Where do you live?
At Chippenham in the county of Wilts.
When you speak of credit, What do you mean?
That he is a very honest man.
Don't you know that he has of late been in very distressed circumstances?
I don't know it.
Mr Tuck, you heard what Mr Lodge has sworn against me; did he not give me a very good character but a week ago?
I have heard him give you a good character.
Call Mr Bradley.
How long have you known Mr Ayliffe?
I have known him a year and an half, or thereabouts?
Was you not one of the subscribing witnesses to the mortgage executed by the prisoner to Mr Clewer?
Yes: I was.
Then look upon the back of that deed,
and tell us whether your name there is of your hand-writing?
I will not disown it; that is my hand-writing.
Then I suppose you was present, and saw the prisoner execute it.
I certainly did?
Do you remember any request made at that time to keep this mortgage a secret?
I do.
Was it not that an oath of secrecy should be taken?
I cannot say that. -- I only know that it was desired the mortgage might be kept a secret.
Who was it that desired it?
I believe it was Mr Ayliffe's Attorney.
Did not Mr Ayliffe himself desire it?
I don't remember that I heard him say any thing about it.
Was Mr Ayliffe present when his Attorney desired it?
I believe he was.
Tell us what was said about it?
It was said Mr Fox would be very angry, if he knew that Rusley-Park was sold or mortgaged; and that therefore Mr Ayliffe was desirous it should not be talked of.
Who said all this? Ayliffe, or his Attorney?
I really cannot swear which of them said it; I only know that this was spoke at the time the mortgage was executed to Clewer.
What is the Attorney's name?
Mr Priddle was the Attorney; I think it was he repeated those words; but I cannot recollect positively who it was.
Was it said in my hearing?
I cannot say you heard it. -- You was there when this deed was signed.
Is it an unusual thing for a mortgager to desire that his being under a necessity to incumber his estate should be kept a secret, and his circumstances not be exposed?
No: I conceive that it is often desired.
If a mortgage is paid off at the time, is there any occasion to disclose it at all?
I should think there can be none.
My Lord, we think it unnecessary to reply, or make any observations upon the evidence given for the prisoner.
Gentlemen of the Jury, Are you all agreed on your verdict?
Yes.
Who shall say for you?
Our foreman.
John Ayliffe, Hold up your hand
Gentlemen of the Jury, look upon the prisoner; how say you, is he guilty of the felony and forgery whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?
Guilty.
What goods or chattels, lands or tenements, had he at the time of the same felony and forgery committed, or at any time since to your knowledge?
None.
Hearken to your verdict as the Court has recorded it: You say that John Ayliffe is guilty of the felony and forgery whereof he standsindicted, and that he had no goods or chattels, lands or tenements, at the time of the same felony or forgery committed, or at any time since, to your knowledge, and so say you all.
My Lord, there is another indictment found by the Grand Jury of the county of Middlesex, against the prisoner, for the forging and publishing another duplicate of the lease of Rusley; upon which we are ready to proceed to tryal, but that we think it will be taking up the time of the Court unnecessarily, as the prisoner is already capitally convicted. And, indeed, as a second conviction could only serve by way of aggravation, we do not desire to throw any difficulties in the way to mercy.
It certainly is unnecessary.<|endoftext|>Call Mr..
I am a broker.
Do you know the prisoner at the bar?
I have known him 15 years.
Did the prisoner apply to you to borrow any sum of money for him, and when?
The prisoner at the bar applied to me to borrow a sum of money for him of Mr. Richard Holland in March last, upon eight warrants for tea lying in the East India company's warehouses.
How much was the sum?
It was 1000 l. I went to Mr. Holland and told him I wanted 1000 l. upon eight warrants and a note of hand; I gave him the list of the numbers of these warrants, which security he at first approved of, so I went for the warrants to Mr. Baker, and he delivered them to me with his own hand, and this note of hand for 1000 l.This is what is usual, part written and part printed; it was filled up by me, and signed by Mr. William Baker.
What did he say these warrants were for?
For tea, lying in the East India company's warehouses.
What did you do with these warrants and the note of hand?
I delivered them to Mr. Richard Holland, and he gave me a draught upon his Bankers (Frame and Barcley) for 1000 l. which I received, and gave to Mr. Baker with my own hand.
This is what I delivered to Mr. Holland. Can you be positive that you took a list of these warrants at that time?
I have got the list here which he gave me at first, and it is the very identical note I gave to Mr. Holland.
How long have you known Mr. Baker?
I have known Mr. Baker upwards of fifteen years.
What did you think of him at this time for substance and honesty?
Had I had money of my own, I had such thoughts of his substance and honesty, that I would have lent it him in my own name.
Mr. Gastineau applied to me about the 23d of March for 1000 l. to lend Mr. Baker, and also brought me the security the same day; as to Mr. Baker I never saw him in my life till I saw him in the Compter.
What did Mr. Gastineau bring to you for security?
He brought to me
this paper, and eight warrants
I delivered this warrant to Mr. Deputy Slater with the others, for him to go to the East India house to see if they were right.
The eight warrants I received of Mr. Holland, I carried to the East India house to have them examined. About the 15th of Nov. I applied to Mr. Holbrook, who looked and said he could not find the check for them, and that he believed them to be bad, for he could not find the numbers to tally; then he apprehended the goods were delivered; he looked into the sale book to see if the goods were weighed off, and found in the entry book that they had been delivered for the warrants which I had, so assured me they were bad ones.
What did he mean by bad warrants?
That are not good for any thing; then he said he had orders from the directors to stop any warrants of this kind; I told him I did not care to part with them, for I had them of a friend whom I had a great regard for; he desired, if I had no objection, I would go to Mr. Chauncey chairman of the East India company, which I accordingly did, and Mr. Holbrook took the warrants and went along with me; he sent a servantto Mr. Holland, who told him what had happened; Mr. Chauncey said he'd detain the warrants let the consequence be what it would; their check is so regular that they cannot be imposed upon.
What did Mr. Holland say upon coming there?
Mr. Holland said he believed he could have his money again upon giving up the notes, and that he look'd upon the prisoner able enough to return it him back.
In whose hands were the warrants then?
They were all in the hands of Mr. Holbrook till we came to Mr. Chauncey, except the 8th, which I had; after we had been there about an hour he ordered Mr. Holbrook to mark the warrants, and some time after he desired me to mark them; said I, they have been out of my possession a considerable time; I marked No. 784, so did he, and declared he had it of me.
How long have you known Mr. Baker?
I have known him many years.
What has been his general character?
His general character was so good as to substance and honesty, that I would have given him credit for 1000 l. at any time in my way.
Who delivered this warrant (No. 784) to you?
Mr. Slater delivered it to me.
Where has it been ever since you went with Mr. Deputy Slater to Mr. Chauncey?
It has never been out of my possession since, and there is my mark upon it.
Tell us whether you gave Mr. Gastineau any sum of money.
I gave him a draught upon Mess. Frame and Barcley, bankers, for 1000 l. and he delivered the warrants, Mr. Baker's note, and defeisance to me.
Is the draught paid?
It is paid, and credit given upon the account.
Were all these brought to you as a joint security for 1000 l.?
They were, there was this note, and the others as a collateral security.
Did you know the prisoner before?
No, I never knew him, or heard of his name, before the broker came to me; but I really believe, had there not been this prosecution carried on, we should have had our money, by what I have heard.
Do you think he had an intention to defraud you?
I don't know that he had, and, by circumstances I have heard since, I don't think he had; I have heard he has paid Mr. Martin and others, and I believe he would have paid me.
Did you then apprehend these eight warrants to be good ones?
I did then.
Do you not think, if a man delivers to you a forg'd warrant, he hath an intention to defraud?
I cannot tell that. I understand he has done these things, taken them up, and paid the money; this might have been the consequence, but I cannot tell his intention.
Supposing it comes out they are forg'd, whether or no you are not defrauded?
To be sure, if I am not to have my money again, I am defrauded.
Do you think two frauds are worse than one?
That they are, Sir.
Did you think you was defrauded, when you went to Mr. Chauncey?
I did, Sir.
Did you lend the money upon the security of the warrants, as well as the note?
I did, and supposed them to be real good warrants.
As you now find them to be bad ones, don't you think yourself defrauded?
I was deceived, or defrauded, in that respect no doubt.
Should you have lent him the money on his word alone?
I should not.
I am warehousekeeper to the East India company. I made a thorough search to see if these warrants were forged; I turned to my sale book in order to see for the number, and found it; there is the letter of my journal put down, to which I referred, and found the goods were delivered; then I immediately thought these warrants were forged.
Did you search about No. 784 in particular?
I cannot say I did that more than the others; I particularly searched every one, but did not look for the receipt, which we generally check the warrants with, for that night it was too dark to do any thing of that kind; our journal is at all times so correct, that I was very certain it was a forgery; since that time I have looked to see for the receipt that will check with it, but have none that will.
Whether or not if these are honest good warrants, there is a receipt, which is cut through the marble part that runs cross, that will check with the warrant?
Yes, sir, there is.
And when the warrant is real and good you try it by checking it with the receipt?
That is the way we examine them.
What was this warrant for?
For three chests of bohea tea described under particular Numbers.
Did you find that these quantities of goods had been delivered out?
Yes, they were.
When did it appear they were delivered?
They were delivered the 15th of Feb. 1749, to Mr. William Hayter.
Are you acquainted with the hand writing of Mr. William Webb?
He is the company's joint treasurer.
What is John Sedgwick?
He is an officer employed by the company to assist the joint treasurers.
What ship did the goods delivered to Mr. Hayter come by?
By the Dragon, I have the original warrant.
Do you know any thing of the delivery of these goods, in February?
Yes, I do, by having the warrant; the persons who deliver them, write down the two initial letters upon it; the warrants are never deliver'd back to our custody, till some part of the goods are deliver'd; this is a warrant, number 676, Ship Dragon, Robert Sedgwick, per William Hayter; Folio 110, Number 113, to 15; three chests of bohea tea, at 3s. 3d. deliver'd 15th. Feb. 1749, sign'd, T.P. that is the person that wrote the warrant off.
How came you by it?
The person that came to take the goods brought it, that is the usual method; thereis a receipt given on the back of the warrant; the receipt is in this manner receiv'd, the 15th of February, 1749; the full contents for William Hayter this was given by Mr. Toby Chauncey, he was Mr. Hayter's apprentice.
I was apprentice to Mr. William Hayter: he is dead.
Do you know of any goods that were deliver'd out of the East-India warehouse, for him?
Yes, sir, I do.
The goods were deliver'd to Mr. Hayter accordingly; I have the receipt here, and I also sign'd the receipt on the back of this warrant; they were bought at the company's sale, Feb. the 15th 1749, by Robert Sedgwick; the warrant is to Robert Sedgwick, for William Hayter.
I am a broker; I transact business at the East-India company's sale; I remember being employ'd by Mr. Hayter, to buy these goods for him; I gave him a written order to receive these very goods.
Did you not buy goods under this description, for Anthony Hotchkin?
No, I never did; this, in our book, is set down to Mr. William Hayter, 137 l. 16s. 4d. if our principal request it of us, we fill the warrant up.
After you have fill'd them up, what examination is there on the behalf of the company, to know that they are rightly fill'd up?
None, as I know of; sometimes they take time to take them out of our sight, before the delivery of them; sometimes an hour, and sometimes a day.
Is there a note brought, which they call the clearing note, from the accomptant's office?
The use of that is, upon orders given to the warehouse keeper, to weigh any goods, he delivers a printed paper, as this,. We call one a weighing note, and the other a clearing note; the accomptant keeps the weighing note, and he likewise signs the clearing note to us, when we carry it to see whether the clearing note, and the warrant agree.
Are the warrants fill'd up by the officer, or the bearer?
I believe they are seldom fill'd up by the company's officers; there are such great numbers come in on the prompt day, it is not practicable for the Clerks to fill them up that day themselves; the quantity is so great.
Look upon this.
Who fill'd this up?
A clerk in our compting office.
Who fill'd up the other?
I don't know that.
I am joint treasurer to the East-India company; it is my duty to sign the warrants; I generally do it upon receiving the money.
Look upon this warrant, and tell us whether it is sign'd by you?
It is not, my lord.
I wrote the William Webb here.
I am assistant to Mr. Dorrington, who is one of the joint treasurers; when warrants are deliver'd in, they are sign'd by Mr. Webb, if Mr. Whitehall, the countersigner, is busy.
What is Mr. Whitehall?
He is the counter-signer.
Look upon this, and tell us whether it is your own hand writing, or not?
I believe not, my lord, here is aI don't think to be like mine.
Look upon the name, is that Mr. Webb's writing?
I have seen him write many hundred times; I believe it is not.
Can you be positive your name there is not your hand writing?
I am certain it is not.
How come you to be certain, you was not just now?
There are the letters,and, and thein John, are not like mine.
Is the whole name of your own hand writing, as it there stands, or is it not?
I am positive it is not.
Look upon the back of this paper, is that your hand writing?
This is not my hand writing, and the goods were not bought by me, nor for me.
Do you frequently buy goods of the company?
I do, at all sales there in the tea way.
I have lent at times nineteen hundred pounds to William Baker upon warrants,
one was for tea, the other for pepper; that for tea was by the ship Dragon; I had them from his own hand, but cannot swear to the identity of this by the Dragon, it having been some time out of his hand; the other by the Tavistock.
Look upon that defeisance, and upon that warrant and number.
Here is 113 to 115, the same numbers he delivered to me; the figures correspond, but I cannot swear this is the identical warrant he delivered to me; my defeisance only mentions the quantity and price; the date was 17 Mar. 49.
I had two warrants deliver'd to me, by Mr. Alveringa, to go to Fenchurch street warehouse, to be check'd; I left them with Mr. Fyfield, at the compting-house, where Mr. Holbrook is warehouse keeper; they were examin'd, and found the goods were deliver'd, Mr. Fyfield took the two warrants, and desir'd me to come up to Mr. Holbrook, I did; then he carried me to Mr. Chauncey, and ask'd me, if they were the same warrants; they were a few minutes out of my custody; they were produc'd by Mr. Holbrook there, and I believe them to be the numbers; Mr. Fyfield had deliver'd them to Mr. Holbrook.
When was this?
It was in November; I cannot tell the day.
I met Mr. Fyfield, and Mr. Pacheco, in Fenchurch-street; they said, they had two forg'd warrants, he gave me this; I went to the India House, and acquainted Mr. Chauncey with them.
Compare that warrant with the good,
Here is Folio 110, No. 113, to 15; three chests of bohea tea, weight 966 1/2, at 3s. 3d. ship Dragon: the number of the warrants differ, and the date, that is all, Sept. sale, 1749, the other things are the same.
Thus we think we have prov'd the forgery, and the publishing of it.
, This fact is laid in the indictment to be done in order to defraud the said Richard Holland bydepositing the same with him, as a security for the sum of a thousand pounds; it appears by the evidence of Mr. Holland that the prisoner did not borrow any sum upon this note singly, but it was a joint sum of money which Mr. Holland lent upon the credit of eight warrants and a note of hand; if it had said, he deposited this warrant together with several other warrants, that would have been according to the evidence now given; but by this indictment it appears to be deposited a single note for the sum of a thousand pounds. Mr. Holland says all the eight warrants were deposited at once, and nothing has been said to contradict him upon that; so I submit this to your Lordship and the court, whether this evidence does support this indictment.
.
The question is, Whether the fact, that has been examined to, lies in this indictment, which was a joint contract for a thousand pounds lent upon two securities, one a promissory note, and the deposit of eight warrants. It was not on the deposit of this single warrant, No. 784. I dare say, if Mr. Holland was asked if he lent him the money upon this only, which is but 146 l. or thereabouts, and the note, he would answer, he did not. This objection is of no weight whatsoever, but I cannot blame the gentlemen to do their best in every thing that occurs; they have a right to try their chance, but they have not a possibility of doing the prisoner service upon this objection. It is said this was done with intention to defraud Richard Holland, by depositing the warrant with him as a security for the payment of a thousand pounds. Can any body doubt, upon this evidence given, but that this was deposited with Mr. Holland as a security? every one is a security. Had it been alledged he deposited this warrant as the only security for a thousand pounds, it might admit of some objection; but, as it is alledged, it is impossible. Can it be deny'd, when the evidence is recollected, but that this warrant (No. 784) was deposited as a security? then this verifies the indictment. It is one of the numbers deposited for a thousand pounds. Suppose he were indicted for theseven other warrants, then it may be aver'd these seven others were part of the number; and also this 784 was part of the pledge for the security for a thousand pounds. Can any one doubt, but that would be a good plea? always in those cases these pleas are well supported by averments. Then taking it so, we make use of only one of these to proceed upon, to save time and trouble of the court. Pledged for a security it certainly was, and therefore there cannot be any colour of reason to say but this verifies the indictment, that it was deposited with others for a security.
I am a stranger to causes of this nature. I 
have acquainted my counsel with my case, and
refer it to them.<|endoftext|><|endoftext|>We desire in the first Place, Mr.himself may be sworn,
Mr., give an account to my Lord and the Jury of the whole Matter.
Onlast I was invited to sup at Mr., and being there, he proposed to me to go to Mrs..
Was this before or after Supper?
This was before Supper: We supp'd about seven, and after Supper about ten a-clock he call'd me out of his Parlour, I follow'd him; we went into the Church-yard. It was then very dark, the Moon did not shine. He took three or four Turns before the House where Mrs.dwelt, then he stood still and made a noise.
What kind of Noise did he make?
It was like a Hollowing.
Were you under any Fear or Apprehension from that Noise?
Yes, my Lord, I was afraid, and made up towards the Wall; but in a quarter of a Minute somebody came behind me, and knock'd me down.
Did you then know who that Man was?
I did not.
Can you tell what was done to you afterwards?
My Lord, I cannot, for on that Blow I lost my Senses for some time.
How long was it before your Senses returned?
My Lord, I cannot tell, but in some time I got up, and return'd to Mr..
In what Condition did you find your self?
I was ready to die and faint, and I was found very much wounded.
Did any Chyrurgeon come to you at Mr.?
Yes, Sir, Mr..
After the Person came up who knock'd you down, did you hear Mr.say any thing?
No, my Lord.
Can you tell whether he stay'd any time, or what became of him?
No, I cannot.
Was he there when the first Blow was given?
Yes, he was.
Will the Prisoners ask Mr.any Questions?
Mr., was I present when you were knock'd down?
Yes, Sir.
Do you remember that you saw me?
Yes.
How near was I to you?
You were close by me when I was knock'd down.
Call Mr.and swear him,
I think you are a Relation of Mr.?
Yes, Sir, I married his own Sister, and he married Mr.Sister.
Was you at Mr.house lastat night?
A Day or two before last, I and my Wife and Daughter were invited to sup with him, and accordingly we went. I came about six a-clock, and found Mr.and Mr.drinking a Glass of Wine in the Parlour before Supper.
Was there any other Company with them?
No, the Women were above Stairs. I sat down with them, and we three staid in the Parlour till Supper-time. When Supper was ready, we went up Stairs. Then after Supper between eight and nine, we three came down into the Parlour again. Some time after,went out of the Room, and then came back again and gave a Call, or beckon'd to Mr., who follow'd him out of the Room.
At what time of night was this?
After nine a-clock at night.
How long was it before Mr.return'd?
He was gone about ten Minutes, and then returned.
Was he in any disorder when he returned?
He seem'd to be out of breath, as if he had been walking faster than ordinary.
How far distant is the Church-Yard, where this Gentlewoman dwelt, from Mr.House?
The Church-Yard is about twice the length of this Shire-House from Mr.House.
What diddo when he came in?
Immediately he drunk a Glass of Wine to me, and after he had sat some time, he went out of the Room. I heard a Noise up Stairs, and being told my Daughter was ill, I went up, and in a little time came down again into the Parlour, where I found Mr..
Did you ask him what was become of Mr.?
I did then ask him what was become of Mr., and he told me that he believ'd he was gone home in the dark. In about two or three Minutes after, Mr.came in. He was very much wounded and bloody. I was so surprized that I could not take particular notice of him.
How long was it fromgoing out to his coming in again?
It was near half an hour.
So thenreturned in about ten Minutes, andin near half an Hour.
Yes, my Lord.
Did Mrsee Mr.when he came back to his House?
Yes.
What did he say?
He seem'd to be in a great Consternation.
Do you know of any Estate that would have come to Mr.after Mr.Death?
I cannot positively say it of my own Knowledge.
We will ask Mr.that Question. Pray, Mr., would any Estate have come by your Death to Mr.?
In case I had died, One hundred Poundswould have come to his Wife as one of my Sisters.
Have you then no Children, nor Brothers?
No, my Lord; my next of Kin are three Sisters, one of which is Mr.Wife, she would have been one of my Heirs.
Call Mr.;
What do you know concerning this wounding of Mr.?
I am a Chirurgeon by Profession; and the first day oflast at Night, about Eleven a-clock, I was sent for to Mr.at Mr.House: When I came, I found him very much wounded and cut, and in a very weak Condition, and that he had lost a great deal of Blood. I examined his Wounds: One Wound began at his right Ear, divided the fleshy part of his Cheek, and ended on his upper Lip just under his right Nostril; the Flesh was all divided, and the Jaw left naked. Another Wound divided the right side of the Nostril, and made an oblique Cross over the Wound, and ended near the right under Jaw.
Was his Nose slit?
Yes, Sir, the Nose was cut from without into the Nostril; the Edge of the Nose was not cut through, but there was a Cut or Slit in the Nose that went through: I sow'd it up: it was indeedbut with one Stitch; it is yet visible, and the Nose was cut through.
Were there any other Wounds?
There was another deep Wound under his Chin, that reach'd from one Jaw to the other. There was another Wound, which began at his Chin, cross'd the left under Jaw, and tended towards his Ear. There was also a small Wound on his left Cheek, another on his upper Lip, and another on his left Temple.
How many Wounds had he in all?
Seven.
Do you think there were seven distinct Wounds, that had seven distinct Blows?
I take it, that every one of the seven Wounds had a distinct Blow.
With what Instrument did you apprehend those Blows were given?
It was cut so clean, that I thought it was done either by a Knife or Razor.
Let the Jury see Mr.Wounds.
Swear;
I think you are a Constable in?
I am.
Had you any occasion to speak toconcerning this Matter, and what did he say?
I had a Warrant from Aldermanand Mr. Serjeantto apprehenduponExamination.
The Question ask'd you is, What you know ofConfession, and what he hath said to you about this Matter?
Afterwas committed, I was with him, and ask'd him, Whether he was concerned in the wounding of Mr.? He told me, Yes he was. I ask'd him, Whether Mr.was with him: he said he was. I ask'd him how longstay'd with him: He said, That he had struckthree or four Blows beforeleft him.
What else did you ask him, or did he say to you?
He told me, that he was walking up and down in the Churchyard whenwhistled to him, and that on that Signal he went up and assaulted Mr..
Did he give you any account how long and where he waited before the Fact was done?
He told me, that he was desired by Mr.to be up and down in the Churchyard about Nine a-clock that Night; and that being a cold Night,gave him a Bottle of Brandy, and told him he could not tell what timewould come home, but desired him to be ready and to stay let it be never so long.
Did he tell you with what Instrument he did it?
He told me, He did it with an Hook or Bill, that was new ground for the Purpose, and that it was in his House at the right hand of his Door. I went according to his Direction, and found it, and brought it to him; and he said, That that was the Hook. -- The Hook I have brought with me, and this is the Hook that I have now in my Hand.
Call;
Give my Lord and the Jury an account what you know of this Matter.
I am the Gaoler; and the Day after Mr.was committed to me, about five Minutes after One, he sent for me up into his Chamber, where his Wife was crying and in great disorder, as he seem'd to be likewise. She was desiring her Husband to discover. When he came to himself, he told me, That he andhad had a Design to murder Mr., and had attempted it several times; and desired me to go and secure. I went to the Alderman, and told him of it, and he gave me the like Orders. Coming from the Alderman I met Mr.Man, who ask'd me whether I had found him; on which I ask'd him, Who, and what he meant, thinking him to be ignorant of his Master's Confession: but he told me, that his Master had discovered it to him, and had sent him to take up. Whilst we were talking, we sawcoming up, and we desir'd onea Smith, who was shooing a Horse, to assist us; which he did, and we secur'd.
Did Mr.confess any thing to you concerning this Fact, and the manner of doing it?
Yes, my Lord, he did. He told me several times, that he had a design to murder, and that he employ'd, and deliveredinto his hands.
Did he tell you that?
He did tell me so: He told me also, That it was done with an Hook; and that he had bidto cut his Weasand or Windpipe; and that ifhad not been a cow-hearted Dog, he would have so done, and secur'dfrom telling Tales.
Didtell you what Means he used to do this to Mr.?
He said, That he call'd him out of his House, went into the Church-yard with him, and there delivered him intohands.
Did he say what Signal was given?
Not that I remember; but he said, Thatwas placed there by his Appointment.
For what Design?
With an intent to murder him. Whenstruck him,said, he went away immediately.
What have you heardsay concerning this Fact?
I have heardsay, That he andhad lain in wait several times and at several places to murder Mr..
Didgive you any account what he did at this time to Mr.?
Yes, he did; he said, That he struck him a Blow with his Hook, and that not quite striking him down, he gave him a second Blow which did; and that, as he was falling, (who was never us'd to swear) cried out, God damn him; and that then it went to his very Heart to think that he should kill a Man with an Oath in his Mouth.
Did he say he gave him many Blows?
He said, He gave him several Blows, and that he thought he was dead.
Call:
What do you know of this Matter?
When I heard what happen'd to, I said, I knew the Person who did it, or the Person who employ'd him to do it; and the reason was, because three Years, or three Years and a half ago, Mr.sent for me, and said to me, at first I thought it to be in a jesting way, that he wish'd Mr.out of the World, he was a good-for-nothing Fellow, his Wife had a trick of playing away his Estate, and he wish'd some body would knock him in the Head. Sir, said I to him, what advantage would that be to you? He shook his Head, and said, A very good Estate. Said I, I thoughthad but a small Estate. Yes, said he, a very good one. Then I began to think there was something in it. After some little time, said he, I do not value ten or twenty Guineas to knock him in the head. Then I began a little to reflect that he should have such an opinion of me, that I should be such a sort of Person.
What then did you say to him?
I told him, That I would not kill the greatest Villain in the world for ten such Towns as.
What did he say afterwards?
I do not remember, I have forgot if there was any thing else.
How came you to remember this?
When I heard of this Fact committed on Mr., then it came fresh into my Memory.
Call,
What Trade are you of?
A Blacksmith.
Didat any time sendfor you, and what past thereon?
On the Friday beforelast, which was on a Monday, Mr.sentto me, who told me his Masterwanted to speak with me.
Did you go?
Yes, I went to his House, and he order'd me to come up to him in his Chamber. When I came up, he told me that he wanted a good strong Horse to carry his Weight. I told him I did not know ofany one then; but when I did, I would let him know. Upon that he said, By God, how do you go on, Boy? I hear you have lost most of your Business, you have got no Iron nor Coals, and you are afraid of a Goal; I have a thing now in agitation that will make a Man of you as long as you live. I said I should be very glad of that. Said he, Can you keep a Secret? Yes, said I, as well as any one to serve my self and my Friend. Said he, Can you keep one of the biggest Secrets in the World? I told him, As well as any body. Said he, You are pretty much in Debt, and if you will serve me in this, I can make a Man of you as long as you live: do you think you could cut five or six Mens Heads off without Scruple of Conscience? I told him, No; it was too much for a Man's Conscience to bear. Said he, What, a Scruple of Conscience to do such a thing as that? There are those above who have done ten times worse. I suppose, Sir, said I, you mean theGentlemen. Yes, said he, so I do; they have ruined Families, and begger'd Gentlemen: To cut Mens Heads off is but a Trifle to them. Said I, Mr., I believe you speak only in joke, by way of merriment. Said he, What, do you think I sent for you by way of joke? I told him, I could not do any such thing. Then, said he, do you think you can cut off one Man's Head without Scruple of Conscience? I told him, No. Then, said he, If you can't cut off a Man's Head, and lay it down upon the Table before me, you are not for my turn: On that he fetch'd a Bottel of Brandy, and gave me a Glass or two, and then said to me,, I would have you go home, and consider of it for two or three Days, and if you can cut off a Man's Head without Scruple of Conscience, you shall have plenty of Gold and Silver, and any thing else you ask. I told him, I needed no Consideration, for I could not do it. Then, said he, sendto me. And as I went out, I sawat the Door, and sent him in to Mr..
Did he say any thing else to you, or any thing about Mr.?
I live in a House of Mr., and Mr.had been formerly his Steward, andacted under him. And Mr.said, that he heard my House was out of repair, that it would be his after Mr., and whether I should not like it better for him to keep it in repair, as he had done before.
I think, my Lord, we have done with our Evidence, and have sufficiently proved Mr.andto be guilty not only within the Intention but the Letter of the Statute of the 22d ofII. upon which they stand indicted. We have proved the Malice premeditated and forethought, the Intention to maim and disfigure by slitting the Nose (for Mens Intentions must be construed by their Actions) and the maiming and disfiguring accordingly; and that Mr.was privy to, and the Aider and Abettor of the Offence: And therefore, Gentlemen of the Jury, we can't doubt but that you will find them both Guilty; and that your Verdict and their Conviction will be with the Suffrage of all Mankind.
, What have you to say for your self?
May it please your Honour, my Lord, the first time thatbegan with me about this Matter was on a Wednesday in last Barley-Harvest. He sent for me to mend his Copper, and after I haddone it, he bid me go to the further end of the, and there he must speak with me, and which came first should stay for the other. I was there before him; when he came, he was on horseback, and his Horse kicked about in a furious manner, that the People took notice of it. When they were gone, he told me that he had a thing for me to do, but not to be done presently, and that if I did it I should want for nothing. I ask'd him what it was. He said, about Mr., to set him aside, that is, to kill him; but he said, it was not to be done presently: so he put his Hand in his Pocket and gave me Eighteen Pence. I told him, I never did such a thing in my Life; I could not do it. Said he, It is not to be done presently, we have time to consider. A while after he sent for me again, and ask'd me, Whether I had considered of it. I told him, I could not do it. Said he, We must setaside; for Mrs.hath got a trick to play; she will make away what there is from me and my Child. I said, I never did any such thing; I could not do it, and desired him to forbear. I went away and left him in his Chamber. Within a while after he came to my House; said he,, what is the reason you can't do this for me? Said I, I cannot do it. Said he, What signifies it, I would do it for you. I said, I could not do it. The he went away very uneasy, and in a Week or Fortnight sent for me again to his Chamber, and there was at me again. I told him, I could do no such Work. Said he, Why can't you do this Work? I have been a good Master for you, I made my self look little to bail you when you were in Gaol. I turned about and cried. Said he, What makes you cry? Your Crying signifies nothing; the Money that I shall give you, will do you and your Family a kindness. Said I, I can do no such thing. Said he, It signifies no more the killing of him, than to kill a Dog, for they do no good with what they have. Yes, said I, Mr.is a very good Master; I work'd for him and his Father before him: and so I went away. Afterwards my Wife died three days beforelast: she was buried on that day, and being very poor, I sent my Daughter to desire a little Money of him to have the Bell toll'd for my Wife; but he sent me none. My Wife was buried on a, then on thehe sent his Boy for me; I went down to him, and when I came, I fell a weeping for the loss of my Wife, and having ten Children. Said he, What makes you cry? you must pull up a good Heart; tho your Wife be dead, you may have Friends; here is that which will do you a kindness hereafter. Said I, I am very sorry for the loss of my Wife. Said he, What signifies that? she was carried well into the Church, and is, no doubt, happy; she is gone before you; we must all go in our time: I was a Friend to you in her Illness; I sent her a good Doctor at my own Charge: this twenty Pounds that I will give you will be a brave Estate for you.
What were you to have this twenty Pounds for?
It was to kill Mr.; he told me, that I must set aside Mr.; he offer'd me Twenty Pounds to do it; but I then refus'd it. On, New-Years-Day, in the Morning,sent his Boy for me to come to him; and between Eight and Nine, in the Morning, I went to him. He was in his green Room. Now, said he,, we shall have the fairest Opportunity to kill Mr.. I told him, I was loth to do it; it was very cold, and I had an Ague. Said he, I will give you that, which shall warm you; he went to his Closet, and gave me out of the Bottle, that he used to carry in his Pocket, half a Pint of Brandy, and told me, that happen how it will, I must not come near his House any more that Day, lest afterwards there should be some Suspicion; but said he, Whether Ague or not, you must be at Mr.Porch, which is in the Church-yard, about Eight a-clock in the Evening. I went there between Eight and Nine; about Nine,came out, and gave me a Whistle; on that I went up to him; he told me, Mr.was very jolly, and he believ'd, it would be late before he came out. I told him, I did not care to stay. Said he, You must stay now; this is the Time that will do it. I staid 'till Ten-a-clock; then he came to me again in Mr.Porch, and told me, That he believedwould not go 'till Eleven-a-clock; but the later the better. Then he went from me again, and a little after Ten,andcame out together, and onwhistling I came up to them;was then before, and coming to get against the Wall. I came up to; he bid me have a care not to hit him instead of, being very dark; so he took me by the Sleeve to lead me up to, and said to, Brother, stand still; on that I hit him two Stroaks with my Hook; tho' I never heard him swear before, yet he now swore, God damn him; on that,said, What! Doth he swear? Secure him, down with him; he stood by him 'till I gave him several Blows, and then he went away.desired me to take away his Watch; for, saith he, As to his Money, he don't carry above Half a Crown or Three Shillings in his Pocket; and when I go to, I will sell the Watch for you.
Whatsaith againstis no Evidence against, and should not have been mention'd by him; but what he saith relating to himself before the Fact, is so twisted with, that without the Whole it is not so intelligible as to himself. However, the Jury are to take notice, that whatsaith, is only Evidence against himself, and not against.
After you had given him those several Blows with your Hook, what did you next?
I began immediately to reflect on what I had done, and went away forthwith to my own House, where I was about to take a Line to hang myself.
Have you any Witnesses, or any body to speak for you?
My Lord, here are my two Daughters in the Court; I desire your Lordship would be pleas'd to hear them,and;
What say you,?
On thebefore New-Years-Day,sent for my Father by his Boy; I told the Boy, my Father was in Bed, and sick of an Ague and could not come. The Boy came again, and said, my Father must by all means come; but he would not then go, but he went to him on New-Years-Day in the Morning, and came home again. About Five or Six-a-clock in the Evening, my Father went out with a Hook in his Hand; and he said, he should not be at Home 'till Eleven or Twelve at Night; and if any body came for him, he bid us not take any notice but that he was at Home. We thought he took the Hook to cut some Wood with.
Have you any thing more to say?
When my Mother died, I went to Mr.to borrow Five Shillings of him, to have the great Bell toll for my Mother; and told him, that my Father would pay him again. He said, What signifi'd the ringing out of the great Bell; her Soul would be never the better for it; but, if he'll satisfy me in my Request, he shall have Five times Five Shillings.
What say you,?
did frequently send for my Father, at all times both of Day and Night; and he would often come to my Father, and when he came, they would go out, and walk down the Backside, and talk together. After this Fact was done,sent his Boy for my Father, and the Boy said, They must not go together, for if they did, People would take notice of them.
, have you any thing more to say?
This Day Nine Weeks, which was a Week after the Fact committed,sent for me, and said,, I wish you would have done the thing I order'd you; but you have been before Aldermanand the Recorder, and have told your Story well; but hold you fast, they will examine you again; I shall --
This is subsequent to the Fact, and is not Evidence against. If youhave done; then Mr., what have you to say for your self?
May it please your Lordship, I am much asham'd, and very unable to defend my self; I am asham'd to think I should be concern'd in so heinous a Crime against Mr.Life; I am even confounded at it; it is indeed a very great Crime, and I know not what to say for my self. As for, he hath asserted against me several things that are false.
I have told the Jury, that what he hath said is no Evidence against you.
When I first spoke of this Matter to, he said, he should value it no more than the cutting off the Head of a Dog. I did, indeed, go out with Mr.that Night, but I was not near him whenstruck him, but retreated to my own House in a Moment. My Lord, I am very sensible that a Point of Law may arise on the Statute whereon I am indicted
Whereon?
With respect to my Intention.
Your Intention is Matter of Fact, and must be try'd by the Jury, whether your Intent was to maim and disfigure; this doth not seem to me to be a Point of Law; if there be any Point of Law that shall arise, you shall have Counsel to speak to it; but whether you slit Mr.Nose, with an Intention to disfigure him, is a Matter of Fact.
My Intent was to kill Mr., and not to maim or disfigure him.
But that is the Question the Jury are to try, Whether you did not of Malice slit his Nose, with an Intent to disfigure him. If the Jury do not find that you so did, you must be acquitted on this Indictment. Supposing your Design was to kill, yet your Design might be likewise to maim; and this the Jury must try; this is Matter of Fact for their Consideration.
This is a very penal Statute, and I am unable to 
plead my own
Cause; I beg your Lordship to assign me Counsel.<|endoftext|>Mr., will you give an Account what happen'd to you, on the Fifth oflast, and how far it concerns the Prisoner?
On the 5th oflast, I happened to be at the Tennis Court, and staid there till about three o'Clock. While I was there, the Prisoner was standing talking with One, and then came up to me, and inquired of me, when I should see my Lord, for he wanted to know if my Lord would play the Match out, that if he did not care to play it he should pay; I told him that if mymy Lordowed him any Money he would pay him without doubt, that I was going down towith him to Morrow and would speak to him, I then asked the Prisoner how much it was? and he told me there were twenty Guneas due to him for a Horse and Fifty Guineas at Tennis, I replied that if my Lordwould give me an Order, I would pay the Money.
Did You offer to pay the Money then?
I said I would, my Lord! provided I had an Order from my Lord. I staid there till about three o'Clock and then I went into the City, intending to dine at a Friend's House, but I met with some Acquaintance which came from, and we agreed to go to a Tavern together, I staid with them some Time, and being at a Loss for a Horse to go my Journey, as I was to set out very soon the next Morning, I went from the Tavern to find out One Mr., who I knew had a Horse would do for me, Mr.was not at Home, But was gone to, accordingly having got directions where to find him, I went to, where I saw Mr.; he gave me a Ticket for his Horse, and I took my leave of him, thinking it to be my best Way to go cross the Fields home to, and accordingly I went toCommon, crossed over the Road and went into the Fields.
What Time was this?
It was almost Nine, when I left, and it was between Nine and Ten, when I got into the Fields. When I got into the Third Field I saw a Man before me in the Field, on my right Hand, and presently two more.
Were they all three together?
Yes, my Lord, there is a Bar to get over, after that I was over that, they seperated, one went to my Left Hand, another to my Right, and the third came after me; seeing myself thus beset, I turn'd back to look, and saw a Man coming towards me in a, a thin middle-sized Man: He came up to the Bar, and leap'd over at once; he had a Pistol in his Left Hand, and a large Oak Stick in his other: After he had leap'd over the Bar, he cry'd out,; and immediately came up to me, and clapping a Pistol to my Breast demanded my Money.
Were the other two Men near you, when you were thus attack'd?
One was about sixteen Yards off, the other more.
This Man that presented the Pistol to you, was dress'd in Brown, you say: What were the others dress'd in?
In Brown, they were all dress'd in Brown. After he had demanded my Money, I told him, I had a Guinea and a Half, and that I would give him; but not satisfied with that, he laid on me with his Stick as hard as he could: The first Blow that I receiv'd, was on the Left Side of my Head; upon which, I rais'd my Arm, and defended myself with my Cane: I receiv'd six Blows on my Head and Left Arm, and then he drew a back Stroke, and cut me just under my.
Did not the two Men come up to you all this While?
No, my Lord, I found myself very much bruised, and said to him, you Rascall, you Villian You, are not you a Rascal to abuse aGentleman, when he tells you what Money he has, and offers to give it You? why did you STRICK then? Said he, I could not well defend myself any longer with my Cane, so I threw it down and clos'd in with him, and in the Scuffle fell with him, he then put his Hand in my Breeches Pocket, and took out One Guinea, a half Guinea, an Iron Ring, a Bunch of small Keys and a Silver Seal, and finding I had no more,! says he,? He then demanded my Watch, and in the Warmth of my Scuffle I was simple enough to let him understand that I knew him, for upon his demanding that,, says I,. When he had robb'd me, he leap'd over the Bar again, and went up to the two Men, and they all went away together.
You have told the Manner of your being robb'd; Now, I would ask you, if you were then certain that you knew the Man, and by what?
As soon as he came up to me I knew him, for his Hat was flapp'd, and stood a little on one Side, so that I saw his Face very plain, and knew it perfectly well, tho' it had a yellowish Cast round the Chin, as if it had been rubb'd with something; besides I knew his Voice.
Did you know the two others?
No, I did not.
You say, you knew the Person that robb'd you. Look at the Prisoner: Now, consider the Oath you have taken, as you shall answer it to God, the Court, and your Country, is the Prisoner the Man that robb'd you?
Upon the Oath I have taken, he is the Man that robb'd me; I knew him the Moment I saw him, and could not be mistaken.
What did you do when he left you?
I went directly Home.
What Time was it when you come Home?
Between Nine and Ten, I sent for Doctor, and he came to me and dressed me, I told him I had been robb'd, the Manner of it, and that I knew the Person. The next Morning, which was, I came to Town, thinking to enquire his Name, and that I should see him at the Tennis Court. I went to Justice, and he would not grant me a Warrant; so I went to the Tennis Court, and told the whole Story to my Lord, who advis'd me to let the Warrant alone till the next Day; because he was to be at the Tennis Court then at Play: Accordingly, on the, having got a Warrant from Colonel, I gave it tothe Officer, and went with him to the Tennis Court, where I pointed out the Prisoner to him, and he took him, and carried him before the Justice, where he was examin'd, and committed to the Gatehouse.
Did you see the Prisoner between the Time of the Robbery being committed, and his being apprehended?
Yes, I saw him on theat the Tennis Court, and spoke to him, and he seem'd to be very much confounded.
I would ask you a Question or two, Sir, if you please. Did you declare to Nobody that you did not know theMan that robb'd you, and said, it was a Soldier?
I did say, he wasto a Troop, and that I knew him, but not readily knew his Name.
Have not you said, that you could not swear to his Face, only to his Voice?
No, I always said, I knew both his Face and Voice.
Call. Mr., do you know any Thing of Mr.coming Home, on, the fifth of? Give an Account of it?
I am a Tenant of Mr.; he came Home to, between Nine and Ten o'Clock onNight, the fifth oflast; he was very much beat and bruis'd, and said, he had been robb'd, and had lost a Guinea and Half, and some other Things, and that he had been very ill us'd, but he knew the Man that did it?
Did he say, who it was?
He said, that he knew him, but did not mention his Name.
Did not he say, he was robb'd by two Soldiers.
He said, the Man that had robb'd him was a Soldier, and that he knew him very well.
Call Dr.. Mr.was you sent for to Mr.on the 5th of, what Time, and upon what Account.
Between Nine and Ten o'Clock on the Fifth of, I was sent for to Mr., I live in, I went to his House, and dress'd him, he said he had been robb'd, and that he believ'd he knew the Man.
Did he mention no Particulars.
Not while I staid, but I was not there long.
What Time was it when you was at Mr.?
It was almost Ten o'Clock, but not quite Ten.
Mr., did you see Mr.any Time, and when since the fifth of, did he mention any Thing about his being robbed, and what?
I saw Mr.on the, he said he had been robb'd, that he should know the Man again if he met him; for he was a Soldier, and he had given two Watermen something to dog him who had seen him inFields.
Did he say, he knew the Man or his Name.
No, he said he should know him again if he saw him, that was all.
Call. Mr.do you know Mr.?
Yes, very well.
Do you remember where and at what Time he was on the fifth oflast, or were you with him?
I dined with him at his own Lodgings in, it was a little after Three, and I staid with him till almost Seven, when I was going away, he said he was going towards the, and if I was going that Way he would accompany me; but as I was going another Way we parted, and he went towards the,
Pray, Sir, when was this?
It was on, the Fifth of.
How came you to be so very particular in that Day, you see Mr.often, can you remember any other Day of the Month that you were with him, or dined with him.
Not directly, but that being Post Night, I wrote a Letter that Night, which makes me remember the Date. I offer'd to give this in before Colonel.
Did Mr.send for you when before the Colonel?
No, I heard of his being apprehended, and went voluntarily.
Call. Do you know any Thing of seeing the Prisoner at his Uncle's on the Fifth of, and what Time was it?
I am a Servant to Mr.. He lives the Corner of the. Between Seven and Eight o'Clock, onNight, young Mr.came to our House, and ask'd for his Uncle, I told him he was not at Home, but was gone up to thein, and he said he would go to him, for he had got on a new Fustian Frock and Breeches, and I took up the Flap to look on it.
Do you usually take up the Flap of Peoples Cloaths that come to your Master's House?
No; but I thought I might take that Liberty with young Mr..
What was he dress'd in do you say?
In a white Fustian Frock and Breeches, a white Waistcoat and Stockings.
How do you know it was the 5th of?
I am sure it was; he was taken up on the, and it was thebefore.
Perhaps you may mistake the Day, how often does he use to come to his Uncles?
Once in three Weeks.
What just once in 3 Weeks and no oftner?
Yes, sometimes oftener.
Call Mr.. Sir, please to givean Account what you remember of seeing Mr., on the 5th of.
I live next Door to old Mrin the; young Mrcame to me, on the 5th of, between 7 and 8 o'Clock in the Evening. I remember the Day for I had wrote to my Lawyer to meet me that Evening, and he had mislaid the Note and came to me to know the Time; when Mrcame to me it was between 7 and 8 o'Clock, and he said he was going up to his Uncle at the.
Did you see him go into his Uncle's?
No, he said he had been there when he came to me: I live next Door.
What Cloaths had he on?
A white Fustian Frock; I did not mind what else. He did not stay long with me.
Do you know where he went to?
He said he was going to the, he went that Way.
This does not prove any Thing as to the Time of the Robbery.
We are coming to that now my Lord. Call Mr. Sir, give an Account where you saw your Nephew on the 5th oflast, where you was in his Company, and how long he staid.
I went from Home onthe 5th of, about seven o'Clock in the Evening and he went up to the Genoa Arms in, a little before Eight o'Clock mycame in, he sate down and drank with me, there were several People in the Room.
How do you know it was about 8 o'Clock.
We all guessed it to be about Eight.
Did you guess it so that Night, or Since?
That Night. We gues'd it to beabout Eight o'Clock. He staid till past Nine, and then he and I went out, and after standing some Time at the Door, we took a walk roundGarden Piazza, and I went Home, and he went Home to Bed.
How do you know he went Home?
He went that Way.
Were any People in Company with you at the?
Yes, several: Mr, Mr, Mr, Mr, and several others.
What Cloaths had he on?
A white Fustian Frock and Breeches, and a white Waistcoat.
Call Mr. Were you at the, Sir, on the 5th of, and did you see the Prisoner Mrthere?
I remember the Day very well, for I wrote several Letters that Day: I was at the, and young Mrcame in about a Quarter before 8 o'Clock: He sat down by his Uncle, and they drank two Half Pints of Wine; while they were drinking, one of the Company pull'd out some Patterns of Cloth, which we look'd at, and I taking Notice of MrCoat, and talking of the Price of Cloth, says he, What do you think the Outside of this Coat and Breeches cost me? it was light Fustian: Five or six and twenty Shillings said I. No, said he, but sixteen.
He had a light Fustian Coat on you say?
Yes, a light Fustian Coat and Breeches, white Waistecoat and white Stockings. They staid till a Quarter after 9, and then youngwould have had t'other half Pint, but the old Gentleman said it was late, he must go Home.
How do you know it was a Quarter after Nine? Had you any Clock, and did you look particularly upon his going?
No, my Lord, but the old Gentleman saying it was late, one of the Company pull'd out his Watch, and it was a Quarter after Nine all but one Minute. They staid about three or four Minutes in the House, and then got up and went into the Yard, and there they stood talking a Quarter of an Hour: From the Yard they went down the Entry to the Street Door, and there they stood again; they were Half an Hour in the Yard, and at the Door.
Did you see them all the While?
Yes, for I sate fronting the Window, and saw them all the While they stood in the Yard, and at the Door, and when they went away I am sure it was above Half an Hour after Nine.
Call Mr. Do you remember seeing Mron the 5th ofat the?
Yes, Sir, I went into theabout Half an Hour after Seven, and Mrcame in not very long after me; so that I believe it was near Eight: He staid there till past Nine, and then ask'd his Uncle, old Mr, if they should have another Half Pint, but the old Gentleman did not care for any more Wine; so they went out and stood talking together in the Yard, and at the Door for near Half an Hour, and then went away.
What Cloaths had young Mron at that Time?
A white Fustian Frock, white Waistcoat Breeches and Stockings.
Did they stand in Sight when they were in the Yard, and at the Door?
Yes, I saw them all the While.
Call Mr. Sir, Was you at the, on the 5th of?
I was there about Seven o'Clock, young Mrcame in about Eight; he staid till a Quarter after Nine, and then went out in the Yard, where he stood talking with his Uncle Half an Hour, that is in the Yard and at the Door.
Do you know any Thing of a Watch being pull'd out to see the Hour.
Yes, old Mrsaying it was late, and he did not care to drink no more, I pull'd out my Watch to see what o'Clock, and it was exactly fourteen Minutes after Nine, they staid some little Time in the House, paid their Reckoning, and went and stood in the Yard and at the Door.
I keep the, young Mrwas in the House when I came in, about a Quarter after Eight, and I left him there when I went out at Nine.
I am Servant at the House where Mr.lodges in; he came home on, the fifth of, exactly at 11 o'Clock: I let him in, and I know what Hour it was, because our Clock was set that Day, and I look'd to see how it went, for one Clock had struck, but ours had not.
My Brother has Seventy Pound a Year or upwards Estate part Freehold, part Copyhold I know it for I received the Rents in my Father's Time, and for my Brother since this Misfortune.
Mr.is Riding Master to the Troop, which I have the Honour to command, it brings him in generally 200; but, I believe, I may say never less than 150. He is a sober Man, bears a general good Character, and I never heard the least Ill of him; this I know, that whenever I send for him upon any Business, he is always ready and with me, almost as soon as I send.
When Mr.came to me for a Warrant, he said he did not know the Man by his Face, but by his Voice: I would not grant him a Warrant, and said, if you cannot swear to his Face, be sure you are certain of his Voice before youswear.
When he was examin'd before me, Mrsaid, ifwas the Man, he had a black Arm, for he had paid him so with his Cane, that it must be black. He stripp'd both his Arms, and not the least Mark appeared; most of the Evidence that has been given in Court was offer'd before me.
WheatleyWheatley.<|endoftext|>Give an Account what you know of this Matter, and speak the Truth.
An't please you, my Lord, onthe 1st of. --
Speak slow and deliberately, that the Court and the Jury may hear you.
An't please you, my Lord, on, the 1st oflast, I and my Father were goingupRiver, to catch a Dish of Fish inMoor, in the Parish of, with a Casting-net; we fish'd all the Way up till we came to this Ground?
In whose Possession was the Ground?
It was Mr.Meadow; we were turning back again, an't please you my Lord, in order to go Home; my Father he carried the Net upon his Arm, and the String was fastened to his Arm.
Well, as you were coming back from fishing, what happened then?
By that Time we had got half way in the Meadow, we sawand Mr.running, andout run Mr., and came up to my Father first.
When they came up what was the first Thing they did?
took my Father by the Collar, and demanded the Net, and he refused to deliver the Net.
Did you see him take him by the Collar?
Yes, my Lord.
What became of the Net afterwards?
My Father threw it into the River.
How far were you from the River then?
I was about two Yards from the River. After the Net was thrown into the River,came up with his Gun, and swore, God damn your Blood, deliver your Net, or you are a dead Man; and he fir'd off before he received any Answer from my Father.
In what Manner didhold his Gun?
In this Manner, (pointing the Gun strait forward) holding it about Breast high, stooping a little.
How near was the Gun to your Father when he fir'd it?
It was close to my Father's Side, he put the Gun betweenand my Father, and shot directly into his left Side, here, (holding his Hand to his Hip) he had a Plate Button there which was bruised to Pieces; then my Father said, you Rogue, what have you done, I am a dead Man, and dropp'd immediately.
What didsay before he fir'd?
He swore if he did not deliver the Net he was a dead Man, and then fir'd immediately.
What did you do after you heard your Father say he was a dead Man?
I took a Knife out of my Pocket to cut the String of the Net: Andsaid, you Rogue, I will knock out your Brains too, and held up the butt End of his Gun; upon that I jump'd into the Stream, and cut the String, and drew the Net over to the other Side of the River: then says, the Rogue has got the Net, let us go to the other Side after him.
Who did you see when you came on the other Side of the River?
I saw,and, and whenandsaw these three Men they ran away directly.
How near were,andto you, beforeandran away.
As soon as I got on the other Side of the River, they saw these three Men coming, and then they ran away; and,, andcame through the River to the Side where my Father lay dead; they came from one Side to the other.
What did you do then?
They bid me get a Surgeon; so I went to one, a Surgeon at.
When you came to, did you meet with?
Yes: And I told him my Father was shot, and I believed he was dead or dying, but henever came near my Father; then I went tothe Constable, and he took some Townsmen with him, and went to old Mr.House, atFarm, to search for the Man that kill'd my Father; we beset the House all round, and foundhid up in a Corner.
How long were you there before he was found?
I was there about a quarter of an Hour, or a little more.
Was you present then?
Yes: I was there all the Time; then, an't please you my Lord, they pull'd him down.
Where was he hid?
He was hid in a Place which is five or six Foot from the Ground, where they put old Iron and any Sort of Lumber, 'tis a boarded Place or Room over the Wash-house; a Place where the Women makes Medicines for sore Eyes.
Was there a Chimney in it.
I do not know.
Was he standing up or lying down, or how was he when he was found?
I do not know, for I did not see him till he was pull'd down; he was carried in a Chair into the Yard, and sat there about a quarter of an Hour, and then was put into the Cart that brought up my Father, and was carried to the Round House at.
This is all you know, is it not?
An't please you, my Lords, I can tell you a great deal more.
Who pull'd him down?
I do not know.
Was this Wound the Occasion of your Father's Death?
Yes, it was.
Go on, you say you have other Things to say.
He lay in the Round-House all Night, the next Daythe Prisoner and I, went in a Cart to a Justice at, and there as onethere, who said to me --
Whatsaid is no Evidence against the Prisoners.
We will let this alone a little.
Can you prove he was any ways employ'd as an Agent by the Prisoner.
I believe we can.
My Lord, please to ask him whether there was no Quarrel, Bustle, or Strugling, between,, and, before the Gun went off.
There was no Quarrel or Jostling, my Father never gave him an ill Word.
Did your Father make no Resistance?
No, no Resistance at all.
Was there no Jostling, nor any Thing else pass'd?
Yes:took my Father by the Collar, andcame up in the mean Time.
What happen'd between your Father andbeforecame up?
He demanded his Net.
I thought you said there was some jostling?
No other Jostling than laying his Hand upon my Father's Collar, but my Father never laid his Hand upon him.
How near were you whenlaid his Hand upon your Father?
About a Yard and an half off.
You say he shot off the Gun, I ask you what you mean by shooting off the Gun?
Why he fir'd the Gun to shoot my Father.
What do you mean by shooting off the Gun?
He came up directly, as if he was going to shoot a Dog.
Did you see him draw the Trigger of the Gun?
No, I did not.
Was the Gun cock'd before he came up?
I do not know.
Did you say that it was?
I do not know that I did.
Pray was any body present at the Time?
There was no body near but,, and, nor no body came up.
Did the Prisoner offer you any Money?
Yes, he offer'd to settle 50a Year on me.
Where was this?
When I was at, the next Day after my Father's Death.
How came you there?
We went to a Justice's at, but he not being at home, we put up at the Red-Lion there, and while we were there, Sircame in and ordered us to go to; accordingly we went to one Mr.into a little Room, and there was, Mrs., and the Prisoner; Youngoffered me 100 l. a Year, but the Prisoner said he could not settle 100 l. a Year upon me, for he had more to do for, but he said he would settle 50 l. a Year on me: this was said in the Presence of the Prisoner.
Did he mention what he would give you 50a Year for?
Because I should not come in as an Evidence against him.
What is the Reason you did not comply with his Offer?
I told them I would not sell my Father's Blood at any Rate.
Pray in what Manner did Mr.,, and your Father stand, when this Accident happened?
stood betweenand my Father, and had him hold by the Collar.
Do you know, and had not you some Talk with him about the Manner of your Father's Death?
No, I never saw him, nor had any talk with him.
Had you any Conversation with one, at, where you say you was offered that Money?
I came out of the Room to ask him whether I should take the Money or not; for he said, I had better take the Money, and not hang the Man.
Then you said nothing at that Time about the Manner in which your Father was killed?
No, Sir.
You say you stood by, and saw Mr.point the Gun to your Father: Did you see him cock the Gun?
I did not see him cock it, the Gun was cock'd when he came up to my Father.
Do you know one?
Yes.
When did you come first to be acquainted with him; before or since your Father's Death?
After my Father was killed.
Did not you meet with him at?
Yes, I believe I did.
Did you ever see him there before?
No, never?
Did you give him any Orders or Authority to prosecute upon the Account of your Father's Death?
No.
Do you know one?
Yes.
Where does he live?
He keeps the White Horse in Piccadilly.
How did you come acquainted with him?
He came toand sent for me.
What did he want with you when he sent for you?
I don't know, I went to live with him as a Servant.
What Business was you of, when your Father died?
I work'd with my Father as a Carpenter.
If you was brought up a Carpenter, how cameto find you out for a Servant?
I can't tell.
How long have you liv'd with him?
Ever since my Father's Death, and I live with him now.
Have you not seen, my Lord -- at?
You say you are Mr.Servant, have you not dined with him at his Table?
Yes.
Do you dine at his Table now?
No, I am his Servant.
Do you know the Reason why you was sent from dining at his Table to draw Beer?
No, Sir.
Do you know one?
Yes.
Do you know any Thing of a Note he drew for you at the?
He did draw something of a Note, but I tore it.
What made you tear the Note?
Because I did not like his Proceedings.
What were the Proceedings you did not like?
I do not know, I did not understand them.
Why, did not you read the Note before you tore it?
No, I did not.
How came the Note to be wrote? Did he say nothing to you about writing of a Note before he wrote it?
Nothing at all, but he desired me to copy it?
What did he say to you when he desired you to copy the Note?
Nothing; it lay upon the Table, and I tore it.
What did you tear it for, if you had not read it?
Because it was about Things that I did not know what they were.
Did not he desire you to copy the Note?
Yes.
What did he say then?
I can't tell what he said.
Was you ever atto see Mr.?
Yes.
What did you go for?
I cannot tell.
I ask you what you went for?
I went for my own Fancy.
Did you not send up Word to him you was sure he would be glad to see you?
I believe I might.
What was the Reason, for which you thought Mr.would be glad to see you?
I cannot tell, I was willing to see him.
Did you never in speaking of your Father's Death, say that it was done accidentally?
I do not know that I did.
Did you never say tothat you were to have 200or had a Promise, or that you were to have Security, and from whom?
No, Sir, I never did.
Did you give the same Account with respect to the holding of the Gun as you do now, before the Coroner's Inquest, and before the Justice?
Yes, I am sure I did.
Did not you give two Accounts before the Coroner's Inquest; part at one time, and went out, and theRemainder when you came in again?
No.
Did you never say that the Butt End of the Gun was up to his Shoulder, and the muzzled Point downward.
No, I did not.
Did you never say any Thing to any body of the Manner of Mr.drawing one of his Feet back?
No never.
Can you tell which of his Legs he drew back?
No, I cannot tell which he drew back.
Did you never say which?
No.
To No-body?
No, never.
You said you went to thewith, and there was something talk'd of relating to a Note, was there any Offer made to you there?
No, Sir.
You talk'd of a Paper that was tore, do you know the Contents of it?
No, Sir, I do not.
Tell us what you know of this Matter, and where you were when you heard a Gun fir'd on the first of?
and his Son were a Fishing; I was 169 Yards some odd Inches from the River as near as I could measure.
What Ground was it in?
They were in the Ground called Mr.Rents.
Are there many Hedges on the Side of the River where the Deceased was?
There were a pretty many Willows, but any body might see through them.
What did you see?
I sawand Mr.come over the Hedge.
What Hedge?
The Hedge that parted Mr.Ground from Mr.Ground, I do not know whether one of them did not come over the Stile, then they both ran after, and his Son: youngcame up first.
Did he lay hold of?
Whether he laid his Hand upon his Collar, or what, I cannot tell; but the Boy run away.
Who was it laid hold of the Shoulder or Collar of the Deceased?
, I saw his Hand upon the Shoulder, or Collar of the Deceased, but I cannot say positively, whether he had him by the Shoulder or Collar.
How long was it after that, thatcame up?
The Boy was gone but a little way from his Father, and when Mr.came up to his Father, he came back again.
How near was he to his Father when this Accident happen'd?
I cannot say how near he was to his Father, I believe two or three Yards off. --andcome up almost together, butcame up after him, the Gun went off after he came up: I saw the Smoak and heard the Fire.
As you were 169 Yards off, how came you to come up?
The Boy called to us and said his Father was killed.
Who came along with you?
, and, came to the River just against the Place where Mr.lay, and we could not get over there without being thus high (putting his Hand to his Middle) but we went over in a shallower Place a little farther.
Wereandthere when you came over?
No, they run away before that.
Wasdead or alive when you came up?
He was not dead, but he could not speak. Idesired the Boy to go for a Surgeon, and he went away directly.
Who came first to the River?
I do not know.
Did you all three come up together?
Yes, I was coming rather before the Boy cried out, for I saw the Man drop, I could not see the Boy for a good while, for he was in the River, and he cut the Net from his Father's Arm, as he says, I did not see that; but I saw the Boy come cross the River, and when I came up I saw that the Net was brought cross the River.
How didlie?
He lay upon his Face; I lifted up his Head, he groan'd pretty much, but he could not speak: I sent the Boy for a Surgeon, but no Surgeon came.
Was you at the Apprehendingof the Prisoner?
Yes, I was.
What Place was it the Prisoner was in when he was taken?
It was a Sort of a wash house, a back-House: he was in a Place where they throw up Hoops and Iron, and any Sort of old Lumber? I saw him lie upon his Face.
Who took him down?
I do not know.
What did they do with him then?
They carried him to the Round-house at.
When you came to the Place where you lay he had hid himself, did he come down of his own accord?
Yes, my Lord.
When you heard the Gun go off, whose Hand was it in?
Mr..
Do you know the Position of the Gun when it went off?
No, I do not.
Did you observe any Struggle between,, and the Deceased?
No other than their striving to take the Net away.
Do you remember any Thing that passed in the Round-House? -- did the Prisoner say any Thing there?
Yes, the Prisoner said he desired to be kill'd out of the way, for being accessary to such an innocent Man's Death.
What did he tell you besides?
He said he would have gone Home for more Men, butwould not let him.
What did he want more Men for?
To take away the Net.
What Answer did he saymade him to that?
I believe it was, that he said we can do it well enough.
Did you see Mr.andbefore they came up to the Deceased?
Yes, I did.
Did you observe Mr.making any use of his Gun before he came up?
I saw him offer to shoot at a Crow.
How long was that before this Accident happened?
I believe about Half an Hour.
Was the Crow flying or sitting?
Flying.
Did you observe whether he did Shoot at the Crow?
Not then, he did not.
How far were you off then?
About as far, I think, as when I saw the Man kill'd.
What was the Position of the Gun when you saw him come up running.
It was on this manner,
You say you sawandin the other Ground, before they came into that Ground which belongs to-- what were they doing there, were they Standing, Sitting, or what?
They were Sitting or Lying under the Hedge, I cannot tell which.
For what Purpose do you imagine they were Sitting or Lying there?
I cannot say that. I may imagine they came to take the Net away, I cannot imagine any Thing else.
Did you see the Boy go into the River?
Yes, and it was just after his Father was shot.
Do you know the Prisoners at the Bar?
I know Mr..
Do you believe this to be the Person who was along with Mr.at the Time that Mr.was kill'd? -- Look at Mr.Face, and see whether that is the Man.
I see Mr., but I cannot say that he is the Man; I saw two Men lie under the Hedge a considerable Time, and saw a Piece in one of their Hands.
In which Ground were they?
I believe in Mr.Ground.
In what Ground was?
He was inGround.called to me, and said there isrunning after, andlaid hold of, the Deceased, and then came up the other with a Piece: I cannot say whether he touched him or no.
In what Manner didlay hold of him?
I cannot say, I was at such a Distance; but I thought he laid hold of his Shoulder.
Didmake away from him?
Yes, for he knew he was out of the Bounds that he ought to have been fishing in; and there was a sort of a Struggle to take away the Net; and I thought thatand the other Person did both snatch at the Net, and then the Gun went off.
In whose Hand was the Gun?
Not inHand, but in the Hand of the other Person.
Was not you attentive at that Time, to see in what Manner he carried the Gun?
It may be this Way, or that Way, I cannot say whether he had the Gun against his Shoulder or no?
How near was he to the Deceas'd?
Very nigh, I believe not above the Length of a Gun?
Did you seeby, when you first came up?
He was near the River.
Did you hear the Boy cry out?
Yes, he said his Father was killed; -- he saw me, and called me by my Name, and said my Father is killed, and I came directly cross the River.
What then became of, and the other?
They ran away; we halloo'd after them, but I did not think the Man was shot, though I saw the Smoak and Fire of the Gun.
Who went over the River first?
We were all three together almost, I cannot tell who was over first, but I believe I was.
What was said to the Boy then?
Nothing; only to go and get a Surgeon.
Who bid him go?
Somebody did, I did not I believe it was, and the Boy ran away directly.
Was there any Surgeon brought there?
No.
Who came there afterwards?
Mr.: he saw the Deceased lying upon the Ground, but he was not there when the Murder was committed?
Was you in the House when he was taken?
No.
Was you with him before the Justice of Peace?
I was examined, but I was not present when the other Witnesses were examined.
What Distance was there between you and the Deceased when the Gun went off?
One Hundred and Sixty-nine Yards.
Do you include the Breadth of the River?
Yes I do.
You say you think that bothandsnatch'd at the Net?
I think they did.
Do you think it was possible for you to hear what passed between them?
I could not hear one Word.
I would ask you, whether young, before he was examined by Sir, did not say to you he believed the Gun did go off by Accident?
He said he believed it was not done wilfully. He had Money offered him, in my hearing, by; Mr.said he could not give him 100a Year; but he would give him 50for he had others to do for; then, said the Boy, I will not sell my Father's Blood; I believe he was in Liquor.
What did you say to him?
I said your Father is dead; the Money will do you good; do not swear any thing against him, if you think it was done accidentally; he said the Money will do me good if I had it; I believe the Gentleman did not do it wilfully.
Had you not some Conversation together, after his Examination before the Justice?
I asked him, after he was examined, what he had done; and how he could swear against him, when he had said so and so to me; said he, I do not know any Thing of the Matter;
Do you know Mr.the Clergyman?
Yes.
Did not you make a Declaration of this to him?
Yes; I said to Mr., thattold me he really believed that the Gentleman did not do it wilfully.
Did not he say it was wilfully done as you were going along to the Justice's?
All the Way he went, he said, he believ'd he did it wilfully, but after the Prisoner had been talking with him, he said he believed it was not done wilfully.
Did you see the Deceas'd after he was Dead?
He lay dead on the Ground that I rent, near the River-side.
Do you know how he came by his Death?
I was going up to look after my Ground, and when I came within 200 Yards or thereabouts of it, I met 3 Men, who told me oldwas killed; and said, there he lies; I saw several People there, and so I went up and saw him lie dead there.
Do you know where the Prisonerwas taken?
He was taken in a back Building belonging to Mr.House.
Did you hear him say any thing at that Time.
I did not hear him say any Thing, I believe he was in a Fit, for he trembled and fell down behind the Door.
Was you atbefore the Justice?
Yes I was.
Had not the Boy been drinking, and did he not sleep before he went into the Justice.
I believe he did, for about 3 quarters of an Hour, which refreshed him.
Have you not received Money to pay the Witnesses for attending here on this last Cause the last Sessions, and from whom?
Yes, I paid some of them, I think it was by Mr.Direction who subpoena'd me up; I asked him who was to pay me, he said I should be paid half a Crown a Day for my Time, which was as much as he thought I could earn at my Business.
What Business is thisof?
He is a Stranger to me.
Do you know who he said he was employed by?
He said he was concerned for the King.
Do you know Mr.?
Yes.
What Business does youngfollow?
I believe he draws Beer now.
How long have you known him?
I have known him 5 or 6 Years.
What Business was he bred to?
Sometimes he would be out at Service, and sometimes he would be with his Father in the Business of a Carpenter.
Where does he draw Beer now?
I think it is at Mr., at the white-Horse in.
Have you had any Conversation with him about this Affair?
I have been at his House insince this Business has been in hand, but never had any talk with him about this Trial.
Was not thisdown before the Justice?
I do not know.
Did you ever see him at?
Yes, about a Week after the Accident happened.
Have you seen the Boy,, there since?
No, never?
What, has he lived withever since?
I can't tell.
I ask you whether you have not seen him atHouse every time you have been there?
Yes, I believe I did.
Mr., you are indicted in a very unhappy Case, what have you to say for yourself?
My Lord, I am very unable to make a proper Defence, having by the Cruelty of those, whoseDuty it was to protect me, been deprived of the Advantages of an Education I was entituled to by my Birth. All I know of the melancholy Accident in Question is, that on the unfortunate Day mention'd in the Indictment, I went out with my Gun, in Company with my innocent Fellow-Prisoner, to shoot Sparrows, as I usually did. As we were going along, Mr., who is Game-keeper to the Lord of the Manor, saw some People a Poaching within the Royalty, upon which he proposed to go and seize their Nets; I follow'd him, the deceas'd threw the Net into the River, and the Boy jump'd in to pull it across, to prevent which, I stoop'd to lay hold of one of the Ropes that trailed upon the Ground, and at the same Instant, the fatal Instrument I had in my other Hand, hanging by my Side, went off without my Knowledge, and to my great Grief as well as Surprize. My Behaviour immediately after the Accident, was, I hope inconsistent with a Temper that could murder a Man I had never seen before, without one Word of Provocation. Whatever may be the Determination of your Lordship and the Jury, great as the Misfortunes of my Life have been, I shall always consider this unfortunate Accident as the greatest of them all.
Mr., what have you to say for yourself?
My Lord, I am Game-keeper to Sir, Lord of the Manor of. On the first oflast, in the Afternoon, Mr.and I went out a walking; we saw a Crow, and Mr.made an Offer to shoot at her, but I called to him not to fire, for that she was too far off: Soon after I sawand his Son a Fishing with a Casting-Net, upon which I said to Mr., I would go and endeavour to take their Net away, as it was my Duty to do; accordingly I went up to the deceas'd and demanded the Net, which he refused to deliver to me, and threw it into the River, one End of the String being about his Arm; I then laid hold of the String, and pulled, whilst the Boy endeavoured to draw it cross the River, and presently I heard the Gun go off (my Back being towards Mr.) and saw the Man fall down. -- I said to Mr., I hoped he had not shot the Man, he said no,but turning up the Flap of his Coat, we saw he was shot! upon which Mr.cried out, what shall I do; and expressed so much Concern, that I am sure it was quite an accidental Thing.
Do you know the Manor of?
Yes: I am Deputy to my Father who is Steward to Sir, as Lord of the Manor, under the Dean and Chapter of.
How do you know this to be a Manor?
I have the Grant of the Manor from the Dean and Chapter in my Pocket.
Are there any Copy-holders?
Yes, I have admitted some Copyholders? I know it to be a Manor, because I have held one Court there for my Father, and have seen him hold several.
Is there any Mansion-House belonging to this Manor?
There is a Mansion-House belonging to it, which I think is the House that Mr.lives in.
What Court was it you held there?
A Court Baron.
Mr., look upon this Deputation. Are you a subscribing Witness to it, if you are, did you see this executed, and by whom.
Yes, Sir, that is my Name, I saw Sirexecute it, this is his Hand and Seal.
Was it executed at the Time it bears Date?
Yes, I believe on the very Day.
Mr., look upon that Endorsement, do you know whose Hand that is?
My Lord, I went to the Clerk of the Peace for the County of, and heard him acknowledge this to be his Hand, and that it was entered according to the Act of Parliament.
Did you see any Entry of it?
He said it was entred, and acknowledged this to be his Hand, and told me that was sufficient.
Do you know the Place where this unhappy Case happened?
Yes.
Give an Account of what you know.
I was in the next Field called. This where the Accident happened, is called the.
Where were you when this happened?
As near as I can guess I was forty Pole off.
What did you observe there?
I saw my Son and Mr.coming up.
How did they behave upon this Occasion?
They were so troubled they could hardly wag or speak; my Son said he was afraid the Man was killed; and he said to Mr., how did you do it? Mr.said, I did not think of the Gun's going off.
How was the Gun carried when it went off?
Just as I may hold this Sword
he had it in one Hand, as I have the Sword now.
Did he express himself concerned?
He was so concerned, that he did not runten Pole, before he fell down and beat himself thus upon the Belly, and said,?
where did you stand when the Accident happened?
In.
Is there not a Hedge betweenand?
Yes, a new Hedge not above a Yard high, and I could see any thing as clear as I can see you.
You were speaking as to this being a Manour; how do you know it to be Manour?
Because there have been Courts kept there.
By whom?
By Sir.
On which Side ofdoes the River lie; is it East, West, North, or South?
It is about South.
Has not Sirgranted the Fishery to any Body?
I Rent the Fishery, the Fishery belongs to me.
Do you depute your Son to look after this?
No, Sirdeputes him.
How came Sirto appoint your Son to be Game-keeper?
Because they robbed me daily.
Have you assign'd that Fishery to any Body?
No, I have not.
Was you standing up when the Gun went off, or sitting?
I was standing up.
Do you know, the Son of?
Yes.
Have you ever had any Conversation with him about this Matter?
Yes: He said that as he and his Father were Fishing, they saw the Prisoner,, coming up; that he desired his Father to give him the Net, and he would run away with it, but his Father would not let him; that thencame up and demanded the Net; that, said he should not have it, and then threw the Net into the River, andin the mean Time, the other Gentleman came up and shot him; thatjump'd into the River, and cut the Line of the Net to pull it out on the other Side; and that when the Gun went off and his Father dropped down, Mr.said to the other Gentleman,! and then they both run Home: Mr., who was present, asked him if he saw Mr.pull the Trigger of the Gun; andanswered, that he could not tell. I asked him if there was any Quarrel or Words that had passed between them, and he said no. -- I said it was very surprizing to me, that this Gentleman should come and shoot his Father and nothing more pass between them; I then asked him in what manner he held the Gun; he had a Stick in his Hand, and shewed in what manner the Gun was held in his Hand, thus, (in his right Hand, the Arm hanging down near the Pocket, some Inches from his Body, and near upon a Level; which was the same manner that oldsaid the Gun was held) I asked if he thought he did it wilfully, he said, he could not tell.
Did you ever see thisbefore, for he says he knows nothing of you?
I have known him these Eight Years, and he has been frequently at my House.
What Character has he?
I cannot say much in his behalf; his Father could not manage him at all.
What Business did he follow?
His Father was a Carpenter, and he worked with him.
When did he leave?
Soon after this Accident happened.
Where has he been ever since?
I have seen him at thein; and I heard at, that he was sent for to.
Who was present at this Conversation besidesand you?
Nobody but Mr..
You say he could not say it was wilfully done, did he say it was accidentally done?
No, he did not say it was.
Do you apprehend he had hold of the Gun by the Barrel near the Lock?
I understood bymanner of holding the Stick, that he meant that Mr.had hold of the Gun about the middle of the Barrel.
What Discourse had you with young?
On the, when the Prisoner at the Bar was carried toto be Examined, I went there:came to the Door, and called me out of the Room where I was, and said he wanted to speak with me. When I came out, he said he wanted to ask my Advice concerning this Accident: I said, I wonder you should ask my Advice, when you have Relations to advise with; he said, I thought fit to ask you, as you are my Master. While we were talking,came out, and said, I was persuading the Boy to sell his Father's Blood; the Boy said, what do you mean you Fool you, my Master is persuading me to no such Thing. I then asked him, whether he thought it was Accidentally done or not; he said, he believed it was Accidental, rather than any other thing.
What Character has the Boy?
He was very irregular, and used to lie out.
What Trade are you?
I am a Butcher.
You say he has a bad Character; do you think he would forswear himself?
I can say nothing to that.
Was there any talk of Money then?
Yes, the Boy said he had been offered Money.
But you say, he said he would not sell his Father's Blood?
No, I saidcame and said I was persuading him to sell his Father's Blood; and the Boy said my Master did not persuade me to any such Thing.
What did you say to him afterwards?
I told him he had lost his Father, and had no Friend to take Care of him, and he knew best what he had to do.
Did not you say it was better to take Money, than Hang the Man?
No, I said, I thought by what he told me, that the Man was in no danger of being Hang'd, and therefore he had better take the Money than endeavour to Hang a Man, that he thought did not do it designedly.
Give us an Account of what you know of this Matter.
I drove the Chaise, to theat; I went up to young, and asked him how this unfortunate Thing happen'd; he said he believed it was accidental, for he did not believe any Gentleman in cool Blood would do any such thing wilfully.
Do you know any thing with respect to the Net?
I think he said Mr.was stooping to in order to take the Net, and the Gun went off.
Did he say any thing how Mr.held the Gun?
I desired him to shew me how Mr.held the Gun; he took my Whip in his Hand and held it so,
I think it was rather nearer the handle than the middle of the Whip that he held it.
Did you see the Wound?
I understood it was somewhere about the Hip.
I ask you whether you think he could have shot him there, if he had held the Gun that way?
I think he could not have shot him there, if he had held it any other way. My Lord, I had forgot to mention one Thing. After this,spoke to Mr.the Prisoner, and shook Hands with him; andsaid he was very sorry for what had happened, but said he did not think he did it designedly, and then drank a Glass of Wine to him.
Did they shake Hands, or drink the Wine first?
Both at the same Time as near as could be.
I ask you whether the Prisoner at the Bar is not married to your Daughter-in-law?
The Prisoner is married to my Daughter-in-law.
They ask this Question in hopes of its being of Service to them in another Affair, for it cannot be of any in this; though I hope he has got a very good Wife.
Mr.. I think you did attend the Coroner's Inquest, upon this Occasion; please to give an Account howbehaved then, and what he said.
My Lord, on the 4th of, I attended the Coroner's Jury at; though, as I had not Time to enquire into the Fact, and prepare for Mr.Defence, I could do him but little more Service, than by Cross examining the Witnesses for the Crown, and making Observations on their Evidence; one of the Witnesses was, who has been examined here. --
As to any Thing in his Behaviour you may give Evidence, but not of any Thing that was reduced into writing.
I can only speak as to what he said before the Coroner, and I admit the Depositions taken at that Time were reduced into writing by the Coroner or his Clerk.
Sir, do you know?
Yes.
Had you any Talk with him aboutbeing killed?
told me thatsaid he did not believe the Gentleman kill'd his Father designedly; but that it was an Accident.
My Lord, this is another Person that is brought to contradict the Evidence of, in what he said with respect to the Position of the Gun.
said the Gun was pointed downward. Now we shall shew you from the Natureof the Wound that it is morally impossible it should be so, for the Wound is slanting upwards.
Sir, You are I think a Surgeon at: did you see the Body of thisthat was kill'd at?
Onafter the Accident, my Lord, I happened to be at, and Sirgave me Leave to come in and hear the Depositions: I was afterwards sent for by Mr.a Surgeon at, to attend the opening of the Body before the Coroner; there were several of the Coroners Jury in the Room. I found the Wound on the left Side, about an Inch and an Half below the Ridge of the Hip bone; the Wound I apprehend to be about an Inch and an Half wide; I found it went into the Cavity of the Belly?
Did the Wound go upward or downwards into the Belly?
When I found it went into the Cavity of the Belly, I remember'd in what Mannerheld the Gun when he was before Sir, to shew how Mr.held it when he fir'd: I remember very well he held it to his Shoulder slanting downward; I attempted to put my Probe into the Wound in the same Direction as he described the Gun, but there was no Passage for it in that Position, it would not go in downwards; then I put it in this Manner cross the Belly, and it went in without any Obstruction, and then upwards, and it went in with the same Ease, in this Manner. I observed several large Blisters, full of black Serum on the Right Side, opposite the Place where the Shot went in, the Blisters which were on the opposite Side, were three or four Inches higher than where the Wound was, -- the Wound was on the left Side, and the Blisters on the Right; when I found this was so plain to me, I desired it might be as plain to the Jury and every one there, as it was to myself, because this was a Matter of Fact and not of Judgment, and I desired the Foreman to come and put the Probe in and try, he did so and found the Wound as I have described it: I was the more careful in this, because Ihad observed the Evidence that the Boy gave on the, and there was some Variation between that and the Nature of the Wound, therefore I desired them to take the more Notice of it.
What do you think those Blisters on the other Side were occasioned by?
I apprehend they were occasioned by the Force of the Powder.
According to your Account, could he, holding the Muzzle of the Gun upwards, have made this Wound?
It could not have made it with the Muzzle downward.
Did you observe how the Wound was upon the Bone, and whether there were any Shot remaining in the Wound?
No Sir, but I found some Shot in the Cavity of the Belly.
Now the Question is, whether the Shot, coming upon this Bone, might not be thrown upwards?
No, for the Shot went through the Bone, so that the Gun must have been held obliquely, pointing upwards; the Shot could not have gone through in that Direction if the Muzzle of the Gun had pointed downwards; this is no Matter of Judgment, but I have given you Demonstration of it.
You say the Wound went from the left Side to the Right, and that if the Muzzle of the Gun was downwards, the Wound would be in the same Manner.
Certainly Sir, if the Muzzle of the Gun is held downward, the Shot cannot go upward.
He makes it appear that the Prisoner could not hold the Gun to his Shoulder, but that it was held horizontally, and that it was impossible for him to wound him in the Manner the Boy described, if the Muzzle of the Gun had been pointed downward.
I beg leave to speak a few Words more to your Lordship. While I was giving in this Evidence before the Coroner and his Jury, if your Lordship remembers, I said I had shewed them how the Wound was, therefore I desired them to consider how consistent it was with the Evidence that Mr.had given:I believe I proved it to the Coroner's Jury, and others that were there, that it was impossible it could be done in that Manner, if the Gun was held as he said, to his Shoulder; upon that he comes up again, and, says he, the Gentleman stooped when he did it.
This shews how he departed from what he had said, for he said first that Mr.stood upright when he fired, and then that he stooped in order to make his Evidence correspond with the Wound.
Did you see the Body of?
I opened the Body on the 4th of, and on Inspection, I found one Wound of about an Inch and an Half Diameter: I put in my Probe 7 or 8 Inches, by which and likewise upon Inspection, I found it run horizontal, a little upon the Ascending: I put my two Fingers into the Cavity of the Bone, and shewed the Jury how it was, and observ'd on the contrary Side, 4 or 5 Blisters, which I think to be occasioned by the Force of the Powder from the other Side; but the Shot did not go through the Skin.
I ask you whether these Blisters were higher or lower than the Wound?
Four or five Inches higher, my Lord.
Do you think these Blisters were occasioned by the Shot?
I apprehend they were.
Was any Application made to you at any Time to send Mr.a Prisoner to.
Yes, I think it was Mr., he came along with another Gentleman, whose Name I think is.
What, Captain?
I believe it was: I said, I think the Gentleman is secure enough: (there was a Lord mentioned. but I cannot remember that he desired it: Mr.wisely kept him from saying who it was) I thought it was too severe to send him to, and said that Sirwas the Justice of Peace who committed him, and he had taken sufficient Care about it.
Do you know any Thing of?
Yes.
Where did you come acquainted with him?
At thein.
What Countryman are you?
I came from, on Board a Merchantman from: I was recommended to the Earl of -- to say what I knew, as a Witness, about the Estate.
How came you to the?
There was onethat came over in the same Ship. When I came to Town, I went and enquired for him at the Earl of --'s, and he sent me to theinto live, and there I came acquainted with.
After your Acquaintance, do you remember any Conversation with him, about what he was to have for swearing in this Cause?
I do, my Lord, remember mighty well; a little Time after he came to the Inn, he and I got acquainted together, and went out a walking to see the Town, and particularly on aMorning; theafter he came to: I believe it was the secondin; as we were walking abroad, I asked him how he came to live there, says he, I am here at the Expence of the Earl of --.
This is not proper: If you can call any Body to contradictyou may, but this is reflecting upon a noble Person's Character.
Did he tell you how he came to be at that Inn?
He told me that Mr., who keeps the, brought him from, and that he should be very well provided for, if he would prosecute this Gentleman, who is now in Custody, for this Murder, and he desired I might contrive some Way that he might get the Money secured, and I wrote two or three Draughts of Notes for 200and he took Copies of them.
How came he to take Copies of them?
Because I did not care my Hand should be known. I have a Copy of one of them in my Pocket.
I Promise to pay to Mr.(that is his elder Brother) or his Order, at or upon the 10thDay ofnext, the Sum ofSterling, for Value received from his deceased Father, and him, in Carpenter's Work,Witness my Hand the 10th Day of1742. This was to be signed either byor my Lord --
Have you ever seen the Earl of -- at the?
He is there often.
What has the Earl of -- any Thing to do there?
His Coach and Horses are kept there.
How long have they stood there?
They stand there constantly.
What was that Note for?
It is only a Copy of what I wrote for,
for as I told the Court before, I did not care that my
Hand should be seen in any such Thing as Bribery and
Corruption.<|endoftext|>Do you know the Prisoner at the Bar?
Yes.
Did you know the deceased Mr.?
Yes.
Were you, at any time, employed to arrest the Prisoner for Debt; and what happened in Consequence of it? Speak up, that the Gentlemen of the Jury may hear you.
Yes, I was employed to arrest the Prisoner, for a Debt due to.
By whom were you so employed?
By Mr., an Attorney.
You mean, I suppose, the deceased Mr., -- him that was shot?
Yes.
Go on.
Being so employed, to arrest Mr., I went to his House, and knocked at the Door. Some Body came to the Window, and asked me, what I wanted? I told the Person who came to the Window, that I had a Letter for the Master of the House, which she took through the Window; and I suppose it was delivered to Mr..
Why do you suppose so?
Because, in a little Time after, Mr.opened the Door.
The Prisoner opened the Door, you say?
Yes, and he asked me, whether I lived with the Gentleman who sent the Letter, or from whom the Letter came? I told him I did; and Mr.invited me in.
Well. what happened afterwards?
I went into the House, with Mr., and we then went together, towards the back Door,and at the back Door, Mr.stood still, to call his Servant.
Whereabouts at the back Door did the Prisoner stand still, to call his Servant? Was it within-side of the Door, or at the out-side of the Door?
He stood still upon a Step, at the back Door, the out-side of the Door; and I was within-side of the Door. -- I then took the Warrant I had against Mr., out of my Pocket, and I laid my Hand upon his Shoulder, and sayd, Sir, I hope you will excuse me. --
Was the Prisoner then out of the Door?
Yes. I sayd, Sir, I hope you will excuse me; For the Letter I gave you, was to decoy you. I am a Bailiff; This is a Warrant against you; and you are my Prisoner in the King's Name.
What did the Prisoner say then?
He screek'd out, and sayd, I had used him ill.
What did you do afterwards?
Mr.and I returned into the House, and when we got into the Kitchen, he called to, who, I believe was his House-keeper, and sayd to her, We have done ill, in letting this Man into the House; For, he has arrested me.
He told her, you had arrested him, you say?
Yes.
Well. What happened then?
The Prisoner went then towards the Fire, and turned to the Screen on the right Hand, and stood at the further End of the Screen.
What did he do then?
He turned, all of a sudden, upon me, with a Pistol in his Hand, and sayd, he would blowmy Brains out, if I did not get immediately out of the House?
Did he present the Pistol at you?
He did.
What did you say then?
I told him, that was not the Way to do Business. -- Mr.then snapp'd the Pistol at me, but it miss'd Fire.
Are you sure he snapp'd the Pistol at you?
Yes, very sure.
Well, what did you do then?
I went backwards thro' the Kitchen, and Mr.followed me; and in a narrow Passage leading from the Kitchen towards the Door, he snapp'd the Pistol at me again; and he snapp'd the Pistol at me a third Time, but I was then out of the House.
When you got out of the House, where did you go then?
I went to the next House. I think Mr., where Mr.promised to be. Mr.saw me, and met me, and asked me, if I had arrested: I told Mr., that I had arrested him, and that he had snapp'd a Pistol at me three different Times, which obliged me to come away.
What did Mr.say to that?
Mr.sayd, I had done enough.
How did you proceed afterwards?
I told Mr., if I had a Pistol, I could bring him away; and he say'd, I should not want that. -- Then Mr.sent a Man to the Plaintiff,, and to bring Arms from his Father's.
Where didlive?
At, not very far from.
Did the Messenger return with Arms?
Yes.
What did you then?
After the Arms and Assistance were brought, We went again to Mr.House.
Who went to the Prisoner's House?
I went, and the Plaintiff, and a Servant of his, I think. Four or five Persons I believe, came with me.
Was there another Sheriff's Officer with you?
Yes, a Man tolerated by the Sheriff, one.
Did Mr.go to the Prisoner's House with you?
Yes.
What happened, when you all returned to the Prisoner's House?
As we were all running towards the Prisoner's House, I saw the Prisoner, and another Man out of Doors; I called to Mr., and sayd, you may as well stay, for we are coming for you.
Did the Prisoner hear you say this?
I believe he did.
Did the prisoner stay for you?
No, He, and the other Man with him, ran into the House.
Well, when you came up to the House; pray, what followed?
When we came up to the House, I sayd to Mr., I know the Way to that Door; Go you to the other.
How many Doors were there to the House?
Three.
Did you know all the three Doors?
Yes, I knew them all.
You bid Mr.go to one of the Doors, I think, you say?
I bid Mr., and the others, to take Care of two of the Doors, and I would go to the other.
How far was the Door, that you sayd you would go to, from the Door, you desired Mr.to take Care of?
It was a good Way distant, in going round about.
You sayd, you would go to the third Door, Did you know the Way to it?
Yes, very well.
Did Mr.say any thing to the People in the House, when he came up to the Door?
I cannot tell, whether he did or not, because I was not present, for I ran to the other Side of the House.
Pray was the Door you went to, locked, or made fast?
It was fast.
When you all came up to the Doors, as you have been mentioning, -- pray, what followed?
In a very little Time, almost immediately after I came up to the Door, I heard a Noise. -- I heard a Gun go off.
Which Way did the Noise come? Where did you apprehend, the Gun went off. In what Situation were you from the Noise, or Report of it?
The Noise came, as betwixt me and them; betwixt me and the People who came with me.
How far distant might you be from the Door, where the Gun was fired?
Nine or ten Yards it might be from Mr..
When you heard the Noise, and the Gun go off, what did you do then? it must have alarm'd you?
When I heard them crying out on the other Side, I went backwards to an Hedge, and lookingover it, I saw Mr.held by two Men, sitting on a Block.
You saw Mr.sitting on a Block supported by two Men, How did he look?
Very piteously indeed.
Did you hear him say any thing?
Yes, I heard him say, Oh! I am shot. I am shot.
Was Mr.at a great Distance from the Gun, at the Time he received the Wound, or was he near it.
I cannot tell, whether he was at a great, or a small Distance from it.
What did you do, after you had seen Mr.sitting on the Block?
I returned again to my own Door, to prevent the Prisoner's getting out.
Did you see Mr.afterwards?
In about ten Minutes afterwards, I saw two Men, carrying him down the Lane.
Were you with Mr., at the House he was carried to?
No.
Did you see him afterwards?
No. I did not see him, after the two Men carried him down the Lane.
Have you the Warrant whereby you arrested the Prisoner?
I have.
Pray produce it. -- Is this the very Warrant, Under the Authority whereof you arrested the Prisoner?
It is.
Pray, who delivered to you this Warrant to execute?
Mr.himself.
Were there any Holes in the Door that theBall came thro' which killed Mr., besides the Shot-hole.
Yes, there were two Holes in the Door, besides the Shot-hole.
Was there ever a Slit in the Door?
That I don't know.
Were the two Holes in the Door higher than the Shot-hole, or lower, or how?
The two Holes were higher than the Hole which the Ball had made.
Could you see thro' the two Holes; were they large enough to see, and know a Person through?
Yes, I could see through them; I did look through, and saw into the Kitchen plainly. I, and several others did so.
Pray, what Business did Mr.go about, when he went with you to the Prisoner's House?
To assist me in re-taking Mr..
Do you know the Sheriff's Hand-writing?
Yes, very well.
Is the Warrant whereby you arrested the Prisoner, all of the Sheriff's Hand-writing?
All is of his Hand-writing, except two Names.
Are you positive to the Sheriff's Hand-writing?
Yes, to Mr.Hand-writing, who acted as Sheriff, and made out the Warrant, and delivered it.
Pray, what are the two Names, that were not written by Mr.?
My own Name, and the Name ofanother Bailiff.
Who wrote your Name, and the Name ofin the Warrant?
Mr..
Are you sure of that?
Yes; for I saw him write them.
Are you usually employed as a Bailiff, for the executing of the Sheriff's Warrants?
Yes. I get my Bread by it; and am often sent for, fifteen or twenty Miles round the Country.
Was your Name inserted in the Warrant, as the Sheriff's own Bailiff, or as a special Bailiff?
I was a special Bailiff, for that time, appointed by the Sheriff.
How do you know that?
I have been informed so. I think it is so expressed in the Warrant.
Had you executed any Warrants, from the Sheriff of the County of, the Year before?
Yes many; twenty, or more.
Had you executed any Warrants from the present Sheriff; -- Under his Authority?
Yes. I executed Attachments under that Authority: -- Under Mr.. I had four or five Warrants, upon Process out of the Exchequer, at the time I arrested Mr., and have executed several Warrants, since Mr.became Sheriff.
How long had Mr.been Sheriff, before you arrested the Prisoner?
A Week or a Fortnight, it might be.
-- Read the Warrant, whereon the Prisoner was arrested by the Witness.
Did, the Sheriff's Bailiff named in the Warrant, go with you, when you attempted to re-take the Prisoner?
No; he did not.
When did the Plaintiffcome to you, was he with you before, or at the time you attempted to re-take the Prisoner?
came, when Assistance was sent for, but not before. He came with us, when we went to re-take Mr..
I think you say, you took the Warrant out of your Pocket, and put your Hand upon the Prisoner's Shoulder, and arrested him?
I did.
Pray, where did you first see that Warrant, whereon you arrested the Prisoner?
I saw it first at.
Who shew'd it you?
The deceased, Mr..
When you first saw the Warrant, was your Name in it?
No.
Was the Warrant when you first saw it, under the Seal of the Sheriff?
I believe, it was.
Was the Name, (the other special Bailiff) in the Warrant, when you first saw it?
I believe, it was not.
Was the Name of, the Sheriff's Officer, in the Warrant then?
Yes it was.
Who wroteName in the Warrant?
The Sheriff put it in.
Of whose Hand-writing is the Warrant?
It is all of Mr.Writing, except my Name, and the Name of.
Are you sure of that?
Yes.
Who is Mr.?
Mr.acts for the Under-Sheriff.
Of whose Hand-writing are the Names,, and, now appearing in the Warrant?
My Name, andwere written in the Warrant by Mr..
Are you sure that the Names, and, were written in the Warrant by Mr.?
I am very sure of it; For I saw him write them.
Were they written by Mr., after you first saw the Warrant, at?
Yes.
Is the Warrant in the same Situation, in evry Part of it, as it was, when you first saw it at?
It is, except the Addition of the Names made since.
Where does Mr.live?
In this City.
Do you know Mr.?
Yes.
Who is he?
The Under-Sheriff.
Do the Sheriffs always keep their Office in the City?
They keep their Office in the City, where they please, to appoint; I believe so.
And is that the Place, where the Sheriff's Warrants are always made out?
That is the Place, where they apply for Warrants.
How far does the Under-Sheriff live from this City?
Twenty Miles, I believe.
Was Mr.appointed by the Sheriff, to make out Warrants?
I don't know, that he was.
Had Mr.Authority, to make out Warrants?
I don't know.
You say, the Under-Sheriff always keeps an Office in the City of?
Yes; where the Sheriffs, when they come in, are pleased to fix it.
You say, you went to Mr., after you had arrested the Prisoner?
Mr.met me, as I was going to him.
And you then told Mr., you were forced to retreat?
I told him so, and so it was.
Is it the Practice, for the Names of the Sheriff's own Bailiffs, or those bound to the Sheriff, to be put into Warrants in the Office; and Blanks to be left in the same Warrants, for the Names of other Bailiffs, to be put in by Attorneys, after the Warrants come from the Office?
It is the Practice.
Did you give Security to the Sheriff, for being his Bailiff?
No, not at that Time.
Where did you stay after you had arrested the Prisoner, till Assistance came to you?
I, and Mr.stay'd at a Gentleman's House, the next House to Mr., Mr.House, till Assistance came.
Who went for the Assistance?
, the other Bailiff named with me, I believe.
What Number of People came to your Assistance?
I don't well recollect the Number; but I remember the Plaintiff, and his Servant, (whose Name I know not,),, and myself made five.
Did you desire Mr.to stay where he was, at Mr.House, and not go to the Prisoner's House?
I did not.
Pray had not you an Iron-Crowe with you, when you all went to the Prisoner's House?
Yes.
Where had you that Crowe?
I told Mr.I wanted a Crowe, and he borrowed one from the Woman of the House, Mrs..
You say you went to different Doors, when you came to the House; pray, were these Doors on one Side of the House, -- at the Corners of the House; or how were they situated?
I said, I went to a Door on one Side of the House, and desired Mr.would stay at a Door, on the other Side of the House.
Did you yourself speak to the Prisoner, when you came to the House, and demand Entrance from him?
I did not.
Diddemand Entrance?
I don't know.was not on the same Side of the House with me.
Did you desire Mr., to demand Entrance, as you were going to the House, or before you came to the House?
No. I did not. -- But when we were going to Mr., I saw Mr.out of Doors, and called to him to stay, and told him, we were coming for him.
How far might you be from the Prisoner, at that time?
It might be threescore Yards.
Were Mr.andat one Door of the House?
I don't know.
Did you from the other Side of the House, desire Mr.to demand Entrance?
I cou'd not see Mr., from the other Side of the House.
Is the Warrant you have shewn to the Court, the same Warrant you produced to me?
Yes, the very same.
-- It is not the Warrant.
Leave the Questions to be ask'd by your Counsel; They know best how to act for your Defence. Consider, you stand upon Tryal for your Life. Your Condition is a most melancholy one, and very perilous; therefore refer yourself to the Judgment of our Counsel, in Matters of so great Importance to you.
It is the very Warrant upon which I arrested the Prisoner.
Call.
Do you know the Prisoner at the Bar?
Yes, very well.
Did you know Mr.deceased?
Yes.
When were you last in Company with the deceased?
I was in Company with him, upon the twenty-first Day oflast, at the House ofin.
Did you go with the deceased, to the Prisoner's House, on that Day?
Yes.
What was the Occasion of your going thither with Mr.?
sent for me, to come to assist the Bailiffs.
To do what?
To re-take.
And did you go accordingly for that Purpose?
Yes.
Who went with you?
Mr., andand. We all went to take the Prisoner by Force,having sent for me to assist him, after the Prisoner had snapp'd a Pistol at him. -- We all went, becausehad drove the Bailiff from the House, by snapping a Pistol at him.
Who told you, that the Prisoner had snapp'd a Pistol at the Bailiff?
the Bailiff told me so.
Did you see the Prisoner in the House, when you came there?
I did not.
Did you go with Mr.?
Yes.
How far were you from Mr., when you came to the House?
Within three or four Yards of him.
Then you did not see the Prisoner?
No.
Did you see any People in the House, when you came there?
No, but I imagine People were in the House, when Mr.and I came to it.
Did you hear any People in the House?
Yes, We heard People, but saw no Body.
Were the Doors lock'd, or made fast?
Yes. The Doors were made.
When you came up to the House, didgive Mr.and you any Directions, about the Business you were to do there?
Yes, When we came up to the Door,ordered Mr.and me to attend that Door.
Which Door was it?
It was the back Kitchen Door.
When you came to the Door, did Mr.say any thing to the People in the House?
As soon as we came to the Door, Mr.sayd, open the Door, -- open the Door, or we'll break it down. -- I thought they were making the Door fast.
Was the Door opened?
No.
What was done afterwards, when the People within would not open the Door?
As soon as Mr.said so, he bid me strike an Iron-Crowe under the Door, in order to lift it off the Hinges; and I accordingly put the Crowe under the Door.
Was it Mr., who ordered you to put the Crowe under the Door?
Yes.
When you put the Crowe under the Door, pray, what happened?
As soon as I had put the Crowe, or Ringer under the Door, Mr.sayd to me,, run to the other Door, for feargets out of it; Whereupon, I left the Crowe sticking under the Door upon the Sill, and went away towards the other Door, and had not gone above three or four Yards from the Door, before I heard a Gun go off.
Did you see Mr.when the Gun went off?
Yes.
Did he say any thing then?
Yes -- I heard him say; I am shot, I am shot. And he fell on one Side of his Back down two Steps. --and I took him up; -- Then Mr.took up his Shirt, and shewed us the Wound.
Who was this?
He was an Assistant who came with me, to re-take.
What did you do with Mr., after you andtook him up?
He hung about our Shoulders, and we carried him to a Wooden-Block, where he desired to rest.
You say he pulled up his Shirt, and shew'd you his Wound, pray, on what Part of his Body was he wounded?
He was wounded on the Side of the Belly, above his Groin.
Were there any Holes in the Door where the Ball came thro', besides that which the Ball made? -- Did you see the Hole which the Bullet made?
I saw the Hole, which the Bullet came through; and there was also a Slit in the Door, which seemed big enough for a Person to see through. And there were two Holes besides in the Door?
How large were the two Holes that were in the Door, besides that which the Bullet made?
One of the Holes was an Inch and half Hole; the other bigger. But the Slit was afterwards lath'd on the Inner-Side of the Door.
Could you have seen the Prisoner through those Holes?
No doubt of it, if he had been opposite to me when I looked through; but he was not, and therefore I cou'd not see him.
Were you present when the Prisoner surrendred himself?
I was
Had he any Fire-Arms in the House, when he surrendred?
He had Fire-Arms at that Time. I fired off one of the Pistols, the Day after the Prisoner killed Mr..
What Day of the Month was that?
The twenty second of. Mr.received his mortal Wound upon the twenty-first, about Three o'Clock.
What other Fire-Arms had the Prisoner, when he surrendred, besides the Pistol you fired?
There were two Pistols; -- one besides that, which I fired; and a Gun.
Were they loaden?
Yes.
How do you know they were loaden?
That Pistol which I fired off, was very heavy loaded: The other Pistol was discharged against an Ash-Tree, and I saw the Hole which the bullet had made in the Tree; and the Gun was fired into the Air.
When the Prisoner surrendred himself, did he acknowledge, that he had Fire-Arms in the House?
He sayd, he had but one Pistol. -- But the Woman in the House being asked, whether there were any more Fire-Arms; she told them, there was another Pistol and a Gun.
You say, you discharged one of the Pistols yourself; Did you?
I did, and fired it into the Air.
Did you see the Pistol discharged against the Ash-Tree?
I did; and look'd at the Hole, which the Ball had made. -- The Gun was fired into the Air.
When you came to re-take the Prisoner with Mr., what Orders didgive you?
He ordered Mr.and me to stay at the Door; and he ran to the other.
What Orders hadreceived; Was he to have no Hand in re-taking the Prisoner?
was ordered by, to attend a Woman,House-keeper, I believe, and not let her come near him.
Was neither, nor,with you and Mr.at the Door, where you were stationed, in order to re-take the Prisoner?
Neither of them.
Waswithin Sight of you?
I think he was.
Did you all act as Assistants to the Bailiff?
Yes;
And by his Orders?
Yes.
call.
Do you know the Prisoner at the bar?
Yes, very well.
Do you remember any thing, about the Prisoner's discharging or firing a Gun at any time? pray, speak up, that the Jury may hear you, and acquaint them, with what you know of the Matter.
Yes, Sir, I was in Mr.House at, when Mr.was shot.
What Part of the House were you in, at that Time?
I was in the House-Place, and Mr.was in the back Kitchen.
Was any Body in the House, besides the Prisoner and yourself?
Yes. A Woman was in the House. -- A Servant-Woman.
Did you see the Prisoner fire the Gun?
The Prisoner did fire the Gun, at the back Door, and brought it in afterwards, and took it into the Parlour.
After the Gun was fired, did you hear no Noise out of Doors; Was there no Alarm made about it?
Yes. The People without shouted, Murder.
From what Place did the Prisoner take the Gun, which he fired?
He took it from the Mantle-Piece in the Kitchen.
Was the Prisoner accustomed to keep Fire-Arms in the House with him?
I cannot tell.
How long was it after the Gun was fired, that you heard the People shout, Murder?
In about a Minute, or two, after the Gun was fired.
I suppose, you were curious enough after the Gun was fired, and you heard the Cry of Murder, to know, Whether any Body was hurt, or not; Were not you?
I went to a Window, and look'd out; and saw a Man in blue Cloaths supported, or held up between two Men.
Did you say nothing to the Prisoner, upon this Occasion?
Yes; I told Mr., that I believed there was never a Man killed, but there was one hurt, and they called him Mr..
And pray, when you told the Prisoner, there was never a Man killed, but a Man hurt, and his Name was Mr.; what did he say to you?
He sayd, I don't know what Business a Man of his Coat, had among such Men as those. I am glad of it.
What do you apprehend he meant, by the Words "A Man of his Coat"?
I don't know.
You will please to observe, The Witness told the Prisoner, there was a Man hurt, but no Body killed; and that was immediately before the Prisoner sayd, he was glad of it. Glad, that no Body was killed.
call Mr..
I think you are a Surgeon?
Yes, Sir.
Where do you live?
At.
Did you know the deceased, Mr.?
Yes, very well.
Were you sent for at any time, and when, to attend Mr.upon Account of his having received a Wound, by the firing of a Gun, or otherwise? -- Pray acquaint the Court, and Jury, with what you know of this Matter?
Uponthe twenty-first Day oflast, a Messenger came to me, about Three o'Clock in the Afternoon, desiring me to go to, to Mr., who, the Messenger told me, was shot. -- I went accordingly with the Man, and got toabout Five o'Clock in the Evening. When I came there, I found, that Mr., a Surgeon from, had been sent for likewise, and had been there, for some time before. Mrand I went up Stairs together, to the Room, where Mr.was, and We found him ill in Bed. Almost so soon as hesaw me, he pulled up his Shirt, and shewed me where the Ball was lodged,and seemed impatient to have it taken out: Upon seeing the Wound, I took the Ball, between my Finger and Thumb, and perceived, I cou'd easily dislodge it. I then examin'd the Wound, where the Ball had entred, and found it cut about two Inches from the Hip on the left Side of his Belly: it pass'd thro' his Belly, by his Bowels no doubt, and lodged five or six Inches below his right Hip, almost through the Skin. As soon as I saw this, I took Mr.into another Room, to consult, what was fittest to be done; and I told him, it was my Opinion, that Mr.was a dying Man, and that I did not know, whether it would be of any Use, to take the Ball away, altho' it could be so easily effected -- But, considering, that it wou'd give him some Satisfaction, and perhaps Ease too, by taking the Ball from the Place where it did lie, Mr.and I went into the Room again, and I took out the Ball. -- After I had taken the Ball out, and dressed the Wound, and put a Bandage about it, I asked Mr., how he did? He sayd he was easier. Doctorcame in afterwards, and when I had told him, the Nature of the Wound, he look'd upon the Case to be extremely dangerous. The Doctor stayd with him two or three Hours and then went away; but Mr.desired me and Mrs.to sit with him, which we did, and his Father did so too, till ten Minutes past Three the next Morning, and he then expired.
Do you believe, that the Wound which Mr.received, was the Occasion of his Death?
I firmly believe, that the Wound which he received was the Occasion of his Death.
Did Mr.say any thing to you in his Agonies, upon the melancholy Occasion, and what?
Mr.told me, that he was shot, as he was stooping down, with a Crowe in his Hand, striving to open the Prisoner's Door?
Did he tell you, from what Part of the House he was shot?
He sayd, he received the Wound at the Door of the Prisoner's House?
Pray, how came the Ball to be made so flat: in that uncommon Form?
I believe its going through the Door, was the Occasion of its being in that Form.
call Mr..
Pray, Mr., Are you concern'd in any, and what Manner, for Mr., the present Sheriff of the County of?
Yes, Sir, I am concerned for the Sheriff, and keep his Office.
Do you make out Warrants for the Sheriff?
I do.
Did you receive at any time, and when, a Writ against the Prisoner, at the Suit of?
I received a Writ against him upon the First oflast.
Look upon that Warrant. -- Did you make out that Warrant upon the Writ, in order to arrest the Prisoner?
I did.
And are you sure, that is the same Warrant you did make out?
Yes; I am sure it is.
Is it usual for the Sheriff to appoint a Gentleman in this Town to execute the Office, and to act for him?
It is usual. -- I have been several Times appointed myself.
Do you receive all the Writs that are sued out directed to the Sheriff of this County?
I do.
And do you make out the Warrants upon such Writs?
I do.
And return the Writs?
Yes.
Do you execute all other Acts, that the Sheriff would do, if he resided here himself?
Yes. Except attending the Assizes and Sessions.
And has this been the constant Practice in this County?
Yes, during all my Time.
Has it been usual, when Plaintiffs would have special Bailiffs appointed, to leave Blanks in the Warrants for their Names to be inserted?
Yes, upon the Sheriff being indemnified.
Have you done this yourself?
Yes.
Have you known others to do it?
Yes, several others to my Knowledge.
Did you ever know it to be refused?
No, never, upon the Sheriff being indemnified, and the Attorney is known to be a fair Practicer. -- I have known it refused, where the Practicer was not liked, or where the Sheriff run any Risque or Hazard, and the Indemnity was not approved; But when the Attorney, or Practicer, and the Indemnity are liked, it is usually done.
Pray, what is the Nature of the Indemnity given to the Sheriff upon this Occasion?
It is, that he should not suffer by Escapes or Rescues.
And has this been the constant Practice used by the Persons, who have acted in the Sheriff's Office, in the Capacity you now act?
It has been so, all the time I have known the Office.
How long, pray, is that?
Seven or eight and twenty Years.
To leave Blanks in the Warrants, for the Names of the special Bailiffs to be inserted?
Yes.
Pray, Whether is such Practice convenient to the Plaintiffs and Suitors in the Court, or inconvenient to them?
It is look'd upon to be very convenient for the Plaintiffs.
Do you think so yourself?
I look upon it in that Light.
Had Mr., or Mr., or both of them a Right, to insert the Names of the special Bailiffs, in the Blank left in the Warrant, whereon the Prisoner was arrested?
I apprehend, either Mr., or Mr.had a Right to do so?
Is it usual for Attornies in the Country, to send their Directions to their Agents into take out Writs?
Yes.
And is the Agent's Name generally put to the Writ, or the Name of the Attorney in the Country only?
The Agent's Name is generally added to the Name of the Country Attorney, in the Writ, since the late Act of Parliament for that Purpose; but before that, the Name of the Attorney was only put to the Writ.
And you say that either Mr., or Mr., had a Right to insert the Names of the special Bailiffs?
Yes. I apprehend so.
Do not the Attornies, and other Persons, usually send the Names of the special Bailiffs, to be inserted in the Warrants, by the Sheriff, or by those who act for him?
Sometimes People do send the Names of the special Bailiffs, to be inserted.
Has it not been the most usual Way, in your Time, to do so?
It was when I first knew the Office the most usual Way, in 1732 and 1733. -- But Warrants went out with Blanks then.
Did, the Bailiff named in the Warrant, indemnify the Sheriff?
He has given Security to the Sheriff, I believe. -- But the Indemnity was for the special Bailiffs.
In the year 1732, or 1733, Were blank Warrants sent out, and not the Names of the special Bailiffs inserted?
When I was concerned for Mr., who was Sheriff in 1732 or 1733, several blank Warrants were sent out, and not the special Bailiffs inserted.
How many Warrants were sent out, with Blanks for the Names of the special Bailiffs, in Mr.Time?
I cannot tell.
Were not Warrants oftner delivered, with the Names of the special Bailiffs inserted in the Office, before they were sent out, than Warrants with Blanks, for the Names of the special Bailiffs, to be afterwards inserted by the Attornies?
I believe, Warrants were oftner sent out, with the Names of the special Bailiffs inserted, than with Blanks.
Is that the Warrant, you made out on the Writ the First ofagainst the Prisoner?
It is the same Warrant.
Is it in the same Situation it was, when you delivered it out of your Hands?
No.
How has it been altered? how does it differ?
The Names,, and, have been since inserted.
Pray, was the Seal to the Warrant before you delivered it out of your Hands?
Yes.
Are you sure of that?
Yes, for I put the Seal to it myself.
Do you remember, that any Arrest was ever set aside, or disputed, on Account of a Blank Warrant having been sent out?
No, never.
Through all the Course of your Practice, has it not been most usual, to make out Warrants, after you received the Names of the special Bailiffs, than without them; -- than making out blank Warrants?
Yes, it has been most usual, I think.
When the Names of the special Bailiffs are sent, Do you always insert them in the Warrants?
Yes. I do.
Pray, how is the Under-Sheriff ofappointed?
He is appointed by the Sheriff, by Deed.
Have you any written Authority from the Sheriff?
No further, than by Letters sent me sometimes, about the Business of the Office.
How were you appointed?
The Night before the Sheriff was sworn, I supped with him, and it was agreed, I shou'd act for him.
Who were present, when you were appointed, to act for the Sheriff?
The Sheriff, and the Under-Sheriff, were both present, and appointed me.
Were you appointed by any Instrument in Writing, or not?
I was not.
Is it usual for the Sheriff and Under-Sheriff, both to appoint an Agent, to act for the Sheriff?
I believe, the usual Way is by the Under-Sheriff only.
Is there no other Method of appointing a Person, to act for the Sheriff, but by Parol?
I don't know of any other Way.
Is the Seal to the Writ, the Seal of Office?
It is.
Have the Persons concern'd for the Sheriff of this County, usually that Sort of Seal?
Yes.
Where had you this Seal?
I had this from Mr., having lost my own.
Are you acquainted with the Method of suing out Process, in the Court of Session for this County?
Yes.
Is it usual, to send out Warrants, from the Sheriff's Office, with Blanks for the Names of the special Bailiffs to be inserted?
When special Bailiffs are desired, Warrants frequently issue with Blanks, for their Names to be inserted.
Do you know this to be frequently done?
Yes.
But is it not more usual, for the Names of the special Bailiffs to be put into the Warrants, in the Office, before they are sent out, than, for Warrants to issue with Blanks, for Bailiffs to be inserted afterwards?
Sometimes the Names of the special Bailiffs are inserted in the Office.
I say, is it not oftner done? more frequently?
I don't know but it may.
Don't you think it prudent, sometimes not to send the Names of the special Bailiffs to the Office? -- to conceal the Names till they are inserted by the Attorney?
I do.
Did your Father ever act as Agent for the Sheriff of this County?
He did.
Was it customary for your Father, to send out Warrants with Blanks, for the Names of the special Bailiffs to be inserted afterwards?
He did leave Blanks often in the Warrants.
I suppose you understood, that your Father had Authority so to do?
I always understood, that he had Authority to do it.
But did your Father never refuse, to send out blank Warrants, to your Knowledge?
Yes; he sometimes did, when he suspected the Attorney; but never, when he knew the Attorney to be a fair Practicer.<|endoftext|>Gentlemen, I must confess, this is a very heavy and severe Charge; but, I hope, it is not all Fact that is alledged against me. -- I shall not take up much time, but leave it to the Court.
Sir, you may depend upon it the Court will do you Justice. --
I am sure they will.
Was thein the Line, when thebegan to engage?
I can't tell; I did not see her then; when I saw her, she made a small Angle with us.
Where was you quartered?
Upon the lower Gun-Deck.
Was theto Leeward of the three other Ships a-stern?
Yes.
What Time did you see her?
Once before she came down.
Did you ever see theengage?
I saw her fire some Guns; but I think not within the Reach of Point-Blank, she was at too great a Distance.
In the first Part of the Engagement, was there any Ship for theto engage with?
The five sternmost Ships were not come up: they did not come up till two or three Hours after the Beginning.
What Ship could she then engage with?
The 2d or 3d Ship a-stern of theAdmiral.
What Ships were a-stern of theAdmiral?
Six. Five at a great Distance.
What Number were in a Line with theAdmiral?
Only one.
When you saw thefire, what Ship did she fire at?
The 2d or 3d Ship from theAdmiral.
Was it in the latter Part of the Engagement?
Yes, two Hours after we began; she might fire before that; and I believe she did.
Was she in a Line with the Admiral, when you first saw her?
She was a little upon our Weather Quarter.
Was she in a Line with the Admiral, at his first engaging?
I did not see her.
Was theever in a Line with you?
No.
Was you in a Line with the Admiral at first?
When we first brought to, the Admiral was as near in a Line as could be; he was rather upon our Weather-Bow.
When you saw the, was it in her power to engage closely?
She must have gone to Leeward of the other Ships if she had.
Could thehave engaged any Ships closely without going to Leeward of the?
If she had bore down in a Line with us at the first, he might afterwards have engaged properly with the otherShips that were coming up.
When theengaged, was it in her power to have engaged in a Line with you?
I believe she might.
Was you in a proper Line with the Admiral?
Yes, as exactly as could be.
Was it in the Power of theto give theany Assistance?
If she had crouded a-head, she might have lain upon our Quarter, and given us Assistance.
How far was thefrom you, when you first lost your Masts?
I saw her a little after we lost our Masts; and she was then a Mile and half from us.
Could you see what Sail she had set?
I could, but did not observe.
Did you see any Number of Shot from thefall short?
No.
How do you know she was not within Point-Blank?
I judge only by the Distance of the Ships, and she did not appear to be near enough.
At what Distance was thefrom the Ship she might have engaged?
If she had made proper Sail, and shot a-head those Ships between her and us, she might have given us the proper Assistance by engaging the.
At what Distance was thefrom you, when you saw her?
A Mile and half, or two Miles.
Was there any Wind then?
Yes.
Was there enough for a Ship to answer her Helm?
Yes.
Did she never edge down after you first saw her?
I did not see that she did, till after the Admiral wore.
Did she appear to be at Windward or to Leeward of the three Ships between you and her?
I think she appeared to Leeward of the three; she was a Mile and half from us, and a-stern with all.
How much upon your Quarter?
Two Points.
How many Points was the Admiral upon your Bow?
One Point.
Which of the four Ships a-stern then appeared to be most in a Line with the Admiral?
Thewas the Leewardmost of all, she was almost in the Line.
Was thenever nearer you than a Mile and half?
I believe not till they all bore away -- but I cannot be exact as to the Distance.
Did you see thehow she engaged?
I did not see her engaged till after the Wearing.
How long did you see thein the whole?
Two Hours and a half from the first I saw her.
Did you never see her out of your Stern Ports?
Yes, before we lost our Masts.
How near was theto the second a-stern of theAdmiral then.
Half a Mile, or something less.
What Ship did she fire at?
I believe it was at the; but I could not see plainly.
Did not thego to Leeward of you before the Wearing?
Not to my Knowledge, but I can't say she was not.
It is a remarkable thing, because you gave us three Cheers.
I do remember it now Captainmentions it, that he was then to Leeward of us just after our Masts were gone: It was before we wore; but I had forgot it.
Was it before the Wearing?
Yes.
Had thebore away then?
Yes.
Are you positive it was after thebore away?
I think she was bore away.
there is a Gentleman just come to Town, that was a Lieutenant in the; and if Capt.does not remember it, perhaps he may.
Where was you quartered?
Upon the middle Gun-Deck.
I know very little of her at the beginning. Soon after the Admiral ordered us to bear down; I went down to my Quarters, when our Masts were gone I went upon Deck, then I saw theto Leeward of the rest of our Ships a-stern of the.
Was this after your Masts were gone?
Yes.
Is that all you know?
Yes.
What Distance was she from you then?
She was upon our Weather Quarter, about half a Mile from us then.
How near was the Enemies Ships?
Within Point-blank of those Ships a-stern of us, that were coming up.
Which of 'em did she fire at?
The Head most.
Within Point-blank?
Yes.
How long did she engage her?
I cannot tell, they were firing before I came upon Deck.
How long did she engage from the Time you saw her.
Three Quarters of an Hour, after the Time I saw her.
What made her leave off?
She was engaging when I left the Ship, and went on Board of the Admiral, I did not observe what she was doing after that.
When you first observed the, how many Ships were between you and her?
There were Three between us, there were some of 'em further off than the: Thewas further off.
Was theto Leeward of all those Ships?
Yes, she was to Leeward of all the Four Sail.
Then there was hardly Room for the other Ships, if she was within half a Mile of you?
The others were further to Windward.
Was the, when you saw her, as far to Leeward as the Admiral, when she began to engage?
I think she was.
Did you ever observe any Signals, besides that for the Line of Battle, and that to engage, after your Masts were gone?
There was a Signal in the Morning for the Vice-Admiral to make more Sail; and after our Masts were gone, the Signal for Battle was haul'd down, and a white Flag was hoisted at the Fore-Topmast head, and a Gun was fired.
When was this?
It was when I went to seek for the Frigates to assist us.
What Time of the Day was it?
It was about Sun-sett; it was after we wore.
Did you ever see theto Leeward of your Ship?
I cannot say I did.
Do you remember her being cheer'd by you?
No: I was not on Board then.
When you saw her; what Position was the Enemy from her?
Some of 'em were a-stern upon her Quarter, and two Shot abreast of her.
How near was thethen to the Enemy?
Those which she fired at, she was within Gun-shot of: I saw their Shot go over her.
If thehad gone nearer, when you saw her, must not she have broke the Line?
Yes: She must have been to Leeward of us; and to Leeward of the Line.
How was the Admiral from you then?
Upon our Weather-bow.
How much upon your Weather-bow?
Two Points.
At what distance?
Half a Mile.
How long did the, engage within Point-blank, before the Admiral wore?
I was gone before the Admiral wore: she was then engaging.
How long was you cheer'd at first by the, before the Engagement began?
An Hour and half, or Two Hours.
How long did you see theengaging?
I am very sure Three Quarters of an Hour.
Was she near enough to do sufficient Execution?
She was within Point-blank, I saw the Shot from the Enemy go over her.
What distance was she from the Ship she engaged?
I do not remember how many Cables length: I believe Three Quarters of a Mile; I saw the Shot go over her.
Why do you think she was within Point-blank?
Because I saw the Shot go over her.
Did any Shot from the Enemy fall short of her?
No: I never did see any.
Was you engaging then?
Thewas then upon our Bow, and we could not bring our Guns to bear upon her.
Where was thethen?
To Windward of us, engaging the.
What was thedoing then?
The Hercules was firing at us, and we at her: but could not bring our Guns to bear upon the.
Did you receive much Damage from the?
I believe most of the Damage we received, was from the.
Did you ever see theengage the Enemy?
After we had done engaging, I saw a Ship more to Leeward, than any of the others a-stern, and believe it was thehailed us, cheered us, and came to Leeward of us.
Was thethen within Point-Blank?
The Shot fell short of her at first.
Was thewithin Point-Blank before you lost your Masts?
I cannot tell whether she was within Point-Blank.
How near was theat the nearest?
Within half a Mile.
Did you see thefire after you lost your Masts?
Yes.
If thehad bore down, and engaged the four Ships of the Enemy that were coming up closely, would not she have been to Leeward of the Line?
Yes, because those Ships were to Leeward of the.
Was she near enough to do Execution?
Yes, in the latter Part of the Action, after we had done engaging.
Did she make all the Sail she could from her first coming into the Fleet?
She was in the Line.
Could thehave bore down sooner than she did?
Yes, all the ships a-stern of us might.
What Ship could she have engaged then?
The, or the headmost of the four Ships that were coming up.
What Distance was the headmost of theShips from thethen?
I cannot say she was not far from them; if she had bore away she might have attacked them, or the Ship a-stern theAdmiral that plagued us.
What distance was the headmost of the fourShips coming up from you at the beginning?
At a great distance, 2 Miles and half a-stern, and to Leeward upon our Lee-Quarter.
What Distance was thethen?
She was sternmost of the four that were a-stern of us.
Was thewithin Gun-shot of the Enemy then?
No.
Could she have gone within Gun-shot without going to Leeward of the Line?
Yes, if she had bore down with us she might.
What Distance was thefrom you, when she engaged?
I cannot tell exactly.
What Ship was nearest you, when you lost your Masts?
The two middle Ships were.
Did you, when you lost your Masts, look at the Admiral?
Yes.
Where was he then?
Till we lost our Masts, he was to the South-East upon our Weather-Bow.
Did you observe any Signal the Admiral had out then, besides that for the Line of Battle, and to engage?
No.
Could thehave given you any Succour, if she had bore down properly.
Yes.
Could she have bore down?
There was Wind enough for them all to come up.
Was thein her Station at the beginning?
Yes.
If all the four Ships had bore down, would theShips coming up have weathered them?
No, I believe not.
How long were you engaged before you saw the?
I saw her just after we had lost our Masts.
Did she fire before that?
I cannot tell.
Did you see any Ships she could have fired at?
No. After our Masts were gone I could not see any Ships.
How long did theengage?
I don't know.
Did theescape within Point-Blank of the Enemy?
Their Shot could reach one another very well.
Where was you quartered?
Upon the upper Deck.
Was thewithin Point-Blank?
I cannot tell all the Ships a-stern of us were to Windward.
Was it ever in thepower to have engaged the Enemy.
I cannot say.
Where was thewhen you began to engage?
They were all to Windward. I did not mind her particularly.
How many of our Ships were a-stern of you?
The,,, and.
Might any of them have bore down and engaged as well as you?
I cannot say there was Wind enough.
Could not they then have bore down?
I think they might.
Did you ever see theengaged with the Enemy?
No.
Was thefiring when you saw her?
I never saw her fire.
How far was thefrom the?
I cannot say.
Where was you quartered?
At the Braces forwards.
What Ship could thehave engaged, if she had bore down in your Wake?
The second, the headmost of the 5 Sail a-stern of theAdmiral.
Was she within Gun-shot at first?
I think not.
If thehad bore down in your Wake, could she have assisted you against the.
Yes.
Did you receive any Damage from the?
Yes, a good deal.
Therefore, if thehad bore down, she might have assisted?
Yes.
Did you see theengage?
Yes.
At what Distance?
I cannot say.
After your Masts were gone, could she have gone nearer without breaking the Line?
I believe not; the four Ships a-stern would have fetch'd into theWake.
Was she in a Line with you?
No.
Did the Admiral haul off first?
The Admiral said to our Captain, Do you bear down, and I will follow you. -- The Admiral fired a Quarter-Deck Shot, and after half an Hour the Admiral hauled his Wind, and broke the Line.
What Distance was thefrom you at the first beginning?
Two or three Miles.
How far was the headmost of theShips from you then?
Two or three Miles.
Was thethe Leewardmost of the four Ships a-stern of you?
I cannot say.
Did you ever observe any Signal made by the Admiral after theMasts were gone, besides the Signal to engage?
No.
Do you think thewas within Point-Blank when she fired?
I cannot say.
Did you see any Shot fly over her?
No, I saw her Smoke.
Did you observe how long she engaged?
No.
When you saw her Smoke, was she at the proper Distance to engage the Enemy?
No, I cannot say, but I think not.
Whether was theor theat the greatest Distance?
I cannot say.
Did you never see theengaging properly?
No.
Did thego to Leeward of you after your Masts were gone?
I cannot say.
Do you remember any thing of any Cheers from the?
No.
When you lost your Masts, which of the four Ships a-stern was nearest you?
The.
What Time of the Day did you see thefire?
It was after two, and after our masts were gone; when the Masts went away, I saw two Ships a-stern fire at the Ships coming up, and I looked out to see which, and believe it was theand.
What Time did you see thelast?
Never after that Time.
Did you see the,, orfiring at the Time you say I could have come down?
About two I saw the, and believe you were firing.
If I had gone down, should not I have gone through their Fire?
I cannot say.<|endoftext|>