Good sonne go forward in this gentle humor, obserue this picture, it presents a maide of noble birth and excellent of parts, whom for our house and honor sake, I wish thou wouldst confesse to marrie.
To marrie father? why we shall haue children.
Why that's the ende of marriage, and the ioye of men.
O how you are deceiued, you haue but me, & what a trouble am I to your ioy? but father, if you long to haue some fruite of me, see father I will creepe into this stuborne earth and mixe my flesh with it, and they shall breede grasse, to fat oxen, asses and such like, and when they in the grasse the spring conuerts into beasts nourishment, then comes the fruite of this my body forth; then may you well say, seeing my race is so profitably increased, that good fat oxe, and that same large eard asse are my sonne sonnes, that caulfe with a white face is his faire daughter, with which, when your fields are richly filled, then will my race content you, but for the ioyes of children, tush tis gone, children will not deserue, nor parents take it: wealth is the onely father & the child, and but in wealth no man hath any ioy.
Some course deare sonne take for thy honor sake.
Then father heres a most excellent course.
This is some comfort yet.
If you will strait be gone and leaue me here, Ile stand as quietlye as anye lambe, and trouble none of you
An haplesse man.
How like you this humour yet my liege?
As of a holy fury, not a frensie.
See see my liege, he hath seene vs sure.
Nay looke how he viewesand makes him fine.
Yea my liege, and she as I hope wel obserued, hath vttered many kind conceits of hers.
Well Ile be gone, and when shee comes to Verones ordinarie, Ile haue her taken to my custodie.
Ile stay my liege, and see the euent of this.
Do so.
What haue I seene? howe am I burnt to dust with a new Sun, and made a nouell Phoenix, is she a woman that obiects this sight, able to worke the chaos of the world into gestion? O diuine aspect, the excellent disposer of the mind shines in thy beautie, and thou hast not chaunged my soule to sense but sense vnto my soule, and I desire thy pure societie, but euen as angels do, to angels flie.
Flie soule and follow him.
I maruaile much at my sonnes sodaine straunge behauiour.
Beare with him yet my Lord, tis but his humour: come, what shall we go to Verones ordinarie?
Yea for Gods sake, for I am passing hungry.
Yea, come Monsieur, will you walke?
What, will you go?
Yea sweet bird, I haue promised so.
Go to, you shall not go and leaue me alone.
For one meale gentle bird: Veron inuites vs to buy some iewels he hath brought of late from: Ile buy the best, and bring it thee, so thou wilt let me go.
Well said flattering, but tel me then what ladies will be there?
Ladies? why none.
No ladies vse to come to ordinaries, Madam.
Go to bird, tell me now the very truth.
None of mine honour bird, you neuer heard that ladies came to ordinaries.
O thats because I should not go with you.
Why tis not fit you should.
Well heark you bird, of my word you shall not go,vnlesse you will sweare to me, you will neither court nor kisse a dame in any sort, till you come home againe.
Whysweare I will not.
Go to, by this kisse.
Yea, by this kisse.
, learne by this when you are a wife.
I like the kissing well.
My lord Ile leaue you, your sonnehath made me melancholy with his humour, and Ile go locke my selfe in my close walke till supper time.
What, and not dine to day?
No my good head: come, you andwill fast togither.
With all my heart Madam.
Well Gentlemen Ile go see my sonne.
Birlady Gentlemen Ile go home to dinner.
Home to dinner? birlord but you shall not, you shall go with vs to the ordinarie, where you shall meete Gentlemen of so good carriage, and passing co~plements, it will do your hart good to see them, why you neuer saw the best sort of Gentlemen if not at ordinaries.
I promise you thats rare, my lord, and Monsieur, Ile meet you there presently.
Weele expect your comming.
Come on my maisters, shadow these tables with their white vailes, accomplish the court Cupboord, waite diligently to day for my credite and your owne, that if the meate should chance to be raw, yet your behauiors being neither rude nor raw, may excuse it, or if the meate should chaunce to be tough, be you tender ouer them in your attendance, that the one may beare with the other.
Faith some of them bee so hard to please, finding fault with your cheere, and discommending your wine, saying, they fare better at Verones for halfe the mony.
Besides, if there be any cheboules in your napkins, they say your nose or ours haue dropt on them, and then they throw them about the house.
But these bee small faultes, you may beare with them, young Gentlemen and wilde heades will be doing.
Come, whose wit was it to couer in this roome, name in the of God I trowee.
Why I hope this roome is as faire as the other.
In your foolish opinion: you might haue tolde a wise body so, and kept your selfe a foole still.
I cry you mercie, how bitter you are in your prouerbs.
So bitter I am sir.
O sweetI dare not say I loue thee.
Must you controule vs you proud baggage you?
Baggage? you are a knaue to call me baggage.
A knaue? my maister shall know that.
I will not see them.
Maister, here is your Maid vses her selfe so sawsily, that one house shall not holde vs two long, God willing.
Come hither huswife. Pardon mee sweete, I must make an angry face outwardly, though I smile inwardly.
Say what you will to me sir.
O you are a fine Gossip, can I not keepe honest seruants in my house, but you must controule them? you must be their mistres.
Why I did but take vp the cloth, because my mistresse would haue the dinner in an other roome, and hee called me baggage.
You called me knaue and foole, I thanke you small bones.
Go to, go to, she were wise enough would talke with you.
Go thy waies for the prowdest harlotrie that euer came in our house.
Let her alone boy, I haue scoold her I warant thee, she shall not be my maide long, if I can helpe it.
No, I thinke so sir, but what, shal I take vppe the cloath?
No, let the cloth lie, hither theile com first, I am sure of it, then If they will dine in the other roome, they shal.
Good morrow my host, is no body come yet?
Your worship is the first sir.
I was inuited by my cosen, to see your iewells.
I thanke his worship and yours.
Heres a prettie place for an ordinarie, I am very sory I haue not vsed to come to ordinaries.
I hope we shall haue your company hereafter.
You are very like so.
Good morrow my host, good morrow good Monsieur.
Good morrow to you sir,
What are we two the first? giue's the cardes, here come, this gentleman and I wil go to cardes while dinner be ready.
No truly I cannot play at cardes.
How! not play, O for shame say not so, how can a yong gentleman spend his time but in play, and in courting his Mistris: come vse this, least youth take too much of the other.
Faith I cannot play, and yet I care not so muchto venture two or three crownes with you.
O I thought what I shuld find of you, I pray God I haue not met with my match.
No trust me sir, I cannot play.
Hearke you my host, haue you a pipe of good Tabacco?
The best in the towne: boy drie a leafe.
Theres none in the house sir.
Drie a docke leafe.
My host, do you know Monsieur?
Yea passing well sir.
Why, he was taken learning trickes at oldhouse the muster mistris of all the smocktearers in Paris, and both the bawde and the pander were carried to the dungeon.
There was dungeon vpon dungeon, but call you her the muster-mistris of al the smocktearers in Paris?
Yea, for she hath them all trained vp afore her.
Good morow my host, good morow gentlemen al.
Good morow Monsieur, I am glad of your quicke deliuery.
Deliuery, what didst thou thinke I was with child?
Yea of a dungeon.
Why, how knew you that?
Whytold vs.
who told you of it?
One that I heard, by the lord.
O excellent, you are still playing the wagge.
Good morrow Gentlemen all, good morrow good Monsieur.
At your seruice.
I pray my lord look what a prety falling band he hath, tis pretty fantasticall, as I haue seen made, with good iudgement, great shew, and but tittle cost.
And so it ispromise you, who made itpray?
know not yfaith, I bought it by chance.
It is a very pretty one, make much of it.
Boy, I prethee call for a course napkin. Good morrow Gentlemen,would you had bin at the tenniscourt, you should haue seene me a beat Monsieur, and I gaue him fifteene and all his faults.
Thou didst more for him, then euer God wil do for thee.
Iaques,prethee fill me a cup of canary, three parts water
You shall haue all water and if it please you.
Who cald for a course napkin?
Marry, sweete heart, do you take the paines to bring it your selfe, haue at you by my hosts leaue.
Away sir, fie for shame.
Hearke you my host, you must marry this young wench, you do her mighty wrong els.
O sir, you are a merry man.
Good morrow gentlemen, you seeam as good as my word.
You are sir, andam very glad of it.
You are welcome Monsieur: but you are not, no not you.
No, welcome that Gentleman, tis no matter for me.
How sir? no matter to you, by this rusham angry with you, as if al our loues protested vnto you were dissembled, no matter for you?
Nay sweetbe not angry, I did but iest, as I am a Gentleman.
Yea but theres a difference of iesting, you wrong all our affections in so doing.
Faith and troth I did not, and I hope sirs you take it not so.
No matter for me, twas very vnkindly sayd, I must needs say so.
You see how they loue me.
I do sir, and I am very glad of it.
And I hope, you are not angry with me stil.
No faith, I am not so very a foole to be angry with one that cares not for me.
Do not I care for you? nay then.
What, dost thou cry?
Nay I do not cry, but my stomacke waters to thinke that you should take it so heauily, if I do not wish that I were cut into three peeces, and that these peeces were turned into three blacke puddings, and that these three blacke puddings were turned into three of the fairest Ladies in the land for your sake, I would I were hanged, what a diuel can you haue more then my poore heart?
Well harke you, in good faith you are too blame to put him to this vnkindnes, I prethee be friends with him.
Well, I am content to put vp this vnkindnesse for this once, but while you liue take heede of: no matter for me.
Why is it such a hainous word?
O the hainousest word in the world.
Wel, Ile neuer speake it more, as I am a gentleman.
No I pray do not.
My lord, will your lordship go to cards?
Yea with you Monsieur.
, will you play?
Pardon good Monsieur, if I had any disposition to gaming your company should draw me before any mans here.
, what will you play?
Play, yea with all my heart,pray lend me three pence.
Ile play no more.
Why, haue you wonne or lost?
Faith I haue lost two or three crownes.
Well to him againe, Ile be your halfe.
Sirrah,, while they are playing at cardes, thou and I will haue some excellent sport: sirrah, dost thou know that same Gentleman there?
No yfaith, what is he?
A very fine gull, and a neat reueller, one thats heire to a great liuing, yet his father keepes him so short, that his shirts will scant couer the bottom of his belly, for all his gay outside, but the linings be very foule and sweatie, yea and perhappes lowsie, with dispising the vaine shiftes of the world.
But he hath gotten good store of money now me thinks.
Yea, and I wonder of it, some ancient seruing man of his fathers, that hath gotten fortie shillings in fiftie years vpon his great good husbandrie, he swearing monstrous othes to pay him againe, and besides to doe him a good turne (when God shall heare his prayer for his father) hath lent it him I warrant you, but howsoeuer, we must speake him faire.
O what else!
God saue sweete Monsieur, what loose or win, loose or win?
Faith sir saue my selfe, and loose my money.
Theres a prouerbe hit dead in the necke like a Cony, why hearke thee, I could haue told thee before what he would haue said.
I do not thinke so.
No, thou seest heers a fine plumpe of gallants, such as thinke their wits singular, and their selues rarelyaccomplished, yet to shew thee how brittle their wittes be, I will speake to them seuerally, and I will tell thee before what they shall answer me.
Thats excellent, lets see that yfaith.
Whatsoeuer I say to Monsieur, he shall say, O sir, you may see an ill weed growes apace.
Come, lets see.
Now Monsieur, me thinks you are exceedingly growne since your comming to Paris.
O sir, you may see an ill weed growes a pace.
This is excellent, forward sir I pray.
What soere I say to, he shall answer me, blacke will beare no other hue, and that same olde Iustice, as greedie of a stale prouerbe, he shall come in the necke of that and say, Blacke is a pearle in a womans eye.
Yea, much yfayth.
Looke thee, here comes hither,, and I haue beene talking of thy complexion, andsay, that all the faire ladies in France would haue beene in loue with thee, but that thou art so blacke.
O sir blacke will beare no other hue.
O sir blacke is a pearle in a womans eye.
You say true sir, you say true sir, sirrah, whatsoeresay tothat is so busie at Cardes, he shall answer me, sblood, I do not meane to die as long as I can see one aliue.
Come let vs see you.
Why, I thought thou hadst beene dead,haue not heard thee chide all this while.
Sblood, I do not meane to die, as long as I can see one aliue.
Why but hearke you, I hope you cannot make this lord answer so roundly.
O, as right as any of them all, and he shall aunswere mee with an olde Latine Prouerbe, that is,.
Once more lets see.
My lord, your lordship could not play at this game verie latelie, and nowe me thinkes you are growne exceeding perfite.
O sir, you may see,.
Monsieur, here is a Gentleman and two Gentlewomen do desire to speake with you.
What are they come?, conuey them into the inwarde Parlour by the inwarde roome, and there is a brace of Crownes for thy labour, but let no bodie know of their being here.
warrant you sir.
See where they come: welcome my good lord and ladies, Ile come to you presently: so, now the sport begins, I shall starte the disguised King plaguilie, nay I shall put the ladie that loues me in a monstrous fright, when her husband comes and finds her here.
The Gentleman, and the two Gentlewomen desires your companie.
Ile come to them presently.
Gentlemen, Ile go speake with one, and come to you presently.
My lord, I would speake a worde with your lordship, if it were not for interrupting your game.
No, I haue done.
My lord there must a couple of ladies dine with vs to day.
Ladies? Gods my life I must be gone.
Why, hearke you my Lorde, I knewe not of their comming I protest to your Lordship, and woulde you haue mee turne such faire Ladies as these are away?
Yea but hearke you, did not you heare mee sweare to my Wife, that I woulde not tarie, if therewere any women, I wonder you would suffer any to come there.
Why you swore but by a kisse, and kisses are no holie things, you know that.
Why but hearke you, indeed I would be very loath to do any thing, that if my wife should know it, should displease her.
Nay then you are to obsequious, hearke you, let me intreate you, and Ile tell you in secrete, you shall haue no worse company then the Kings.
Why will the King be there?
Yea, though disguised.
Who are the ladies?
The flowers of Paris, I can tell you, faire countesse, and the ladie.
Monsieur, the gentleman and the two Gentlewomen desire your companie.
Ile come to them straight: butcome hither I prethee, go to, and tell him that the Countesse, and the ladiebe here at thy maisters house: and if it come in question hereafter, denie that thou tolde him any such thing.
What, is this all? Sblood Ile denie it, and forsweare it too.
My Lorde, Ile goe and see the roome be neate and fine, and come to you presently.
Yea but hearke you, I prethee take such order that they be not knowne of any women in the house.
O how shuld they now to his wife go yfaith!
Hearke you, Monsieur, I pray let me speak a worde with you.
With all my heart, I pray looke to my stake, theres three pence vnder the Candlesticke.
I pray see, do you know the Countesse, and the ladie?
Do I know the ladie? I knew her before she was borne, why do you aske me?
Why, they are both here at my masters house.
What, is Mistrisat an ordinarie?
Yea that she is.
By skies and stones Ile go and tel her father.
What you are out of breath me thinks Monsieur?
It is no matter Madam, it is spent in your seruice, that beare your age with your honesty, better then an hundred of these nise gallants, and indeed it is a shame for your husband, that contrary to his oath made to you before dinner, he shoud be now at the ordinary with that light huswife, which I could not chuse but come and tell you; for indeede it is a shame that your motherly care should be so slightly regarded.
Out on thee strumpet and accurst, and miserable dame.
Well, there they are: nothing els now, to her husband go I.
Nothing els quoth you, can there be more? O wicked man, would he play false, that would so simply vow, and sweare his faith, and would not let me be displeased a minute, but he would sigh, and weepe til I were pleased, I haue a knife within thats rasor sharp, and I wil lay an yron in the fire, making it burning hot to mark the strumpet, but t'will bee colde too ere I can come thither, doe something wretched woman, staies thou here?
My lorde, the roome is neate and fine, wilt please you go in?
Gentlemen, your dinner is ready.
And we are ready for it.
, shut the doores let no body come in.
Where be these puritanes, these murderers, let me come in here?
Where is the strumpet?
where is this harlot, let vs come in here.
What shall we do? the streets do wonder at vs, and we do make our shame knowne to the world, let vs go, and complaine vs to the King.
Come, will you go?
No no I scorne to go; no King shal heare my plaint, I will in silent liue a man forlorne, mad, and melancholy, as a cat, and neuer more weare hat band on my hat.
What dost thou meane? thou must not hang on me.
O good lord, haue me home with you, you may excuse all to my father for me.
O my lord, be not so rude to leaue her now.
Alas man, and if my wife should see it, I were vndone.
Pursue them sirs, and takingfrom him, conuay her presently tohouse. What vilain was it that hath vttered this?
Why twas euen I, I thanke you for your gentle tearmes, you giue me vilain at the first, I wonder wheres this old doter, what doth he thinke we feare him.
O monstrous man, what, wouldst thou haue him take vs?
Would I quoth you, yea by my troth would I, I know he is but gone to cal the constable, or to raise the streets.
What meanes the man trow? is he mad?
No, no, I know what I do, I doe it of purpose, I long to see him come and raile at you, to call you harlot, and to spurne you too, O you'l loue me a great deale the better, and yet let him come, and if he touch but one thread of you, Ile make that thread his poyson.
I know not what to say.
Speake, do you loue me?
Yea surely do I.
Why then haue not I reason that loue you so dearely as I do, to make you hatefull in his sight, that I might more freely enioy you.
Why let vs be gon my kind, and not be wondered at in the open streets.
Ile go with you through fire, through death, throgh hell, come giue me your owne hand, my owne deare heart, this hand that I adore and reuerence, and loath to haue it, touch an olde mans bosome, O let me sweetely kisse it;
Out on thee wretch, he hath bit me to the bone, O barbarous Canibal, now I perceiue thou wilt make me a mocking stocke to all the world.
Come, come, leaue your passions, they cannot mooue mee, my father and my mother died both in a day, and I rung mee a peale for them, and they were no sooner brought to the church and laide in their graues, but I fetcht me two or three fine capers aloft, and took my leaue of them, as men do of their mistresses at the ending of a galiard;.
O brutish nature, how accurst was I euer to indure the sound of this damned voice?
Well, and you do not like my humor, I can be but sory for it, I bit you for good will, and if you accept it, so, if no, go.
Vilain, thou didst it in contempt of me.
Well, and you take it so, so be it: harke you Madam, your wisest course is, euen to become puritane againe, put off this vaine attire, and say, I haue despised all: thanks my God, good husband, I do loue thee in the Lord, and he (good man) will thinke all this you haue done, was but to shew thou couldest gouerne the world, and hide thee as a rainebow doth a storme: my dainty wench, go go, what shall the flattering words of a vaine man make you forget your dutie to your husband? away, repent, amend your life, you haue discredited your religion for euer.
Well wench, for this foule shame thou puttest on me, the curse of all affection light on thee.
Go, go, why this is excellent, I shal shortly become a schoolemaster, to whom men will put their wiues, to practise; well now wilgo set the Queene vpo~ the King, and tell her where he is close with his wench: and he that mends my humor, take the spurres: sit fast, for by heauen, ile iurke the horse you ride on.
Well Gentlemen,am vtterly vndone without your good helpes, it is reported thatreceiued certaine ladies or gentlewomen into my house: no heres my man, my maid, and my boy, now if you saw any, speak boldly before these Gentlemen.
saw none sir.
Nor I, by my maidenhead.
Nor I, as I am a man.
Wel my host, weele go answere for your house at this time, but if at other times you haue had wenches, and would not let vs know it, we are the lesse beholding to you.
Peraduenture the more beholding to him, but I laye my lifehath deuised some ieast, he gauevs the slip before dinner.
Well Gentlemen, since we are so fitly mette, Ile tell you an excellent subiect for a fit of myrth, and if it bee well handled.
Why, what is it?
Why man,is grown maruelous malecontent, vpon some amorous disposition of his mistres, and you know he loues a mease of cream, and a spice-cake with his heart, andam sure he hath not dined to day, and he hath taken on him the humour of the yong lord, and we will set a mease of creame, a spice-cake, and a spoone, as the armour, picture, and apparell was set in the way of, which I doubt not but will woorke a rare cure vpon his melancholie.
Why, this is excellent, Ile go fetch the creame.
Andthe cake.
Andthe spoone.
See where hee comes as like the lordas may be, nowe you shall heare him begin with some Latin sentence that hee hath remembred euer since hee read his Accidence.
O sillie state of things, for things they be that cause this sillie state: and what is a thing, a bable, a toy, that stands men in small stead:
but what haue we here? what vanities haue we here?
He is strongly tempted, the lord strengthen him, see what a vaine he hath.
O cruell fortune, and dost thou spit thy spite at my poore life: but O sowre creame what thinkest thou that I loue thee still? no, no, faire and sweete is my mistries, if thou haddest strawberries and sugar in thee: but it may bee thou art set with stale cake to choke me: well taste it, and trie it, spoonefull by spoonefull: bitterer and bitterer still, but O sowre creame, wert thou an Onion, since Fortune set theefor mee, I will eate thee, and I will deuour thee in spite of Fortunes spite, choake I, or burst I, mistres for thy sake, to end my life eate I this creame and cake.
So he hath done, his Melancholy is well eased I warrant you.
Gods my life Gentlemen, who hath beene at this creame?
Creame, had you creame? where is your creame? Ile spend my penny at your creame.
Why, did not you eate this creame?
Talke not to me of creame, for such vaine meate I do despise as food, my stomack dies drowned in the cream boules of my mistres eyes.
Nay stay.
No not I, not I.
O he is ashamed yfayth: but I will tell thee howe thou shalt make him mad indeed, say his mistres for loue of him hath drowned her selfe.
Sblood, that will make him hang himselfe.
haue at them yfayth with a lame counterfeite humor: ake on rude arme, I care not for thy paine, I got it nobly in the kings defence, and in the gardiance of my faire Queenes right.
O tell me sweet, how fares the king? or what his right was that thou didst defend?
That you shall know when other things are told.
Keepe not the Queene too long without her longing.
No, for I tell you it is a daungerous thing.
Little care cruell men how women long.
What would you haue me then put poyson in my breath, and burne the eares of my attentiue Queene.
Tell me what ere it be, Ile beare it all.
beare with my rudenesse then in telling it, for alas you seecan but act it with the left hande, this is my gesture now.
Tis well enough.
Yea well enough you say, this recompence haue I for all my woundes: then thus the King inamoured of an other ladie compares your face to hers, and saies that yours is fat and flat, and that your neather lip was passing big.
O wicked man, doth he so sodainlie condemne my beautie, that when he married me he thought diuine: for euer blasted be that strumpets face, as all my hopes are blasted, that did change them.
Nay Madam, though he saide your face was fat, and flat, and so forth, yet he liked it best, and said, a perfect beautie should be so.
O did he so! why that was right euen as it should be.
You see now Madam, howe much too hastie you were in your griefes.
If he did so esteeme of me indeed, happie am I.
So may your highnesse be that hath so good a husband, but hell hath no plague to such an one as I.
Indeed Madam, you haue a bad husband: truly then did the king growe mightily in loue with the other ladie, and swore, no king could more inriched be, then to inioy so faire a dame as shee.
O monstrous man, and acurst most miserable dame!
But saies the king I do inioy as faire, & though I loue in al honored sort, yet Ile not wro~g my wife for al the world
This proues his constancie as firme as brasse.
It doth, it doth: O pardon me my lord, that I mistake thy royall meaning so.
In heauen your highnesse liues, but I in hell.
But when he vewd her radient eyes againe, blinde was hee strooken with her feruent beames: and now goodKing he gropes about in corners voide of the chearefull light should guide vs all.
O dismall newes, what is my soueraigne blind?
Blind as a Beetle madam, that a while houering aloft, at last in cowsheds fall.
Could her eyes blind him?
Eyes or what it was I know not, but blind I am sure he is as any stone.
Come bring me to my Prince my lord that I may leade him, none aliue but I may haue the honour to direct his feete.
How lead him madam? why hee can go as right as you, or any here, and is not blind of eyesight.
Of what then?
Of reason.
Why thou saidest he wanted his cheerfull light.
Of reason stillmeant, whose light you knowe should cheerefully guide a worthie King, for he doth loue her, and hath forced her into a priuate roome where now they are.
What mocking chaunges is there in thy wordes fond man, thou murtherest me with these exclaimes.
Why madam tis your fault, you cut mee off before my words be halfe done.
Forth and vnlade the poyson of thy tongue.
Another lord did loue this curious ladie, who hearing that the King had forced her, as she was walking with another Earle, ran straightwaies mad for her, and with a friend of his, and two or three blacke ruffians more, brake desperately vpon the person of the King, swearing to take from him, in traiterous fashion, the instrument of procreation: with them I fought a while,and got this wound, but being vnable to resist so many, came straight to you to fetch you to his ayde.
Why raised you not the streetes?
That I forbore, because I would not haue theworld, to see what a disgrace my liege was subiect to, being with a woman in so meane a house.
Whose daughter was it that he forst I pray?
Your daughter sir.
Whose sonne was that ranne so mad for her?
Your sonne my lord.
O Gods, and fiends forbid.
I pray sir, from whom did he take the Ladie?
From your good Lord.
O Lord I beseech thee no.
Tis all too true, come follow the Queen and I, where I shall leade you.
O wretched Queene, what would they take from him?
The instrument of procreation.
Now was there euer man so much accurst, that when his minde misgaue him, such a man was haplesse, to keep him company? yet who would keep him company but I, O vilde, my wife and I are bound to curse thee while we liue, but chiefely I, well: seeke her, or seek her not; find her, or find her not, I were as good see how hell opens, as looke vpon her.
We haue yfaith, stop thou him there, and I wil meet him here.
Well, I will venture once to seek her.
Gods Lord, my Lord, come you this way, why your wife runnes ranging like as if she were mad, swearing to slit your nose if she can catch you.
What shal I do at the sight of her and hern.
Gods precious my Lord, come you this way, your wife comes ranging with a troope of dames, likedrunken foes, iust as you go, shift for your selfe my Lord.
Stay good.
No not I my Lord.
How now Iaques, whats the newes?
None but good my Lord.
Why hast not seene my wife run round about the streets.
Not I my Lorde, I come to you from my maister, who would pray you to speake to, thatmight speake to the King, that my masters lottery for his iewells may go forward, he hath made the rarest deuice that euer you heard, we haue fortune in it, and she our maide plaies, and I, and my fellow carrie two torches, and our boy goes before and speakes a speech, tis very fine yfaith sir.
Sirra in this thou maiest highly pleasure me, let me haue thy place to beare a torch, that I may look on my wife, and she not see me, for if I come into her sight abruptly, I were better be hanged.
O sir you shall, or any thing that I can do, Ile send for your wife to.
I prethee do.
This is the house where the mad Lord did vow to do the deed, draw all your swoords couragious gentlemen, Ile bring you there where you shall honor win, but I can tell you, you must breake your shinne.
Who will not breake his necke to saue his King: set forward.
Yea, much good can I do with a wounded arme, Ile go and call more helpe.
Others shall go, nay we will raise the streets, better dishonor, then destroy the King.
Sbloud I know not how to excuse my villany, I would faine be gone.
Ile geld the adulterous goate, and take from him the instrument, that plaies him such sweete musicke.
O rare, this makes my fiction true: now ile stay.
Arrest these faithlesse traitrous gentlemen.
What is the reason that you call vs traitours?
Nay, why do you attempt such violence against the person of the King?
Against the King, why this is strange to me.
How now my masters, what? weapons drawne, come you to murder me.
How fares my Lord?
How fare I? well, but you yfaith shall get me speak for you another time; he got me here to wooe a curious Lady, and she temptes him, say what I can, ouer what state I will in your behalfe, she will not yeeld.
Yfaith my liege, what a hard heart hath she, well hearke you, I am content your wit shall saue your honesty for this once.
Peace, a plague on you, peace; but wherefore asked you how I did?
Because I feared that you were hurte my Lord.
Hurt, how I pray?
Why, hurt Madam, I am well againe.
Do you aske? why he told meand this his friend, threatned to take away.
To take away, what should they take away.
Name it Madam.
Nay, I pray name it you.
Why then, thus it was my liege, I told her, and this his friende threatned to take away, and if they could the instrumentof procreation, and what was that now, butbeeing a fayre woman, is not shee the instrument of procreation, as all women are.
O wicked man.
Go to, go to, you are one of those fiddles too yfaith.
Well pardon my minion, that hath frayd you thus, twas but to make you mery in the end.
I ioy it endes so well, my gracious Lord.
But say my gracious Lord, is no harme done, betweene my louing daughter, and your grace?
No, of my honor and my soule.
The fire of loue which she hath kindled in me being greater then my heate of vanity, hath quite expelled.
Come, receiue with your lost wittes your loue, though lost; I know youle yeeld, my lord and you her father.
Most ioyfully my Lord.
And for her part I know her dispositio~ well enough.
What, will you haue her?
Yea mary will I.
Ile go and tellpresently.
Monsieur, I pray let me speake with you, I come to you from the Lord, who would desire you to speake to the King for my masters lottery, and he hath my place to beare a torch, for bare faced hee dares not look vpon his wife, for his life.
O excellent, Ile further thy masters lottery and it be but for this iest only, harke you my liege, heres the poore man hath bin at great charges for the preparation of a lottery, and he hath made the rarest deuice, that I know you wil take great pleasure in it, I pray let him present it before you athouse.
Whith all my heart, can you be ready so soone?
Presently and if it like your grace.
But hearke you, how shall we do for euery mans posie.
Will you all trust me with the making of them?
With all our hearts.
Why then Ile go to make the poses and bringto the lottery presently.
Surely the world is full of vanitie, a woman must take heed she do not heare a lewd man speake, for euery woman cannot when shee is tempted, when the wicked fiend gets her into his snares escape like me, for graces measure is not so filled vp, nor so prest downe in euery one as me, but yetpromise you a little more: well, Ile go seeke my head, who shal take me in the gates of his kind armes vntoucht of any.
What Madam are you so pure now?
Yea, would not you be pure?
No puritane.
You must be then a diuell, I can tell you.
O wife where hast thou beene?
where did I tell you I would bepray.
In thy close walke thou saidst.
And wasnot?
Trulyknow not, I neither looked nor knocked, fortold me that you, and fairewere at Verones ordinarie.
? my lord you are a wise man to beleeue a fool.
Well my good head, for my part I forgiue you: but surely you do much offend to be suspicious: where there is no trust, there is no loue, and where there is no loue twixt man and wife, theres no good dealing surely: for as men should euer loue their wiues, so should they euer trust the~, for what loue is there where there is no trust?
She tels you true, my lord.
Shee doth my liege; and deare wife pardon this andwill neuer be suspicious more.
Whysay,do.
Looke you my liege,haue done simple seruice amongest you, here is one had hanged himselfe for loue, thinking his Mistresse had done so for him: well, see your Mistresse liues.
And doth my Mistresse liue?
Shee doth, O noble knight, but not your Mistresse now.
Sblood, but she shall for me, or for no body else.
How now, what a traitor, draw vpon the King.
Yea, or vpon any woman here in a good cause.
Well sweetelet her marry, Ile get thee a wife worth fifteene of her, wilt thou haue one that cares not for thee?
Not I by the Lord, I scorne her, Ile haue her better if I can get her.
Why thats well said.
What Madam, are you turned puritan againe?
When was I other, pray?
Marie Ile tell you when, when you went to the Ordinarie, and when you made false signes to your husband, which I could tell him all.
Cursed be he that maketh debate twixt man & wife.
O rare scripturian! you haue sealed vp my lips, a hall, a hall, the pageant of the Butterie.
What is he?
This is Verones sonne, my liege.
What shall he do?
Speak some speach that his father hath made for him
Why is he good at speeches?
O he is rare at speaches.
Faire ladies most tender, and nobles most slender, and gentles whose wits be scarce.
My host, why do you call vs nobles most slender?
And it shall please your Grace, to be slender is to be proper, and therfore where my boy saies nobles most slender, it is as much to say, fine and proper nobles.
Yea, but why do you call vs gentles whose wits are scarce.
To be scarce, is to be rare: and therefore where as he sayes Gentles whose wits be scarce, is as much as to say, Gentles whose wits be rare.
Well, forwards trunchman.
Faire ladies most tender, and nobles most slender, and gentles whose wittes bee scarce, Queene Fortune doth come with her trumpe, and her drumme, as it may appeare by my voice.
Come hither, are you a schoolemaister, where was Fortune Queene, of what countrey or kingdome?
Wy sir, Fortune was Queene ouer all the world.
Thats a lie, theres none that euer conquered all the world, but maister, I am sure of that.
O rare Monsieur, who would haue thought hee could haue found so rare a fault in the speach.
Ile alter it if it please your grace.
No, tis very well.
Father I must begin againe they interrupt me so.
I beseech your grace giue the boy leaue to begin again.
With all my heart, tis so good we cannot heare it too oft.
Faire ladies most tender, and nobles most slender, and gentles whose wittes are scarce, Queene Fortune doth come with her Fife, and her Drum, as it doth appeare by my voice, here is Fortune good, but il by the rood, and this naught but good shall do you, dealing the lots out of our pots, and so good Fortune to you sir.
Looke you my liege, how hee that caries the torch trembles extreamly.
I warrant tis with care to carie his torch well.
Nay there is something else in the wind: why my host, what meanes thy manto tremble so?
Hold still thou knaue, what art thou afraid to looke vpon the goodly presence of a king: hold vp for shame.
Alas poore man, he thinks tishis man: poore lord, how much is he bound to suffer for his wife?
Hearke you mine host, what goodly person is that? is it Fortune her selfe?
Ile tell your Maiestie in secrete who it is, it is my maide.
I promise you she becomes her state rarely.
Well my liege, you were all content that I should make your poses: well here they be euery one: giue Master Verone his fiue crownes.
Theres mine andthe Queenes.
Theirs ours.
And there is mine and.
Comethy money.
You must lend me some, for my boy is runne away with my purse.
Thy boy?neuer knew any that thou hadst.
Had not I a boy three or foure yeares ago, and he ran away.
And neuer since he went thou hadst not a peny, but stand by, Ile excuse you. But sirrah, thou shalt stand on one side and reade the prises, and I will stand on the other and read the Poses.
Content.
Come on Queene Fortune, tell euery man his posie, this is orderly, the King and Queene are first.
Come let vs see what goodly poses you haue giuen vs.
This is your Maiesties, At the fairest, so it bee not.
A plague vpon you, you are still playing the villaines with me.
This is the Queenes, Obey the Queene: and she speakes it to her husband, or to Fortune, which she will.
A prise: your Maiesties is the summe of foure shillings in gold.
Why how can that be, there is no such coyne.
Here is the worth of it, if it please your grace.
Well, whats for me?
A heart of gold.
A goodly iewell,
Countand.
Whats my posie sir I pray?
Mary this my Lord, Of all fortunes friends, that hath ioy in this life, He is most happy that puts a sure trust in his wife.
A very good one sir, I thanke you for it.
Whats mine I pray?
Mary this Madam, Good fortune, be thou my good fortune bringer, And make me amends for my poore bitten finger.
Who bit your finger wife?
No body; tis vaine posie.
Blanke for my lord, for his wife a posie, a apaire of holy beades with a crucifix.
O bommination Idole, Ile none of them.
Keepe them thy selfe Veron, she will not haue them.
and, I haue fitted your lordship for a posie.
Why what is it?
And what is mine sir?
A serious one I warrant you, change for the better.
Thats not amisse.
A prize:hath a cats eyes, orrod of gold, set with Iacinths and Emeraldes.
What is for?
hath the two serpents heads set with diamonds.
What my host?
What? is he in for his owne iewells?
O what els my liege, tis our bountie, and his posie is to tel you the truth in words plaine and mild,loues his maide, and she is great with child.
What Queene fortune with child, shall we haue yongfortunes my host?
I am abused, and if it please your Maiestie.
Ile play no more.
No faith you need not now, you haue plaid your bellie full alreadie.
Stand still good, they do but ieast.
Yea, but I like no such ieasting.
Come great Queene Fortune, let see your posies, what madam, alas, your ladiship is one of the last.
What is my posie sir I pray?
Marie Madame your posie is made in manner and forme of an Eccho, as if you were seeking your husbande, and fortune should be the Eccho, and this you say: where is my husbande hid so long vnmaskt? maskt, sayes the Eccho: but in what place sweet Fortune? let me heare: heare, sayes the Eccho.
There you lie Eccho, for if he were here we must needes see him.
Indeed sweete King, there me thinkes the Eccho must needes lie, if hee were here, wee must needes see him, tis one of them that caries the torches: no that cannot be neither, and yet by the Masse heres: why my host, did not you tell me thatshould be a torchbearer? who is this? Gods my life, my lord!
And you be Gentlemen, let me go.
Nay come your way, you may be well enough ashamed to shew your face that is a periured wretch, did not you sweare, if there were any wenches at the ordinarie, you would straight come home?
Why, who tolde you Madam, there were any there?
He that will stand to it,my liege.
Who I stand to it! alas, I tolde you in kindnesse, and good will, because I would not haue you companie long from your husband.
Why loe, you bird, how much you are deceiued.
Why wherefore were you afraid to be seene?
Who I afraid? alas I bore a torch to grace thishonorable presence: for nothing els sweete bird.
Thankes good, see lady with what wrong
you haue pursued your most inamored lord: but come, now
all are friends, now is this day spent with vnhurtfull motiues of
delight, and ouer ioyes more my senses at the night: and now
for, if all will follow my deuise, his beauteous loue
and he shall married be, and here I solemnly inuite you all
home to my court, where with feastes wee will crowne this
myrthfull day, and vow it to renowne.