Here commeth.
I see, that these Philosophers are here attending for vs.
They were not Philosophers, if they knewe not their dueties.
But I much meruaileshoulde bee so dogged.
I do not think but his excuse wilbe better thenmessage.
I wil go see him, because I long to see him that would commaundeto come, to whom all the world is like to come.& the reste sithence my comming fromto, from a place of conqueste to a pallace of quiet, I haue resolued with my self in my court to haue as many Philosophers as I had in my camp soldiers. My court shalbe a schoole, wherein I wil haue vsed as great doctrine in peace, as I did in warre discipline.
We are al here ready to be commanded, & glad we are that we are commanded, for that nothing better becommeth kinges then literature, which maketh them come as neere to the Gods in wisdome, as they doe in dignitie.
It is so, but yet there is among you, yea & of your bringing vp, that sought to destroy,,, whose treasons againste his prince shall not bee borne out with the reasons of his Phylosophy.
If euer mischiefe entred into the hearte of, letsuffer for it, but thateuer imagined any such thing of,doth denie.
Well, kindred may blind thee, and affection mee, but in kinges causes I will not stande to schollers arguments. This meeting shalbe for a co~mandement, that you all frequente my courte, instructe the young with rules, confirme the olde with reasons: lette your liues be answerable to your learninges, leaste my proceedinges be contrary to my promises.
You sayde you woulde aske euerye one of them a question, which yester night none of vs could aunswere.
I will., of all beastes, which is the subtillest?
That which man hetherto neuer knew.
, how should a man bee thought a God?
In doing a thing vnpossible for a man.
, which was first, the day or the night?
The day by a day.
In deede straunge questions must haue straung answers., what say you, is life or death the stronger?
Life, that suffereth so many troubles.
, how long should a man liue?
Till he think it better to die then liue.
, whether doth the sea or the earth bring forth most creatures?
The earth, for the sea is but a parte of the earth.
, me thinkes they haue answered all well, and in such questions I meane often to trye them.
It is better to haue in your court a wise manne, then in your ground a golden mine. Therefore would I leaue war, to studie wisdome, were I.
So would I, were I. But come let vs go and giue release, as I promised to ourthralles.
Thou art fortunate, thatis thy scholler.
And all you happy that he is your souereigne.
I could like the man well, if he could be conte~ted to be but a man.
He seeketh to draw neere to the Gods in knowledge, not to be a God.
Let vs questio~ a litle with, why he went not with vs to., thou didst forget thy duetie, that thou wentst not with vs to the king.
And you your profession, that you went to the king.
Thou takest as great pride to be peeuish, as others do glory to be vertuous.
And thou as great honor being a Philosopher to be thought courtlike, as others shame that be courtiers, to be accounted Philosophers.
These austere maners set aside, it is wel known that thou didst counterfeit money.
And thou thy manners, in that thou didst not counterfeit money.
Thou hast reason to contemn the court, being both in bodye and minde too crooked for a courtier.
As good bee crooked, and endeuour to make my selfe straight from the court, as to bee straighte, and learne to be crooked at the court.
Thou thinkest it a grace to be opposite against.
And thou to be iumpe with.
Let vs goe: for in co~temning him, we shal better please him, then in wondring at him.
, what doest thou thinke of?
To befurious, let vs goe.
Beholdwhere thy maister is, seeking either for bones for his dinner, or pinnes for his sleeues. I will goe salute him.
Doe so, but mum not a word that you sawe.
Then staye thou behinde, and I will goe with.
All hayleto your proper person.
All hate to thy peeuish conditions.
O Dogge.
What dost thou seeke for here?
For a man and a beast.
That is easie without thy light to be founde, be not all these men?
Called men.
What beast is it thou lookest for?
The beast my man.
He is a beast in deede that wil serue thee.
So is he that begat thee.
What wouldest thou do, if thou shuldest finde?
Giue him leaue to doe as hee hath done beefore.
Whats that?
To runne away.
Why, hast thou no neede of?
It were a shame forto haue neede of, and forto haue no neede of.
But put the case he were gone, wouldst thou entertaine any of vs two?
Vppon condition.
What?
That you should tell mee wherefore anye of you both were good.
Why, I am a scholler, and well seene in Philosophy.
And I a prentice, and well seene in paynting.
Well then, be thou a painter to amende thine ill face, and thoua Philosopher to correct thine euil manners. But who is that?
I care not whoe I were so I were not.
You are taken tardie.
Let vs slip aside, to see the salutation betweeneand his maister.
, thou knowest the last daye I threw away my dish, to drink in my hand, because it was superfluous, now I am determined to put away my man, and serue my selfe:.
Maister, you know a while agoe I ran away, so doe I meane to doe againe,.
I know I haue no money, neither will I haue euer a man: for I was resolued long sithe~ce to put away both my slaues, money and.
So was I determined to shake off both my dogges, hunger and
O sweete concent betweene a crowde and a Iewes harpe.
Come, let vs reconcile them
It shal not neede: for this is their vse, now do they dine one vpon an other.
How nowe, art thou gone from thy mayster.
No, I didde but nowe binde my selfe to him.
Why, you were at mortall iars.
In faith no, we brake a bitter iest one vppon another.
Why, thou art as dogged as he.
My father knew them both litle whelpes.
Well, I wil hie me after my maister.
Why, is it supper time with?
I, with him at al times when he hath meate.
Why then euerye man to his home, and let vs steale out againe anon.
Where shall we meete.
Why, at.
O,, thou blessest me.
Stand aside sir boy, till you bee called., how doe yee like the sweete face of?
I cannot but commend the stout courage of.
Without doubthad som great man to her father.
You knowhadto her brother.
stil in thy mouth, art thou not in loue?
Not I.
Not withyou meane, wherein you resemble the Lapwing, who crieth most where her neast is not. And so you lead me from espying your loue with, you cry.
Coulde I aswell subdue kingdomes, as I can my thoughtes, or were I as farre from ambition, as I am from loue, all the world would account me as valiaunt in armes as I know my self moderate in affection.
Is loue a vice?
It is no vertue.
Well, nowe shalt thou see what small difference I make betweeneand. And sith thou hast beene alwaies partaker of my triumphes, thou shalt be partaker of my tormentes. I loue, I loue I loue, a thing farre vnfit for a Macedonian, for a king, for. Whye hangest thou downe thy head? blushing to hear that whichI am not ashamed to tell.
Might my wordes craue pardon and my counsell credit, I woulde both discharge the duetie of a subiect, for so I am, and the office of a friend, for so I wil.
Speake, for whatsoeuer is spoken,speaketh to.
I cannot tell, whether the reporte be more shamefull to be heard, or the cause sorowfull to be beleeued? What, is the sonne of, king of Macedon become the subiect of, the captiue of? Is that minde, whose greatnes the world coulde not containe, drawn within the compasse of an idle alluring eie? Wil you handle the spindle with, when you shuld shake the speare with? Is the warlike sound of drumme and trumpe turned to the softe noyse of lire and lute, the neighing of barbed steedes, whose loudnes filled the ayre with terrour, and whose breathes dimmed the sunne with smoake, conuerted to delicate tunes and amorous glaunces? O, that soft and yeelding minde should not bee in him, whose hard and vnconquered heart hath made so many yeelde. But you loue, ah griefe, but whom?, ah shame, a maide forsooth vnknowne, vnnoble, and who can tell whether immodest? whose eies are framed by arte to inamour, and whose heart was made by nature to enchaunt. I, but she is bewtiful, yea, but not therefore chaste: I, but she is comly in al partes of the body: yea, but she may be crooked in some parte of the mind: I, but she is wise, yea, but she is a woman: Bewtie is like the blackberry, which seemeth red, when it is not ripe, resembling pretious stones that are polished with honney, which the smother they look, the sooner they breake. It is thought wonderful among the sea men, thatof all fishes the swifteste is found in the belly of theof all the slowest; And shal it not seeme monstrous to wise men, that the hearte of the greatest conquerour of the worlde, should be foundin the handes of the weakest creature of nature? of a woman? of a captiue?haue faire skinnes, but fowle liuers, Sepulchers fresh colours, but rotten bones, women faire faces, but false heartes. Rememberthou haste a campe to gouerne, not a chamber, fall not from the armour ofto the armes of, fro~ the fiery assaults of warre, to the maidenly skirmishes of loue from displaying the Eagle in thine ensigne, to sette downe the sparrow. I sighthat where fortune could not counquer, folly should ouercome. But behold al the perfection that may be in, a haire curling by nature, not arte: sweete alluring eies, a faire face made in despite of, and a stately porte in disdaine of, a witte apt to conceaue, and quick to aunswere, a skin as softe as silke, and as smooth as iet, a long white hand, a fine little foote, to conclude, all partes aunswerable to the best part, what of this? Though she haue heauenlye gifts, vertue and bewtie, is she not of earthly mettal flesh and bloud? Youthat would be a God, shewe your self in this worse then a man, so soone to bee both ouerseene and ouertaken in a woman, whose false teares know their true times, whose smooth wordes wounde deeper then sharpe swordes. There is no surfeit so dangerous, as that of honeye, nor any poyson so deadly, as that of loue, in the one phisicke cannot preuaile, nor in the other counsel.
My case were light, and not worthy to be called loue, if reason were a remedie, or sente~ses could salue, that sense cannot conceaue. Litle do you know, and therefore sleightly doe you regard the dead embers in a priuate perso~, or liue coles in a great prince, whose passions and thoughts do as farre exceede others in extremitie, as their callinges doe in Maiestie. An Eclipse in the Sunne is more then the fallinge of a starre, none can conceiue the tormentes of a king, vnlesse hee be a king, whose desires are not inferiour to theirdignities. And then iudgeif the agonies of loue be dangerous in a subiect, whether they be not more then deadly vnto, whose deep and not to be conceiuedsighes, cleaue the heart in shiuers, whose wounded thoughtes can neither be expressed nor endured. Cease thenwith argumentes to seeke to refel that, which with their deitie the Gods cannot resist, and let this suffice to aunswere thee, that it is a king that loueth and, whose affections are not to be measured by reason, being immortall, nor I feare me to bee borne being intollerable.
I must needes yeeld, when neither reason nor counsel can be heard.
Yeelde, fordoth loue, & therefore must obtaine.
Suppose she loues not you, affection co~meth not by appointmente or birth, and then as good hated as enforced.
I am a king, and wil commaund.
You may, to yeelde to luste by force, but to consent to loue by feare you cannot.
Why, what is that, whichmaye not conquer as he list?
Why, that which you say the Gods cannot resiste, Loue.
I am a conquerour, shee a captiue, I as fortunate, as she faire: my greatnes may answere her wants, and the giftes of my minde, the modestie of hers: Is it not likely then that shee should loue? Is it not reasonable?
You say that in loue there is no reason, and therefore there can be no likelyhood.
No more: in this case I wil vse mine owne counsell, and in all other thine aduice, thou mayst be a good soldier, but neuer good louer. Call my page. Sirha, goe presentlye to, and will him to come tome without either delay or excuse.
I goe.
In the meane season to recreate my spirits, being so neere, we will goe see. And see where his tub is..
Who calleth?
: how happened it that you woulde not come out of your tub to my pallace?
Because it was as far from my tub to your pallace, as from your pallace to my tub.
Why then doest thou ow no reuere~ce to kings?
No.
Why so?
Because they be no Gods.
They be Gods of the earth.
Yea, Gods of earth.
is not of thy mind.
I am glad of it.
Why?
Because I would haue none ofminde, but
Ifhaue any thing that may pleasure, let me know, and take it.
Then take not from me, that you cannot giue me, the light of the world.
What dost thou want?
Nothing that you haue.
I haue the world at commaund.
And I in contempt.
Thou shalt liue no longer then I will.
But I shall die whether you wil or no.
How should one learne to be content?
Vnlearne to couet.
, were I not, I would wishe to be.
He is dogged, but discrete, I cannot tell howsharpe with a kinde of sweetenes, full of wit, yet too to wayward.
, when I come this way again, I wil both see thee, and confer with thee.
Doe.
But here commeth, how now, isface yet finished?
Not yet: Bewtie is not so soone shadowed, whose perfection commeth not within the compasse either of cunning or of colour.
Wel let it rest vnperfect, & come you with mee, where I will shewe you that finished by nature, that you haue beene trifling about by arte.
Lady, I doubt whether there bee any colour so fresh, that may shadow a countenance so faire.
Sir, I had thought you had beene commaunded to paint with your hand, not to glose with your tongue, but as I haue heard, it is the hardest thing in painting to set down a hard fauour, which maketh you to dispair of my face, and then shal you haue as great thanks to spare your labour, as to discredit your arte.
Mistresse, you neither differ from your selfe nor your sex: for knowing your own perfectio~, you seeme to dispraise that which men moste commend, drawing the~ by that meane into an admiration, where feedinge themselues they fal into an extasie, your modestie being the cause of the one, and of the other, your affections.
I am too young to vnderstande your speache, thogh old enough to withsta~d your deuise: you haue bin so long vsed to colours, you can do nothing but colour.
Indeed the colours I see, I feare, wil altar the colour I haue: but come Madam, wil you draw neere: forwill be here anon., stay you heere at the window, if anye enquire for me, aunswere,.
It is alwaies my maisters fashion, when any fair gentlewoman is to be drawne within, to make mee to stay without. But if he shuld paintlike a Bul, like a Swanne, like an Eagle, then mustwith one hand grinde colours, and with the other hold the candle. But let him alone, the better he shadowes her face, the more will he burne his own heart. And now if a manne coulde meete with, who I dare say, lookes as leane, as ifdropped out of his nose.
And heere come, whoe hath as muche meate in his maw, as thou hast honestie in thy head.
Then I hope thou art very hungry.
They that know thee, know that.
But doest thou not remember that wee haue certeine licour to conferre withal.
I, but I haue busines, I must go cry a thing.
Why, what hast thou lost?
That which I neuer had, my dinner?
Foule lubber wilt thou crie for thy dinner?
I meane, I must cry, not as one wold saye cry, but cry, that is, make a noyse.
Why foole, that is all one, for if thou cry, thou must needes make a noise.
Boy, thou art deceiued Cry hath diuerse significations, and may bee alluded to manye thinges, knaue but one, and can be applyed but to thee.
Profound.
Weeare madde fellowes, didste thounot finde I did quip thee?
No verely, why, whats a quip?
We great girders call it a short saying of a sharp witte, with a bitter sense in a sweete word.
How canst thou thus diuine, deuide, define, dispute, and all on the sodaine?
Wit wil haue his swing, I am bewitcht, inspirde, inflamed, infected.
Well, then will not I tempt thy gybing spirite.
Do not, for thy dull head will bee but a grindstone for my quick wit, which if thou whet with ouertwhartes,. I haue drawne bloud at ones braines with a bitter bob.
Let me crosse my self: for I die, if I crosse thee.
Let me do my busines, I my self am afraid, least my wit should waxe warm, and then must it needes consume some hard head with fine & prety iests. I am sometimes in such a vaine, that for want of some dull pate to worke on, I begin to gird my selfe.
The Gods shield mee from such a fine fellowe, whose words melt wits like waxe.
Well then, let vs to the matter. In fayth my maister meaneth to morow to flye.
It is a iest.
Is it a iest to flye? shouldest thou flye so soone, thou shouldest repent it in earnest.
Well, I will be the cryer.
O ys, o ys, o ys, All manner of men, women, or children, that wil come to morow into the market place, betweene the houres of nine and ten, shall seethe Cynick fly.
I do not think he wil flye.
Tush, say fly.
Fly.
Now let vs goe: for I wil not see him againe, till midnight, I haue a back way into his tub.
Which way callest thou the backwaye, when euery way is open.
I meane to come in at his back.
Well, let vs goe away, that we may returne speedely.
I shall neuer drawe your eies well, because they blind mine.
Why the~, paint me without eies, for I am blind?
Were you euer shadowed before of any?
No. And would you could so nowe shadow me, that I might not be perceiued of any.
It were pittie, but that so absolute a face should furnishtemple amongst these pictures.
What are these pictures?
This is, whomdeceiued in likenes of a swan.
A faire woman, but a foule deceit.
This is, vnto who~came in shape ofher husband, and begate.
A famous sonne, but an infamous fact.
He might do it, because he was a God.
Nay, therefore it was euil done, because he was a God.
This is, into whose prisondrisled a golden shewre, and obtained his desire.
What gold can make one yeelde to desire?
This is, whomrauished, this.
Were al the Gods like this?
There were many Gods in this like.
I thinke in those daies loue was well ratifiedamong men on earth, when lust was so full autorised by the Gods in heauen.
Nay, you may imagine there were wome~ passing amiable, whe~ ther were Gods exceding amorous.
Were women neuer so faire, men would be false.
Were woman neuer so false, men wold be fond.
What counterfeit is this?
This is, the Goddesse of loue.
What, be there also louing Goddesses?
This is she that hath power to commaunde the very affections of the heart.
How is she hired, by praier, by sacrifice, or bribs?
By praier, sacrifice and bribes.
What praier?
Vowes irreuocable.
What sacrifice?
Hearts euer sighing, neuer dissembling.
What bribes?
Roses and kisses? but were you neuer in loue?
No, nor loue in me.
Then haue you iniuried many.
How so?
Because you haue beene loued of many.
Flattered perchance of some.
It is not possible that a face so faire, and a wit so sharp, both without comparison, shulde not bee apte to loue.
If you begin to tip your tong with cunninge, I pray dip your pensil in colours, and fall to that you must doe, not that you would doe.
I cannot tell howe it co~meth to passe, that innow a daies there groweth an vnpacie~t kinde of life, in the morning he is mela~cholye, at noonesolomne, at all times either more sower or seuere, then he was accustomed.
In kinges causes I rather loue to doubte then coniecture, and thinke it better to be ignoraunt then inquisitiue: they haue long eares and stretched armes, in whose heades suspition is a proofe, and to bee accused is to be condemned.
Yet betweene vs there canne be no daunger to finde out the cause: for that there is no malice to withstand it. It may be an vnquenchable thirste of conquering maketh him vnquiet: it is not vnlikely his long ease hath altred his humour: that hee shoulde be in loue, it is not impossible.
In loue, no, no, it is as farre from his thought, as treason in ours: hee, whose euer waking eye, whose neuer tired heart, whose body pacient of labour, whose mind vnsatiable of victorie hath alwaies bin noted, cannot so soone be melted into the weake conceites of loue:told him there were many worlds, and that he hath not conquered one that gapeth for all, galleth. But here he commeth.
, and, I would haue you both redy to goe into Persia about an ambassage no lesse profitable to me, then to your selues honourable.
We are ready at all commaundes, wishing nothing els, but continually to be commaunded.
Well, then withdraw your selues, till I haue further considered of this matter.
Now we will see howgoeth forward: I doubt me that nature hath ouercom arte, and her countena~ce his cunning.
You loue, and therefore think any thing.
But not so farre in loue with, as with, if occasion serue either of conflicte or of conquest.
Occasion cannot want, if wil doe not. Behold all Persia swelling in the pride of their owne power, the Scithians carelesse what courage or fortune canne doe: the Egyptians dreaminge in the southsayinges of theyr Augures, and gaping ouer the smoak of their beastes intralles. All theseare to bee subdued, if that world be not slipped out of your head, which you haue sworne to conquer with that hand.
I confesse the labours fit for, and yet recreation necessary among so manye assaultes, bloudie woundes, intollerable troubles: giue mee leaue a litle, if not to sitte, yet to breath. And doubt not butcan when he wil throw affections as farre from him, as he can cowardise. But beholdtalking with one at his tub.
One pennie, I am a Cynick.
He made thee a begger, that first gaue thee any thing.
Why, if thou wilte giue nothinge, no bodye wil giue thee.
I want nothing, till the springs dry, & the earth perish.
I gather for the Gods.
And I care not for those gods, which want money.
Thou art a right Cynicke, that wyll gyue nothing.
Thou art not, that wil beg any thing.
, kinge, giue a poore Cynick a groat.
It is not for a king to giue a groat.
Then giue me a talent.
It is not for a begger to aske a talent. Awaye.?
Here.
Now Gentlewomanne, doth not your bewtieput the painter to his trump?
Yes my lord, seeing so disordered a countena~ce, he feareth he shall shadow a deformed counterfeit.
Would he could colour the life with the feature. And me thinketh, were you as cunning as report faith you are, you may paint flowers aswell with sweete smels, as fresh colours, obseruing in your mixture suche things as should draw neere to their fauours.
Your maiestie must know, it is no lesse harde to paint fauours then vertues, colours can neither speake nor think.
Where do you first begin, when you draw anye picture?
The proportion of the face in iust compasse, as I can.
I would begin with the eie, as a light to all the rest.
If you wil paint, as you are a king, your Maiesty, maye beginne wher you please, but as you wold be a painter, you must begin with the face.
would in one houre colour foure faces.
I meruaile in half an houre he did not foure.
Why, is it so easie?
No, but he doth it so homely.
When wil you finish?
Neuer finishe: for alwaies in absolute bewtie there is somwhat aboue arte.
Why shoulde not I by labour bee as cunning as?
God shield you should haue cause to be so cunning as.
Me thinketh four colours are sufficie~t to shadow any countenance, & so it was in the time of.
Then had men fewer fancies, & wome~ not so many fauors. For now, if the haire of her eie browes be black,yet must the heare of her head be yellowe: the attire of her head must be different from the habite of her body, els would the picture seeme like the blason of auncient Armorie, not like the sweete delight of new found amiablenes. For as in garden knottes diuersitie of odours make a more sweete sauour, or as in musicke diuers stringes cause a more delicate consent, so in painting, the more colours, the better counterfeit, obseruing blacke for a ground, and the rest for grace.
Lend me thy pensil, I wil paint, and thou shalt iudge.
Here.
The coale breakes.
You leane too hard.
Now it blackes not.
You leane too soft.
This is awry.
Your eie goeth not with yourhand.
Now it is worse.
Your hand goeth not with your minde.
Nay, if all be too hard or soft, so many rules and regardes, that ones hand ones eie, ones mind muste all draw together, I had rather be setting of a battell, then blotting of a bourd. But how haue I done here?
Like a king.
I think so: but nothing more vnlike a Paynter. Wel,is finished as I wish, dismisse her, & bring presently her counterfeit after me.
I wil.
Now, doth not this matter cotton as I would,looketh pleasantly, liberty wil encrease her bewtie, and my loue shal aduaunce her honour.
I wil not contrary your maiestie, for time must weare out that loue hath wroughte, and reason weane what appetite noursed.
How stately she passeth bye, yet howe soberlie, asweete consent in her countenance with a chast disdain, desire mingled with coynesse, and I cannot tell howe to tearme it, a curst yeelding modestie.
Let her passe.
So shee shall for the fairest on the earth.
I shalbe hanged for tarying so long.
I pray God my maister bee not flowne before I come.
Away, my maister doth come.
Where haue you bin all this while?
No where but heere.
Who was here sithence my comming?
No body.
Vngratious wag, I perceiue you haue beene a loytering, wasno body?
He was a king, I meant no meane body.
I wyll cogell your bodye for it, and then wyll I saye it was no bodye, because it was no honest body. Away in.
This is the place, the day, the time, thathath appointed to flye.
I wil not loose the flight of so fair a foule asis, though my maister cogel my no bodye, as he threatned.
What, will the beaste wag his winges to day?
We shal heare: for here commeth:will it be?
Be, he were best be as cunning as a Bee, or else shortly he will not be at all.
How is he furnished to flye, hath he feathers?
Thou art an asse, Capons, Geese and Owles haue feathers. He hath foundold waxen wings, and hath beene peecing them this moneth, he is so broad in the shoulders. O you shal see him cut the aire euen like a Tortoys.
Methinks so wise a man should not be so mad, his body must needes be too heauy.
Why, he hath eate~ nothing this seuennight but corke and feathers.
Tutch him.
He is so light that he can scarse keepe him from flying at midnight.
See they beginne to flocke, and behold my maister bustels himself to flye.
Yee wicked and bewitched Athenians, whose bodies make the earth to groane, and whose breathes infect the aire with stench. Come ye to seeflye?commeth to see you sinke: yee call me dog, so I am, for I long to gnawe the boanes in your skins. Yee tearme me an hater of menne: no, I am a hater of your ma~ers. Your liues dissolute, not fearing death, wil proue your deaths desperate, not hoping for life. What do you els in Athens but sleepe in the daye, and surfeite in the night: backGods in the morning with pride, in the euening bellyGods with gluttony. You flatter kings, & call them Gods, speak trueth of your selues, and co~fesse you are deuils. From the Bee you haue take~ not the honey, but the wax to make your religion, framing it to the time, not to the trueth. Your filthy lust you colour vnder a courtly colour of loue, iniuries abroad vnder the title of pollicies at home, & secrete malice creepeth vnder the name of publike iustice. You haue causedto dry vp springs and plant vines, to sow roket and weede endiffe, to sheare sheepe, and shrine foxes. All conscience is sealed at Athens. Swearing commeth of a hot mettle: lying of a quick wit: flattery of a flowing tong, vndecent talk of a mery disposition. Al things are lawful at Athe~s. Either you think there are no Gods, or I must think yee are no men. You build as though you shoulde liue for euer, and surfeit as though you should die to morow.None teacheth true Phylosophy but, beecause he was the kinges schoolemaister. O times, O menne, O corruption in manners. Remember that greene grasse must turne to dry hay. When you sleep, you are not sure to wake, and when you rise not certeine to lye downe. Looke you neuer so hye, your heads must lye leuel with your feet. Thus haue I flown ouer your disordered liues, and if you will not amende your manners, I will studie to flye further from you, that I may be neerer to honestie.
Thou rauest, for thy life is different fro~ thy woordes. Did not, I see thee come out of a brothel house? was it not a shame?
It was no shame to goe out, but a shame to goe in.
It were a good deede, to beate thy maister.
You were as good eate my maister.
Hast thou made vs all fooles, and wilt thou not flye?
I tell thee, vnlesse thou be honest, I wil fly.
Dog, dog, take a boane.
Thy father neede fear no dogs, but dogs thy father.
We wil tel, that thou reproouest him behind his back.
And I wil tell him, that you flatter him beefore his face.
We wil cause all the boies in the streete to hisse at thee.
In deede I think the Athenians haue their childre~ redy for any vice, because they be Athenia~s.
Why maister, meane you not to flye?
No, not without wings.
Euery body wil account you a lyar.
No, I warrant you: for I will alwayes say the Athenians are mischieuous.
I care not, it was sport ynogh for me to see these old huddles hit home.
Nor I.
Come, let vs goe, and hereafter when I meane to raile vpon any body openly, it shall be giuen out, I will flye.
Gentlewoman, the misfortune I had with your picture, will put you to some paines, to sitte againe to be painted
It is small paines for me to sit still, but infinit for you to draw still.
No Madame, to paintewas a pleasure, but to shadowe the sweet face ofit is a heauen.
If your tongue were made of the same flesh that your heart is, your wordes woulde be as your thoughts are: but such a common thing it is amongst you to commend, that oftentimes for fashion sake you call the~ bewtifull, whom you know blacke.
What might men doe to be beleeued?
Whet their tongues on their hearts.
So they doe, and speake as they think.
I would they did.
I would they did not.
Why, would you haue them dissemble?
Not in loue, but theyr loue. But will you giue me leaue to ask you a question without offe~ce?
So that you will aunswere me an other without excuse.
Whom do you loue best in the world?
He that made me last in the world.
That was a God.
I had thought it had beene a man: but whome do you honour most?
The thing that is likest you.
My picture?
I dare not venture vpon your person. But come, let vs go in: forwill thinke it longe till we returne.
We heare nothing of our Embassage, a colourbelike to bleare our eies, or ticle our eares, or inflame our heartes. But what dothin the meane season, but vse forfor his harde couch, downe beddes, for his handfull of water, his standinge Cup of wine?
, I mislike this new delicacie and pleasing peace: for what els do we see now then a kind of softnes in euery mans minde, Bees to make their hiues in soldiers helmets, our steedes furnished with foote clothes of golde, insteede of saddles of steele: More time to bee required to scowre the rust of our weapons, the~ there was woont to be in subdewing the countries of our enemies. Sithencefell from his harde armour to his softe robes, beholde the face of his court, youthes that were woont to carry deuises of victory in their shieldes, engraue now posies of loue in their ringes: they that were accustomed on trotting horses to charge the enemie with a launce, now in easie coches ride vp & downe to court Ladies: in steede of sworde and target to hazard their liues, vse penne and paper to paint their loues. Yea, such a feare and faintnes is growne in courte, that they wish rather to heare the blowing of a horne to hunt, the~ the sound of a trumpet to fight? O Phillip, wert thou aliue to see this alteration, thy men turned to women, thy soldiers to louers, gloues worne in veluet, caps in steede of plumes in grauen helmets, thou wouldest either dye among them for sorow, or confound them for anger.
Cease, least in speaking what becommeth thee not, thou feele what liketh thee not: trueth is neuer without a scratcht face, whose tongue although it cannot be cut out, yet must it be tied vp.
It greeueth me not a litle for, whoe thristeth for honour, not ease, but such is his fortune & neerenesse in friendship to, that he must lay a pillowe vnder his head, when he would put a targette in his hand.But let vs draw in, to see how well it beecomes them to tread the measures in a daunce, that were wont to set the order for a march.
I haue nowalmost made an end.
You told me, you would neuer end.
Neuer end my loue: for it shalbe eternal.
That is, neither to haue beginning nor ending.
You are disposed to mistake, I hope you do not mistrust.
What will you saye, ifperceiue your loue?
I will say, it is no treason to loue.
But how if he will not suffer thee to see my person?
Then will I gase continually on thy picture.
That will not feede thy heart.
Yet shall it fill mine eie: beesides the sweete thoughtes, the sure hopes, thy protested faith, will cause me to embrace thy shadow continuallye in mine armes, of the which by stronge imagination I will make a substaunce.
Wel, I must be gon: but this assure your self, that I had rather be in thy shop grinding colours, then incourt, following higher fortunes.
Now, gather thy wittes together:is no lesse wise then faire, thy selfe must be no lesse cunning then faithfull. It is no small matter to be riuall with.
, you must come away quicklye with the picture, the king thinketh that nowe you haue painted it, you play with it.
If I would playe with pictures, I haue enough at home.
None perhaps you like so well.
It may be I haue painted none so well.
I haue knowne many fairer faces.
And I many better boies.
I haue brought my sons, to bee taught of thee.
What can thy sonnes doe?
You shall see their qualities: Daunce sirha.
How like you this? doth he well?
The better, the worser.
The musicke very good.
The Musitions very badde, who onelye studie to haue their stringes in tune, neuer framing their manners to order.
Now shall you see the other: tumble sirha.
How like you this? why do you laugh?
To see a wagge, that was born to break his neck by destinie, to practise it by arte.
This dogge will bite me, I wil not be with him.
Feare not boy, dogges eate no thistles.
I meruaile what dog thou art, if thou be a dog.
When I am hungry, a mastiue, and when my belly is full, a spaniell.
Doest thou beleeue that there are any gods, that thou art so dogged?
I must needs beleeue there are Gods: for I think thee an enemie of them.
Why so?
Beecause thou hast taught one of thy sonnes to rule his legges, and not to follow learning, the other to bend his body euery way, and his minde no way.
Thou doest nothing but snarle, and barke like a dogge.
It is the next way to driue away a theefe.
Now shall you heare the third, who signes like a Nightingall.
I care not: for I haue heard a Nightingall sing her self.
Sing sirha.
Loe, I am sure thou canst not doe so much.
But there is neuer a Thrush but can.
What hast thou taughtthy man?
To be as vnlike as may be thy sonnes.
He hath taught me to fast, lye hard, and runne away.
Howe saiest thou, wilte thou bee with him?
I, so he will teach me first to runne away.
Thou needest not be taught, thy legs are so nimble.
Howe sayest thou, wilte thou be with him?
Nay, hold your peace, he shall not.
Why?
There is not roome enough for him and mee both to tumble in one tub.
Well, I perceiue my sonnes brook not thy manners.
I thought no lesse, when they knewe my vertues.
Farewel, thou neededst not haue scraped rootes, if thou woldest haue followed.
Nor thou haue followed, if thou hadst scraped rootes.
It shal go hard, but this peace shal bring vs some pleasure.
Downe with armes, and vp with legges, this is a world for the nonce.
Sweete youthes, if you knew what it were to saue your sweete bloud, you would not so foolishly go about to spend it. What delight can there be in gasshinge, to make foule scarres in faire faces, & crooked maimes in streight legges? as though men being borne goodlye by nature, would of purpose become deformed by follye, and all forsooth for a new found tearme, called valiant, a worde which breedeth more quarrelles then the sense can commendation.
It is true, a featherbed hath no fellow, good drinke makes good bloud, and shal pelting wordes spill it?
I meane to enioy the world, and to draw out my life at the wiredrawers, not to curtall it off at the cuttelers.
You may talke of warre, speake bigge, conquer worldes with great wordes: but stay at home, where in steede of Alarums you shall haue daunces, for hot battelles with fierce menne, gentle skirmishes with faire womenne. These pewter coates canne neuer sitte so well as satten dublets. Beleeue mee, you cannot conceiue the pleasure of peace, vnlesse you despise the rudenes of warre.
It is so. But seeprying ouer his tubbe:, what saiest thou to such a morsel?
I say, I would spit it out of my mouth, because it should not poyson my stomacke.
Thou speakest as thou arte, it is no meate for dogges.
I am a dogge, and Phylosophy rates mee from carion.
Vnciuill wretch, whose manners are aunswerable to thy callynge, the tyme was thou wouldest haue hadde my companie, had it not beene, as thou saidst too deare.
I remember there was a thing, that I repentedme of, and now thou haste told it, indeede it was too deare of nothing, and thou deare to no bodye.
Downe villaine, or I wil haue thy head broken?
Will you couch?
Auaunt curre: Come sweete, let vs goe to some place, and possesse peace. But first let vs sing, there is more pleasure in tuning of a voyce, then in a vollye of shotte.
Now let vs make haste, leastfinde vs here.
Mee thinkethyou are more melancholy then you were accustomed, but I perceiue it is all for. You can neither brooke this peace, nor my pleasure, be of good cheare, though I winke, I sleepe not.
Melancholy I am not, nor well content: for I know not how there is such a ruste crept into my bones with this long ease, that I feare I shall not scowre it out with infinite labours.
Yes, yes, if all the trauailes of conquering the world will set either thy body or mine in tune, wee will vndertake them. But what think you of? Did yee euer see any so perplexed? Hee neither aunswered directly to any question, nor looked stedfastly vppon anye thing. I hold my life the painter is in loue.
It may be: for commonly we see it incident in artificers to be inamoured of their own workes, asof his woodden doue,, of his iuorieImage,of his wodde~ swan, especially painters, who playing with their own conceites, now coueting to draw a glauncing eie, then a rolling, now a wincking, stil mending it, neuer ending it, till they bee caught with it, and then poore soules they kisse the colours with their lippes, with which before they were loth to tainte theyr fingers.
I wil finde it out. Page, goe speedelye for, will him to come hether, and when you see vs earnestly in talke, sodenly cry out,shoppe is on fire.
It shalbe done.
Forget not your lesson
I meruaile what your deuice shalbe.
The euent shall proue.
I pittie the poore painter, if he be in loue.
Pittie him not, I pray thee, that seuere grauity set aside, what do you think of loue?
As the Macedonians doe of their hearbe Beet, which looking yellow in the ground, and blacke in the hand, thinke it better seene then toucht.
But what do you imagine it to be?
A word by superstition thought a God, by vse turned to an humour, by self will made a flattering madnesse.
You are too hard harted to think so of loue. Let vs go to., thou maist think it somwhat, thatcommeth to thee againe so soone
If you come to learn, you could not come soone enough, if to laugh, you be come too soone.
It would better become thee to be more curteous, and frame thy self to please.
And you better to be lesse, if you durst displease.
What dost thou think of the time we haue here?
That we haue litle, and lose much.
If one be sick, what wouldest thou haue him do?
Be sure that he make not his Phisition his hiere.
If thou mightest haue thy wil, how much grou~d would content thee?
As much as you in the ende must bee contented withall.
What, a world?
No, the length of my body.
, shal I be a litle pleasaunt with him?
You may: but he wil be very peruerse with you.
It skilleth not, I cannot be angry with him., I pray thee, what dost thou think of loue?
A litle worser then I can of hate.
And why?
Because it is better to hate the thinges, which make to loue, the~ to loue the things, which giue occasion of hate.
Why, be not women the best creatures in the world?
Next men and Bees.
What dost thou dislike chiefly in a woman?
One thing.
What?
That she is a woman.
In mine opinion thou wert neuer born of a woman, that thou thinkest so hardly of wome~. But now co~meth, who I am sure is as far from thy thoghts, as thou art fro~ his cunning., I wil haue thy cabin remoued nerer to my court, because I wilbe a philosopher
And when you haue done so, I pray you remoue your court further from my cabinne, because I wil not be a courtier.
But here commeth., what peece of work haue you now in hand?
None in hand, if it like your maiestie: but I am deuising a platforme in my head.
I think your hand put it in your head. Is it nothing about?
No, but some thing about.
,, looke about you, your shope is on fire.
Ay me, if the picture ofbe burnt, I am vndone.
Stay, no haste, it is your hart is on fire, not your shop, & ifhang there, I wold she were burnt. But haue you the picture of? Beelike you loue her wel, that you care not thogh al be lost, so she be safe.
Not loue her: but your Maiestie knowes that painters in their last works are said to excell themselues, and in this I haue so much pleased my self, that the shadow as much delighteth mee beeing an artificer, as the substaunce doth others that are amorous.
You lay your colours grosely, though I could not paint in your shop, I ca~ spy into your excuse. Be not ashamed, it is a Gentlemans sport to be in loue. Call hither. Me thinks I might haue bin made priuie to your affection, though my counsel had not beene necessary, yet my countenance might haue bin thought requisite. Butforsooth loueth vnder hand, yea & vndernose, and, but I say no more.
loueth not so: but he liueth to do aswill.
, here is newes,is in loue with you.
It pleaseth your maiesty to say so.
, I wil try her to., for the good qualities I know inand the vertue I see in you, I am determined you shal enioy one the other. Howe saye you, would you say, I?
Your handmaid must obey, if you commaund.
Think you notthat shee would faine be commaunded?
I am no thought catcher, but I gesse vnhappily.
I will not enforce mariage, where I cannot co~pel loue.
But your maiestie may moue a question, whereyou be willing to haue a match.
Beleeue me, these parties are agreed, they would haue me both priest and witnesse., take, why moue ye not?, take, wil it not be? If you be ashamed one of the other, by my consent you shal neuer come togeather. But dissemble not, do you loue?
Pardon my Lord, I loue.
, it were a shame for you, being loued so openly of so faire a virgin, to say the contrary. Doe you loue?
Onely.
Two louing wormes,, I perceiuecannot subdue the affections of menne, though he co~quer their countries. Loue falleth like dew aswel vpo~ the low grasse, as vppon the high Caedar. Sparkes haue their heate, Antes their gall, Flyes their splene. Well, enioy one an other, I giue her thee fra~ckly. Thou shalt see thatmaketh but a toye of loue, and leadeth affection in fetters, vsing fa~cie as a foole to make him sport, or as a minstrell to make him merry. It is not the amorous glaunce of an eie can settle an idle thought in the heart, no no, it is childrens game, a life for seamesters and schollers, the one pricking in cloutes haue nothing els to thinke on, the other picking fancies out of books, haue litle els to meruaile at. Go, take with you your,is cloied with looking on that, which thou wondredst at.
Thankes to your maiestie on bended knee, you haue honoured.
Thankes with bowed hearte, you haue blessed.
Page, go warneandand the other Lordes to be in a readines, let the trumpet sounde, strike vp the drumme, and I will presently into Persia.How now, isable to resiste loue as he list?
The conquering ofwas not so honourable, as the subdueing of these thoughts.
It were a shameshould desire to commaund the world, if he could not commaund himselfe. But come, let vs goe, I willtry whether I can better beare my hand with my heart, then I could with mine eie. And good, when al the world is woone, and euery countrey is thine and mine, either find me out an other to subdue, or of my word I will fall in loue.