How nowe fellowe, what all amort? Doth this sadnes become thy madnes? What though wee haue lost our way in the woodes, yet neuer hang the head, as though thou hadst no hope to liue till to morrow: forand I will warrant thy life to night for twenty in the hundred.
and, as I am frollicke franion, neuer in all my life was I so dead slaine. What? to loose our way in the woode, without either fire or candle so vncomfortable?
Why makes thou it so strange, seeing Cupid hath led our yong master to the faire Lady and she is the only Saint that he hath sworne to serue.
What resteth then but wee commit him to his wench, and each of vs take his stand vp in a Tree, and sing out our ill fortune to the tune of O man in desperation.
Desperately spoken fellow Frollicke in the darke: but seeing it falles out thus, let vs rehearse the old prouerb.
Hush a dogge in the wood, or a wooden dogge, O comfortable hearing! I had euen as liue the Chamberlaine of the white Horse had called me vp to bed.
Eyther hath his trotting Cur gone out of his cyrcuit, or els are we nere some village,
which should not be farre off, for I perceiue the glymring of a Gloworme, a Candle, or a Cats eye, my life for a halfe pennie. In the name of my own father, be thou Oxe or Alfe that appearest, tell vs what thou art.
What am I? Why I am Clunch the Smith, what are you, what make you in myterritories at this time of the night?
What doe we make dost thou aske? why we make faces for feare: such as if thy mortall eyes could behold, would make thee water the long seames of thy side slops, Smith.
And in faith Sir vnlesse your hospitalitie doe releeue vs, wee are like to wander with a sorrowfull hey ho, among the owlets, & Hobgoblins of the Forrest: good, for Cupids sake that hath cousned vs all: befriend vs as thou maiest, and commaund vs howsoeuer, wheresoeuer, whensoeuer, in whatsoeuer, for euer and euer.
Well Masters it seemes to mee you haue lost your waie in the wood: in consideration whereof, if you will goe with Clunch to his Cottage, you shall haue house roome, and a good fire to sit by, althogh we haue no bedding to put you in.
O blessed Smith, O bountifull Clunch.
For your further intertainment, it shall be as it may be, so and so,
Hearke this is Ball my Dogge that bids you all welcome in his own language, come take heed for stumbling on the threshold, open dore Madge take in guests.
Welcome Clunch & good fellowes al that come with my good ma~ for my good mans sakecome on sit downe here is a peece of cheese & a pudding of my owne making.
Thanks Gammer a good example for the wiues of our towne.
Gammer thou and thy good man sit louingly together, we come to chat and not to eate.
Well Masters if you will eate nothing take away: Come, what doo we to passe away the time? Lay a crab in the fire to rost for Lambes-wooll; what shall wee haue a game at Trumpe or Ruffe to driue away the time, how say you?
This Smith leades a life as merrie as a King withhis wife; Syrrha, I am sure thou art not without some round or other, no doubt but Clunch can beare his part.
Els thinke you mee ill brought vp, so set to it when you will.
This sport dooes well: but me thinkes Gammer, a merry winters tale would driue away the time trimly, come I am sure you are not without a score.
I saith Gammer a tale of an howre long were as good as an howres sleepe.
Looke you Gammer, of the Gyant and the Kings Daughter, and I know not what, I haue seene the day when I was a litle one, you might haue drawne mee a mile after you with such a discourse.
Well, since you be so importunate, my good man shall fill the pot and get him to bed, they that ply their worke must keepe good howres, one of you goe lye with him, he is a cleane skind man I tell you, without either spauin or windgall, so I am content to driue away the time with an old wiues winters tale.
No better hay in Deuonshire, a my word Gammer, Ile be one of your audience.
And I another thats flat.
Then must I to bed with the good man,Gammer, God night.
Come on my Lad, thou shalt take thy vnnaturall rest with me.
Yet this vantage shall we haue of them in the morning, to bee ready at the sight thereof extempore.
Nowe this bargaine my Masters must I make with you, that you will say hum & ha to my tale, so shall I know you are awake.
Content Gammer that will we doo.
Once vppon a time there was a King or a Lord, or a Duke that had a faire daughter, the fairest that euer was; as white as snowe, and as redd as bloud: and once vppon a time his daughter was stollen away, and hee sent all his men to seeke out his daughter, and hee sent so long, that he sent all his men out of his Land.
Who drest his dinner then?
Nay either heare my tale, or kisse my taile.
Well sed, on with your tale Gammer.
O Lord I quite forgot, there was a Coniurer, and this Coniurer could doo any thing, and hee turned himselfe into a great Dragon, and carried the Kinges Daughter away in his mouth to a Castle that hee made of stone, and there he kept hir I know not how long, till at last all the Kinges men went out so long, that hir two Brothers went to seeke hir. O I forget: she (he I would say) turned a proper yong man to a Beare in the night, and a man in the day, and keeps by a crosse that parts three seuerall waies, & he made this Lady run mad: gods me bones who comes here?
Soft Gammer, here some come to tellyour tale for you.
Let them alone, let vs heare what they will say.
Vpon these chalkie Cliffs ofWe are ariued now with tedious toile, And compassing the wide world round about To seeke our sister, to seeke faireforth, Yet cannot we so much as heare of hir.
O fortune cruell, cruell & vnkind, Vnkind in that we cannot find our sister; Our sister haples in hir cruell chance: Soft who haue we here.
Now father God be your speed, What doo you gather there?
Hips and Hawes, and stickes and strawes, and thinges that I gather on the ground my sonne.
Hips and Hawes, and stickes and strawes, why is that all your foode father?
Yea sonne.
Father, here is an Almes pennie for mee, and if I speede in that I goe for, I will giue thee as good a Gowne of gray as euer thou diddest weare.
And Father here is another almes pennie for me, and if I speede in my iourney, I will giue thee a Palmers staffe of yuorie, and a scallop shell of beaten gold.
Was shee fayre?
I the fairest for white, and the purest for redd, as the blood of the Deare, or the driuen snow:
Then harke well and marke well, my old spell: Be not afraid of euery stranger, Start not aside at euery danger: Things that seeme are not the same, Blow a blast at euery flame: For when one flame of fire goes out, Then comes your wishes well about: If any aske who told you this good, Say the white Beare of Englands wood.
Brother heard you not what the old man said:
Well if this doo vs any good, Wel fare the white Bear of Englands wood.
Now sit thee here & tel a heauy tale. Sad in thy moode, and sober in thy cheere, Here sit thee now and to thy selfe relate, The hard mishap of thy most wretched state. InI liu'd in sweete content, Vntill that Fortune wrought my ouerthrow;For there I wedded was vnto a dame, That liu'd in honor, vertue, loue, and fame: Butthat cursed sorcerer, Being besotted with my beauteous loue: My deerest loue, my true betrothed wife, Did seeke the meanes to rid me of my life, But worse than this, he with his chanting spels, Did turne me straight vnto an vgly Beare; And when the sunne doth settle in the west, Then I begin to don my vgly hide: And all the day I sit, as now you see, And speake in riddles all inspirde with rage, Seeming an olde and miserable man: And yet I am in April of my age.
See wheremy betrothed loue, Runs madding all inrag'd about the woods; All by his curssed and inchanting spels.
But here comesmy discontented neighbour. How now neighbour, you looke towarde the ground aswell as I, you muse on something.
Neighbour on nothing, but on the matter I so often mooued to you: if you do any thing for charity, helpe me; if for neighborhood or brotherhood, helpe me: neuer was one so combered as is poore: and to begin, I pray receiue this potte of Honny to mendyour fare.
Thankes neighbor, set it downe, Honny is alwaies welcome to the Beare. And now neighbour let me heere the cause of your comming.
I am (as you knowe neighbour) a man vnmaried, and liued so vnquietly with my two wiues, that I keepe euery yeare holy the day wherin I buried the~ both; the first was on saintday; the other on saint.
And now neighbour, you of this country say, your custome is out: but on with your tale neighbour.
By my first wife, whose tongue wearied me aliue, and sounded in my eares like the clapper of a great Bell, whose talke was a continuall torment to all that dwelt by her, or liued nigh her, you haue heard me say I had a handsome daughter.
True neighbour.
Shee it is that afflictes me with her continuall clamoures, and hangs on me like a Burre: poore shee is, and proude shee is, as poore as a sheepe new shorne, and as proude of her hopes, as a Peacock of her taile well growne.
Well said, you speake it like an Englishman.
As curst as a waspe, and as frowarde as a childe new taken from the mothers teate, shee is to my age, as smoake to the eyes, or as vinegar to the teeth.
Holily praised neighbour, as much for the next.
By my other wife I had a daughter, so hard fauoured, so foule and ill faced, that I thinke a groue full of golden trees; and the leaues of Rubies and Dyamonds, would not bee a dowrie aunswerable to her deformitie.
Well neighbour, nowe you haue spoke, heere me speake; send them to the Well for the water of life: there shall they finde their fortunes vnlooked for; Neighbour farewell.
Farewell and a thousand, and now goeth pooreto put in execution this excellent counsell.
Why this goes rounde without a fidling stick; but doo you heare Gammer, was this the man that was a Beare in the night, and a man in the day?
I this is hee; and this man that came to him was a beggar, and dwelt vppon a greene. But soft, who comes here? O these are the haruest men; ten to one they sing a song of mowing.
Gammer, what is he?
O this is one that is going to the coniurer, let him alone, here what he sayes.
Now byandandandandand, and by the honor of my house, it is a wonder to see what this loue will make silly fellowes aduenture, euen in the wane of their wits, and infansie of their discretion. Alas my friend what fortune calles thee foorth to seeke thy fortune among brasen gates, inchanted towers, fire and Brimstone, thunder and lightning. Beautie I tell thee is peerelesse, and she precious whom thou affectest: do off these desires good countriman, good friend runne away from thy selfe, and so soone as thou canst, forget her; whom none must inherit but he that can monsters tame, labourers atchiue, riddles absolue, loose inchantments, murther magicke, and kill coniuring: and that is the great and mighty.
Harke you sir, harke you; First know I haue here the flurting feather, and haue giuen the Parish the start for the long stocke: Nowe sir if it bee no more but running through a little lightning and thunder, and riddle me riddle me whats this, Ile haue the wench from the Coniurer if he were ten Coniurers.
I haue abandoned the Court and honourable company, to doo my deuoyre against this sore Sorcerer and mighty Magitian: if this Ladie be so faire as she is said to bee, she is mine, she is mine.
! the faire maide isand all.
If shee bee mine, as I assure my selfe the heauens will doo somewhat to reward my worthines; shee shall bee allied to none of the meanest gods; but bee inuested in the most famous stocke of, my Grandfather: my father: my mother,: famouslie descended.
Doo you heare sir; had not you a Cosen, that was called?
Indeede I had a Cosen, that somtime followed the Court infortunately, and his name.
O Lord I know him well: hee is theknight of the neates feete.
O he lou'd no Capon better, he hath oftentimes deceiued his boy of his dinner, that was his fault good.
Come shall we goe along? Soft, here is an olde man at the Crosse, let vs aske him the way thither. Ho, you Gaffer, I pray you tell where the wise man the Coniurer dwells?
Where that earthly Goddesse keepeth hir abode; the commander of my thougts, and faire Mistres of my heart.
Faire inough, and farre inough from thy fingering sonne.
I will followe my Fortune after mine owne fancie, and doo according to mine owne discretion.
Yet giue some thing to an old man before you goe.
Father mee thinkes a peece of this Cake might serue your turne.
Yea sonne.
giueth no Cakes for Almes, aske of them that giue giftes for poore Beggars. Faire Lady, if thou wert once shrined in this bosome, I would buckler thee haratantara.
Father doo you see this man, you litle thinke heele run a mile or two for such a Cake,or passe for a pudding, I tell you father hee has kept such a begging of mee for a peece of this Cake, whoo he comes vppon me with a superfantiall substance, and the foyson of the earth, that I know not what he meanes: If hee came to me thus, and said, my friendor so, why I could spare him a peece with all my heart; but when he tells me how God hath enriched mee aboue other fellowes with a Cake: why hee makes me blinde and deafe at once: Yet father heere is a peece of Cake for you as harde as the world goes.
Farewell father, farewell; for I must make hast after my two hand sword that is gone before.
The day is cleare, the Welkin bright and gray, The Larke is merrie, and records hir notes; Each thing reioyseth vnderneath the Skie, But onely I whom heauen hath in hate: Wretched and miserable, Inwas I borne and brought vp,My motherhight a famous Witch, And by hir cunning I of hir did learne, To change and alter shapes of mortall men, There did I turne my selfe into a Dragon, And stole away the Daughter to the King; Faire, the Mistres of my heart: And brought hir hither to reuiue the man, That seemeth yong and pleasant to behold, And yet is aged, crooked, weake and numbe. Thus by inchaunting spells I doo deceiue, Those that behold and looke vpon my face; But well may I bid youthfull yeares adue:
See where she coms from whence my sorrows grow, How now fairewhere haue you bin?
At the foote of the Rocke for running water, and gathering rootes for your dinner sir.
Ah, fairer art thou than the running water, yet harder farre than steele or Adamant.
Will it please you to sit downe sir.
I, sit & aske me what thou wilt, thou shalt haue it brought into thy lappe.
Then I pray you sir let mee haue the best meate from the king oftable, and the best wine in all, brought in by the veriest knaue in all.
I am glad to see you so pleasant,well sit thee downe.
Spred table spred; meat, drinke & bred Euer may I haue, what I euer craue: When I am spred, for meate for my black cock, And meate for my red.
Heere, will yee fall to.
Is this the best meate in England?
Yea.
What is it?
A chine of English beefe, meate for a king And a kings followers.
Is this the best wine in?
Yea.
What Wine is it?
A cup of neate wine of, That neuer came neer the brewers in England.
Is this the veriest knaue in all?
Yea.
What is he a Fryer?
Yea a Frier indefinit, & a knaue infinit.
Then I pray ye sir Frier tell me before you goe, which is the most greediest Englishman?
The miserable and most couetous Vsurer.
Holde thee there Friar,
But soft who haue we heere,away begon.
away, for beset are we, But heauen or hell shall rescue her for me.
Brother, was not thatdid appeare? Or was it but her shadow that was here?
Sister, where art thou?come again He calles, that of thy absence doth complaine. Call outthat she may heare, And crie aloud, foris neere.
Neere.
Neere, O where, hast thou any tidings?
Tidings.
Which way isthen, or that, or this?
This.
And may we safely come whereis
Yes.
Brother remember you the white Beare of Englands wood: Start not a side for euery danger, Be not afeard of euery stranger; Things that seeme, are not the same.
Brother, why do we not the~ coragiously enter.
Then brother draw thy sword & follow me.
What brother doost thou fall?
I, and thou to.
: away with them,Go cary them straight tocell, There in despaire and torture for to dwell; These aresonnes of, That come to seeketheir sister forth: But with a potion, I to her haue giuen, My arts hath made her to forget her selfe.
See heere the thing which doth prolong my life With this inchantment I do any thing. And till this fade, my skill shall still endure, And neuer none shall breake this little glasse, But she that's neither wife, nor widow, nor maide. Then cheere thy selfe, this is thy destinie, Neuer to die, but by a dead mans hand.
Tell me Time, tell me iust Time, When shall Isee? When shall I see the loadstar of my life? When shall my wandring course end with her sight? Or I but view my hope, my hearts delight. Father God speede, if you tell fortunes, I pray good father tell me mine.
You may be ashamed, you whorson scald Sexton and Churchwarden, if you had any shame in those shamelesse faces of yours, to let a poore man lie so long aboue ground vnburied. A rot on you all, that haue no more compassion of a good fellow when he is gone.
What would you haue vs to burie him, and to aunswere it our selues to the parishe?
Parish me no parishes, pay me my fees, and let the rest runne on in the quarters accounts, and put it downe for one of your good deedes a Gods name, for I am not one that curiously stands vpon merits.
You whoreson sodden headed sheepes-face, shall a good fellow do lesse seruice and more honestie to the parish, & will you not when he is dead let him haue Christmas buriall.
Peace, assure aswas, the frollickst frannion amongst you, and Ihis sweete sworne brother,shall haue his funerals, or some of them shall lie on Gods deare earth for it, thats once.
I hope thou wilt do no more then thou darst aunswer.
Sir, sir, dare or dare not, more or lesse, aunswer or not aunswer, do this, or haue this.
Helpe, helpe, helpe, VViggen sets vpon the parish with a Pike staffe.
Hould thy hands good fellow.
Can you blame him sir, if he takepart against this shake rotten parish that will not burie.
Why what was that?
Whosir, who oursir? as good a fellow as euer troade vppon Neats leather.
Looke you sir, he gaue foure score and nineteene mourning gownes to the parish when he died, and because he would not make them vp a full hundred, they would not bury him; was not this good dealing?
Oh Lord sir how he lies, he was not worth a halfepenny, and drunke out euery penny: and nowe his fellowes, his drunken companions, would haue vs to burie him at thecharge of the parish, and we make many such matches, we may pull downe the steeple, sell the Belles, and thatche the chauncell: he shall lie aboue ground till he daunce a galliard about the churchyard for.
; and we make many such matches, we may pull downe the steeple, sell the Belles, and thatche the chauncell: in good time sir, and hang your selues in the Bell ropes when you haue done,, whether will you haue the ground broken, or your pates broken: first, for one of them shall be done presently, and to begin mine, ile seale it vpon your cockescome.
Hould thy hands, I pray thee good fellow be not too hastie.
Your Capons face, we shall haue you turnd out of the parish one of these dayes, with neuer a tatter to your arse, then you are in worse taking then.
Faith and he is bad enough: this fellow does but the part of a friend, to seeke to burie his friend; how much will burie him?
Faith, about some fifteene or sixteene shillings will bestow him honestly.
I euen there abouts sir.
Heere hould it then, and I haue left me but one poore three halfe pence; now do Iremember the wordes the old man spake at the crosse; bestowe all thou hast, and this is all, till dead mens bones comes at thy call, heare holde it, and so farewell.
God, and all good, bee with you sir; naie you cormorants, ile bestowe one peale ofat mine owne proper costs and charges.
You may thanke God the long staffe and the bilbowe blade, crost not your cockescombe; well weele to the church stile, and haue a pot, and so tryll lyll.
Come lets go.
But harke you gammer, me thinkes thisbore a great sway in the parish.
O thiswas a maruelous fellow, he was but a poore man, but very well beloued: you shall see anon what thiswill come to.
Soft, who haue wee heere? our amorous haruest starres.
I, I, let vs sit still and let them alone.
Soft, who haue we here?
O this is a cholerick gentleman, all you that loue your liues, keepe out of the smell of his two hand sworde: nowe goes he to the coniurer.
Me thinkes the Coniurer should put the foole into a Iugling boxe.
Fee, fa, fum, here is the Englishman, Conquer him that can, came for his lady bright, To prooue himselfe a knight, And win her loue in fight.
Who hawe maisterare you here? heare you, you had best sit downe heere, and beg an almes with me.
Hence base cullion, heere is he that commaundeth ingresse and egresse with his weapon, and will enter at his voluntary whosoeuer saith no.
No.
So with that they kist, and spoiled the edge of as good a two hand sword, as euer God put life in; now goesin, spight of the coniurer.
Away with him into the open fields, to be a rauening pray to Crowes and Kites:And for this villain let him wander vp & downe In nought but darkenes and eternall night.
Heer hast thou slaina slashing knight And robbed pooreof his sight.
Hence villaine hence. Now I haue vntogiuen a potion of forgetfulnes, That when shee comes shee shall not know hir Brothers: Lo where they labour like to Country slaues, With spade and mattocke on this inchaunted ground. Now will I call hir by another name, For neuer shall she know hir selfe againe, Vntill thathath breathd his last. See where she comes.
Come hithertake this gode, Here hard at hand two slaues do worke and dig for gold. Gore them with this & thou shalt haue inough.
Good sir I know not what you meane.
She hath forgotten to be, But not forgot the same she should forget: But I will change hir name Faireso this Country calls you, Goe ply these strangers wench they dig for gold
O heauens! how I am beholding tothis faire yong man. But I must ply these strangers to their worke. See where they come.
O Brother see whereis.
Ohappy are we to see thee here.
What tell you mee ofprating swaines? I know nonor know I what you meane, Ply you your work or else you are like to smart.
Whyknowst thou not thy Brothers here? We come fromto seeke thee forth, And thou deceiuest thy selfe for thou art.
Yet more of, then take this and smart: What faine you shifts for to defer your labor? Worke villaines worke, it is for gold you digg.
Peace Brother peace, this vild inchanter Hath rauishtof hir sences cleane, And she forgets that she is.
Leaue cruell thou to hurt the miserable; Digg brother digg, for she is hard as steele.
Stay brother what hast thou descride?
Away & touch it not, it is some thing, that my Lord hath hidden there.
Well sed, thou plyest these Pyoners well, goe get you in you labouring slaues. Come, let vs in likewise, And heare the Nightingale record hir notes.
Now for a husband, house and home, God send a good one or none I pray God: My father hath sent me to the well for the water of life, and tells mee if I giue faire wordes I shall haue a husband.
But heere comesmy sweete sister, Ile stand by and heare what she saies.
My father hath sent mee to the well for water, and he tells me if I speake faire, I shall haue a husband and none of the worst: Well though I am blacke I am sure all the world will not forsake mee, and as the olde prouerbe is though I am blacke, I am not the diuell.
Marrie gup with a murren, I knowe wherefore thou speakest that, but goe thy waies home as wife as thou camst, or Ile set thee home with a wanion.
I thinke this be the curstest queane in the world, you see what she is, a little faire, but as prowd as the diuell, and the veriest vixen that liues vpon Gods earth. Well Ile let hir alone, and goe home and get another Pitcher, and for all this get me to the well for water.
Once againe for a husband, & in faithI haue got the start of you; Belike husbands growe by the Well side; now my father sayes I must rule my tongue: why alas what am I then? a woman without a tongue, is as a souldier without his weapon; but ile haue my water and be gon.
What is this,faire maiden white & red, Combe me smooth, and stroke my head: And thou shalt haue some cockell breadCockell callest thou it boy, faith ile giue you cockell bread.
Foe, what greasie groome haue wee here? Hee looks as though hee crept out of the backeside of the well; and speakes like a Drum perisht at the West end.
Whoope nowe I haue my dreame, did you neuer heare so great a wonder as this? Three blue beanes in a blue bladder, tattle bladder rattle.
Ile nowe set my countenance and to hir in prose, it may be this rim ram ruffe, is too rude an incounter. Let me faire Ladie if you be at leisure, reuell with your sweetnes, and raile vppon that cowardly Coniurer, that hath cast me or congealed mee rather into an vnkinde sleepe and polluted my Carcasse.
Laugh, laugh, thou hast thy fortune, a foole and a husbande vnder one.
Truely sweete heart as I seeme, about some twenty yeares, the very Aprill of mine age.
Why what a prating Asse is this?
Hir Corall lippes, hir crimson chinne,
By gogs bones thou art a flouting knaue, Hir Corall lippes, hir crimson chinne: ka wilshaw.
True my owne and my owne becausemine & mine because mine ha ha: Aboue a thousand pounds in possibilitie, and thingsfitting thy desire in possession.
The Sott thinkes I aske of his landes, Lobb be your comfort, and Cuckold bee your destenie: Heare you sir; and if you will haue vs, you had best say so betime.
True sweete heart and will royallize thy progeny with my petigree.
You are well ouertaken sir.
Who's that?
You are heartily well met sir.
Forbeare I say, who is that which pincheth mee?
Trusting in God good Master, that you are in so good health as all your friendes were at the making hereof: God giue you God morrowe sir, lacke you not a neate handsome and cleanly yong Lad, about the age of fifteene or sixteene yeares, that can runneby your horse, and for a neede make your Mastershippes shooes as blacke as incke, howe say you sir.
Alasse pretty Lad, I know not how to keepe my selfe, and much lesse a seruant, my pretty boy, my state is so bad.
Content your selfe, you shall not bee so ill a Master but ile bee as bad a seruant: Tut sir I know you though you know not me; Are not you the man sir, denie it if you can sir, that came from a strange place in the land of Catita, where Iacke a napes flies with his taile in his mouth, to seeke out a Ladie white as snowe, and as redd as blood; ha, ha, haue I toucht you now.
I thinke this boy be a spirit, How knowst thou all this?
Tut are not you the man sir, denie it if you can sir, that gaue all the money you had to the burying of a poore man, and but one three-halfe-pence left in your pursse: Content you sir, Ile serue you that is flat.
Well my Lad since thou art so impornate, I am content to entertaine thee, not as a seruant; but a copartner in my iourney. But whither shall we goe for I haue not any money more than one bare three halfe-pence.
Well Master content your selfe, for if my diuination bee not out, that shall beespent at the next Inne or alehouse we come too: for maister I knowe you are passing hungrie; therefore ile go before and prouide dinner vntill that you come, no doubt but youle come faire and softly after.
I, go before, ile follow thee.
But doo you heare maister, doo you know my name?
No I promise thee not yet.
Why I am.
, why be it so then.
How say you sir, doo you please to sit downe?
Hostes I thanke you, I haue no great stomack.
Pray sir, what is the reason your maister is so strange, doth not this meate please him.
Yes Hostes, but it is my maisters fashion to pay before hee eates, therefore a reckoning good hostesse.
Marry shall you sir presently.
Whywhat doost thou meane, thou knowest I haue not any money: therefore sweetetell me what shall I doo.
Well maister looke in your pursse.
Why faith it is a follie, for I haue no money.
Why looke you maister, doo so much for me.
Alasmy pursse is full of money.
Alas, maister, does that worde belong to that accident? why me thinkes I should haue seene you cast away your cloake, and in a brauado daunced a galliard round about the chamber; why maister, your man can teach you more wit than this, come hostis, cheere vp my maister.
You are heartily welcome: and if it please you to eate of a fat Capon, a faire birde, a finer birde, a sweeter birde, a crisper birde, a neater birde, your worship neuer eate off.
Thankes my fine eloquent hostesse.
But heare you maister, one worde by the way, are you content I shall be halfes in all you get in your iourney?
I am Iack, here is my hand.
Enough maister, I aske no more.
Come Hostesse receiue your money, and I thanke you for my good entertainment.
You are heartily welcome sir.
Comewhether go we now?
Mary maister to the coniurers presently.
Content: Hostis farewell.
Come my ducke come: I haue nowgot a wife, thou art faire, art thou not?
Mythe fairest aliue, make no doubt of that.
Come wench, are we almost at the wel.
Iwe are almost at the Well now, ile go fetch some water: sit downe while I dip my pitcher in.
Gently dip: but not to deepe; For feare you make the goulde~ beard to weepe.
Oh seeI haue combd a great deale of golde into my lap, and a great deale of corne.
Well said wench, now we shall haue iust enough, God send vs coiners to coine our golde: but come shall we go home sweet heart?
Nay comeI will lead you.
Sothings haue well hir, Thou hast gotten wealth to mend thy wit.
Come away maister come.
Go along, ile follow thee,, they say it is good to go crosse legged, and say his prayers backward: how saiest thou?
Tut neuer feare maister, let me alone, heere sit you still, speake not a word. And because you shall not be intised with his inchanting speeches; with this same wooll ile stop your eares: and so maister sit still, for I must to the Coniurer.
How now, what man art thou that sits so sad Why dost thou gaze vpon these stately trees, Without the leaue and will of? What not a word but mum, Thenthou art betraide.
What hand inuades the head of? What hatefull fury doth enuy my happy state? Thenthese are thy latest dayes, Alas my vaines are numd, my sinews shrinke, My bloud is pearst, my breath fleeting away, And now in my timelesse date is come to end: He in whose life his actions hath beene so foule,Now in his death to hell defends his soule.
Oh Sir are you gon: now I hope we shall haue some other coile: Now maister how like you this; the Coniurer hee is dead, and vowes neuer to trouble vs more. Now get you to your faire Lady, and see what you can doo with her: Alas he heareth me not all this while; but I will helpe that.
How now, what news?
Heere maister, take this sword and dig with it, at the foote of this hill.
How now, what is this?
Maister, without this the Coniurer could do nothing, and so long as this light lasts, so long doth his arte indure, and this being out, then doth his arte decay.
Why thenI will soone put out this light.
I maister, how?
Why with a stone ile breake the glasse, and then blowe it out.
No maister you may as soone breake the Smiths Anfill, as this little vyoll; nor the biggest blast that euerblew, cannot blowe out this little light; but she that is neither maide,wife, nor widowe. Maister, winde this horne; and see what will happen.
So maister, how like you this; this is she that ranne madding in the woods, his betrothed loue that keepes the crosse, and nowe this light being out, all are restored to their former libertie. And now maister to the Lady that you haue so long looked for.
God speed faire maide sitting alone there is once. God speed faire maide; there is twise: God speed faire maide, that is thrise.
Not so good sir, for you are by.
Enough maister, she hath spoke, now I will leaue her with you.
Thou fairest flower of these westerne parts: Whose beautie so reflecteth in my sight, As doth a Christall mirror in the sonne: For thy sweet sake I haue crost the frosen, Leauing faire, I saild vp, As farre aswhose inhansing streames, Cuts twixt theand the,These haue I crost for thee faire: Then grant me that which I haue sude for long.
Thou gentle knight, whose fortune is so good: To finde me out, and set my brothers free, My faith, my heart, my hand, I giue to thee.
Thankes gentle Madame: but heere comes Iack, thanke him, for he is the best friend that we haue.
How now Iack, what hast thou there?
Mary maister, the head of the coniurer.
Why Iack that is impossible, he was a young man.
Ah maister, so he deceiued them that beheld him: but hee was a miserable, old, and crooked man; though to each mans eye he seemed young and fresh, for maister; this Coniurer tooke the shape of the olde man that kept the crosse: and that olde man was in the likenesse of the Coniurer. But nowe maister winde your horne.
Welcome, welcome faire,Welcome, andboth, Now haue I her that I so long haue sought, So saith faire, if we haue your consent.
Valiantthou well deseruest To haue our fauours: so let vs reioyce, That by thy meanes we are at libertie. Heere may we ioy each in others sight, And this faire Lady haue her wandring knight.
So maister, nowe yee thinke you haue done: but I must haue a saying to you; you know you and I were partners, I to haue halfe in all you got.
Why so thou shalt.
Why then maister draw your sworde, part your Lady, let mee haue halfe of her presently.
Why I hopethou doost but iest, I promist thee halfe I got, but not halfe my Lady.
But what else maister, haue you not gotten her, therefore deuide her straight, for I will haue halfe there is no remedie.
Well ere I will falsifie my worde vnto my friend, take her all, heereile giue her thee.
Nay neither more nor lesse Maister, but euen iust halfe.
Before I will falsifie my faith vnto myfriend, I will diuide hir,thou shalt haue halfe.
Bee not so cruell vnto our sister gentle Knight.
O spare faireshee deserues no death.
Content your selues, my word is past to him, therefore prepare thy selfefor thou must die.
Then farewell worlde, adew.
Stay Master, it is sufficient I haue tride your constancie: Do you now remember since you paid for the burying of a poore fellow.
I very well Iacke.
Then Master thanke that good deed, for this good turne, and so God be with you all.
Iacke what art thou gone? Then farewell Iacke. Come brothers and my beauteous,and thy deare: We will towith ioyfull hearts.
Agreed, we follow thee and.
What Gammer, a sleepe?
By the Mas sonne tis almost day, and my windowes shuts at the Cocks crow.
Doo you heare Gammer, mee thinkes this Iacke bore a great sway amongst them.
O man, this was the ghost of the poore man, that they kept such a coyle to burie, & that makes him to help the wandring knight so much: But come let vs in, we will haue a cup of ale and a tost this morning and so depart.
Then you haue made an end of your tale Gammer?
Yes faith: When this was done I
tooke a peece of bread and cheese, and came
my way, and so shall you haue too before you
goe, to your breakefast.