If ye were not such a brabling foole and mad-braine scold as yee are, yee would neuer thus crosse your husbande in all actions. Tis no matter, let her serue me thus once more, Ile send her home to her dad with a vengeance. I can neuer go foorth a doores, but shee asketh mee whither I go? what I do? what busines? what I fetch? what I carry? * As though she were a Constable, or a tollgatherer. I haue pamperd her too much: she hath seruants about her, wooll, flax, and all things necessary to busie her withall, yet she watcheth & wondreth whither I go. Well sith it is so, she shall now haue some cause, I mean to dine this day abroad with a sweet friend of mine.
Yea mary now comes hee to the point that prickes me: this last speech gaules mee as much as it would doo his wife; If he dine not at home, I am drest.
We that haue Loues abroad, and wiues at home, are miserably hampred, yet would euery man could tame his shrewe as well as I doo mine. I haue now filcht away a fine ryding cloake of my wiues, which I meane to bestow vpon one that I loue better. Nay, if she be so warie and watchfull ouer me, I count it an almes deed to deceiue her.
Come, what share haue I in that same?
Out alas, I am taken.
True, but by your friend.
What, mine owne?
Yours (ifaith) bodie and goods if I had any.
Why thou hast a bodie.
Yea, but neither goods nor good bodie.
Thou couldst neuer come fitter in all thy life.
Tush, I euer do so to my friends, I know how to come alwaies in the nicke. Where dine ye to day?
Ile tell thee of a notable pranke.
What did the Cooke marre your meate in the dressing? Would I might see the reuersion.
Tell me didst thou see a picture, howEagle snatcht away, or howstole away.
Often, but what care I for shadowes, I want substance.
Looke thee here, looke not I like such a picture?
O ho, what cloake haue ye got here?
Prethee say I am now a braue fellow.
But hearke ye, where shall we dine?
Tush, say as I bid thee man.
Out of doubt ye are a fine man.
What? canst adde nothing of thine owne?
Ye are a most pleasant Gentleman.
On yet.
Nay not a word more, vnlesse ye tell mee how you and your wife be fallen out.
Nay I haue a greater secret then that to impart to thee.
Say your minde.
Come farther this way from my house.
So, let me heare.
Nay farther yet.
I warrant ye man.
Nay yet farther.
Tis pittie ye were not made a water-man to row in a wherry.
Why?
Because ye go one way, and looke an other, stil least your wife should follow ye. But what's the matter, Ist not almost dinner time?
Seest thou this cloake?
Not yet. Well what of it?
This same I meane to giue to.
That's well, but what of all this?
There I meane to haue a delicious dinner prepard for her and me.
And me?
And thee.
O sweet word. What, shall I knock presently at her doore?
I knocke. But staie too, let's not be too rash. Oh see shee is in good time comming forth.
Ah, he now lookes against the Sun, how her beames dazell his eyes.
What mine owne, welcome sweete heart.
And what am I, welcome too?
You sir? ye are out of the number of my welcome guests.
I am like a voluntary souldier, out of paie.
, I haue determined that here shal be pitcht a field this day; we meane to drinke for the heauens: And which of vs performes the brauest seruice at his weopon the wine boll, your selfe as Captaine shall paie him his wages according to his deserts.
Agreed.
I would we had the weapons, for my valour pricks me to the battaile.
Shall I tell thee sweete mouse? I neuer looke vpon thee, but I am quite out of loue with my wife.
Yet yee cannot chuse, but yee must still wearesomething of hers: whats this same?
This? such a spoyle (sweete heart) as I tooke from her to put on thee.
Mine owne, well woorthie to bee my deare, of all dearest.
Now she showes her selfe in her likenesse, when shee findes him in the giuing vaine, she drawes close to him.
I thinkegot not the garter fromso hardly, as I got this from my wife. Take this, and with the same, take my heart.
Thus they must do that are right Louers: especially if they meane to beggers with any speed.
I bought this same of late for my wife, it stood mee (I thinke) in some ten pound
There's tenne pounde bestowed verie thriftily.
But knowe yee what I woulde haue yee doo?
It shall bee done, your dinner shall be readie.
Let a good dinner be made for vs three. Harke ye, some oysters, a mary-bone pie or two, some artichockes, and potato rootes, let our other dishes be as you please.
You shall sir.
I haue a litle businesse in this Cittie, by that time dinner will be prepared. Farewell till then, sweete: Come.
Nay I meane to follow yee: I will sooner leese my life, then fight of you till this dinner be done.
Who's there? Call meethe Cooke hither.
, take the Hand-basket, and heere, there'sten shillings is there not?
Tis so mistresse.
Buy mee of all the daintiest meates ye can get, ye know what I meane: so as three may dine passing well, and yet no more then inough.
What guests haue ye to day mistresse?
Here will beand his Parasite, and my selfe.
That's ten persons in all.
How many?
Ten, for I warrant you, that Parasite may stand for eight at his vittels.
Go dispatch as I bid you, and looke ye returne with all speed.
I will haue all readie with a trice.
Surely, I thinke Sea-fairers neuer take so comfortable a ioy in any thing, as when they haue bene long tost and turmoylde in the wide seas, they hap at last to ken land.
Ile be sworn, I shuld not be gladder to see a whole Country of mine owne, then I haue bene at such a sight. But I pray, wherfore are we now come to? must we needs go to see euerie Towne that we heare off?
Till I finde my brother, all Townes are alike to me: I must trie in all places.
Why then let's euen as long as wee liue seeke your brother: six yeares now haue we roamde about thus,, all the vpper sea, all high, all Hauen Towns in, I think if we had sought a needle all this time, we must needs haue found it, had it bene aboue ground. It cannot be that he is aliue, and to seek a dead manthus among the liuing: what folly is it?
Yea, could I but once find any man that could certainly enforme me of his death, I were satisfied; otherwise I can neuer desist seeking: Litle knowest thouhow neare my heart it goes.
This is washing of a Blackamore. Faith let's goe home, vnlesse ye meane we should write a storie of our trauaile.
Sirra, no more of these sawcie speeches, I perceiue I much teach ye how to serue me, not to rule me.
I, so, now it appeares what it is to be a seruant. Wel yet I must speake my conscience. Do ye heare sir? Faith I must tell ye one thing, when I looke into the leane estate of your purse, and consider aduisedly of your decaying stocke, I hold it verie needfull to be drawing homeward, lest in looking your brother, we quite lose our selues. For this assure your selfe, this Towne, is a place of outragious expences, exceeding in all ryot and lasciuiousnesse: and (I heare) as full of Ribaulds, Parasites, Drunkards, Catchpoles, Cony-catchers, and Sycophants, as it can hold: then for Curtizans, why here's the currantest stamp of them in the world. Ye must not thinke here to scape with as light cost as in other places. The verie name shews the nature, no man comes hither.
Yee say very well indeed: giue mee my purse into mine owne keeping, because I will so be the safer,.
Why sir?
Because I feare you wil be busie among theCurtizans, & so be cosened of it: then should I take great paines in belabouring your shoulders, so to auoid both these harms, Ile keep it my selfe.
I pray do so sir, all the better.
* I haue tickling geare here yfaith for their dinners: It grieues me to the heart to think how that cormorant knauemust haue his share in these daintie morsels Butwhat? Iscome alreadie, before I could come from the Market?how do ye sir? how haps it ye come so soone?
God a mercy my good friend, doest thou know mee?
Know ye? no not I. Where's mouldichappes that must dine with ye? A murrin on his manners.
Whom meanest thou good fellow?
Whyworship, that whorson lick-trencher, your Parasiticall attendant.
What? what attendant? My Attendant? Surely this fellow is mad.
Did not I tell ye what cony-catching villaines yee should finde here?
, harke ye sir, ye come too soone backe again to dinner, I am but returned from the Market.
Fellow, here thou shalt haue money of me, goe get the priest to sacrifice for thee. I know thou art mad, els thou wouldst neuer vse a straunger thus?
Alas sir,was wont to be no stranger to you, know ye not?
, or, or what the diuell thou art, I know not, neither do I care to know.
I know you to be.
Thou shouldst be in thy wits, in that thou namest me so right, but tell me, where hast thou knowne me?
Where? euen heere, where ye first fell in loue with my mistresse.
I neither haue Louer, neither knowe I who thou art.
Know ye not who I am? who fils your cup & dresses your meate at our house?
What a slaue is this? that I had somewhat to breake the Rascals pate withall.
At your house, when as I neuer came intill this day.
Oh thats true. Do ye not dwell in yonder house?
Foule shame light vpon them that dwell there, for my part.
Questionlesse, hee is mad indeede, to curse himselfe thus. Harke ye.
What saist thou?
If I may aduise ye, ye shall bestow this money which ye offred me, vpon a sacrifice for your selfe: for out of doubt you are mad that curse your selfe.
What a verlet art thou to trouble vs thus?
Tush he wil many times iest with me thus. Yet when his wife is not by, tis a ridiculous iest.
VVhat's that?
This I say, Thinke ye I haue brought meate inough for three of you? If not, ile fetche more for you and your wench, and snatchcrust your Parasite.
VVhat wenches? what Parasites?
Villaine, Ile make thee tell me what thou meanest by all this talke?
Away Iack Napes, I say nothing to thee, for I know thee not, I speake to him that I know.
Out drunken foole, without doubt thou art out of thy wits.
That you shall see by the dressing of your meat. Go, go, ye were better to go in and finde somewhat to do there, whiles your dinner is making readie. Ile tell my mistresse ye be here.
Is he gone?I think vppon thy words alreadie.
Tush marke I pray, Ile laie fortie pound here dwels some Curtizan to whom this fellow belong.
Butwonder how he knowes my name.
Oh ile tell yee. These Courtizans assoone as anie straunge shippe arriueth at the Hauen, they sende a boye or a wench to enquire what they be, what their names be, whence they come, wherefore they come, &c. If they can byany meanes strike acquaintance with him, or allure him to their houses, he is their owne. We are here in a tickle place maister, tis best to be circumspect.
I mislike not thy counsaile.
I, but follow it then. Soft, here comes somebodie forth. Here sirs, Marriners, keep this same amongst you.
Let the doore stand so, away, it shall not be shut. Make hast within there ho: maydes looke that all things be readie. Couer the boord, put fire vnder the perfuming pannes, let all things be very handsome. Where is hee, thatsayd stood without here? Oh, what meane you sweet heart, that ye come not in? I trust you thinke your selfe more welcome to this house then to your owne, and great reason why you should do so. Your dinner & all things are readie as you willed. Will ye go sit downe?
Whom doth this woman speake to?
Euen to you sir, to whom else should I speake?
Gentlewoman ye are a straunger to me, and I maruell at your speeches.
Yea sir, but such a straunger, as I acknowledge ye for my best and dearest friend, and well you haue deserued it.
Surely, this woman is also mad or drunke, that vseth all this kindnesse to mee vppon so small acquaintance.
Tush, did not I tell ye right? these be but leaues which fall vpon you now, in comparison of the trees that wil tumble on your necke shortly. I tolde ye, here were siluer tong'de hacsters. But let me talke with her a litle. Gentlewoman what acquaintance haue you with this man? where haue you seene him?
Where he sawe me, here in.
In? who neuer till this day set his foote within the Towne.
Go, go, flowting Iack.what need al this? I pray go in.
She also calls me by my name.
She smels your purse.
come hither, here take my purse. Ile know whether she aime at me or my purse, ere I go.
Will ye go in, to dinner sir?
A good motion, yea and thanks with all my heart.
Neuer thanke me for that which you commaunded to be prouided for your selfe.
That I commaunded?
Yea, for you and your Parasite.
My Parasite?
, who came with you this morning when you brought me the cloake which you got from your wife.
A cloake that I brought you, which I got from my wife?
Tush what needeth all this iesting? Pray leaue off.
Iest or earnest, this I tell ye for a truth. I neuer had wife, neither haue I, nor neuer was in this place till this instant: for only thus farre am I come, since I brake my fast in the ship.
What ship do ye tell me off?
Marry ile tell ye, an old rotten weather-beaten ship, that we haue saild vp and downe in this sixe yeares, Ist not time to be going homewards thinke ye?
Come, come,, I pray leaue this sporting and go in.
Well Gentlewoman, the truth is, you mistake my person, it is some other that you looke for.
Why, thinke ye I know ye not to be, the sonne of, and haue heard ye say, ye were borne at, wheredid raigne, then, then, and now.
All this is true.
Either shee is a witch, or else shee hath dwelt there and knew ye there.
Ile goe in with her, Ile see further of this matter.
Ye are cast away then.
Why so? I warrant thee. I can loose nothing, somwhat I shall gaine, perhaps a good lodging during my abode heere. Ile dissemble with her an other while. Nowe when you please let vs go in, I made straunge with you, because of this fellow here, least he should tell my wife of the cloake which I gaue you.
Will ye staie any longer for youryour Parasite?
Not I, Ile neither staie for him, nor haue him let come in, if he do come.
All the better. But sir, will yee doo one thing for me.
What is that?
To beare that cloake which you gaue me, to the Diars, to haue it new trimd and altred.
Yea that will be well, so my wife shall not know it. Let mee haue it with mee after dinner. I will but speake a word or two with this fellowe, then ile follow yee in. Hocome aside: goe and prouide for thy selfe, and these shipboyes in some Inne, then looke that after dinner you come hither for me.
Ah maister will yee be conycatcht thus wilfully.
Peace foolish knaue, seest thou not what a sot she is, I shall coozen her I warrant thee.
Ay maister.
Wilt thou be gone?
See, see, she hath him safe inough now. Thus he hath escaped a hundreth Pyrates hands at sea: and now one land-rouer hath bourded him at first encounter. Come away fellowes.
* Twentie yeares I thinke and more, haue I playde the knaue, yet neuer playd I the foolish knaue as I haue done this morning. I follow, and he goes to the Hall where now the Sessions are holden: there thrusting our selues into the prease of people, when I was in midst of all the throng, he gaue me the slip, that I could neuer more set eye on him, and I dare sweare, came directly to dinner. That I would he that first deuised these Sessions were hang'd, and all that euer came of him: tis such a hinderance to men that haue belly businesses in hand. If a man be not there at his call, they amearce him with a vengeance. Men that haue nothing else to do, that do neither bid anie man, nor are themselues bidden to dinner, such should come to Sessions, not we that haue these matters to looke too. If it were so, I had not thus lost my dinner this day: which I think in my conscience he did euen purposely couzen me off. Yet I meane to go see: if I can but light vppon the reuersion, I may perhaps get my peny-worthes. But how now? is thiscomming away from thence? dinner done, and all dispacht? what execrable lucke haue I?
Tush I warrant ye, it shall be done as ye would wish, Ile haue it so altered and trimd anew, that it shall by no meanes be knowne againe.
He carries the cloake to the Dyars, dinner done, the wine drunke vp, the Parasite shut out of doores. Well, let me liue no longer, but ile reuenge this iniurious mockerie. But first ile harken awhile what he saith.
Good goddes, who euer had such lucke as I? Such cheare, such a dinner, such kinde entertainment? And for a farewell, this cloake which I meane shall go with me.
He speakes so softly, I cannot heare what hee saith, I am sure he is now flowting at me for the losse of my dinner.
She tels me how I gaue it her, and stole it from my wife. When I perceiued she was in an error, though I knew not how, I began to sooth her, and to say euery thing as she said. Meane while I far'd well, and that a free cost.
Well, I'le go talke with him.
Who is this same that comes to me?
O well met fickle-braine, false and treacherous dealer, craftie and vniust promise breaker. How haue I deserued, you should so giue me the slip, come before and dispatch the dinner, deale so badly with him that hath reuerenst ye like a sonne.
Good fellow what meanest thou by these speeches? Raile not on mee, vnlesse thou intendst to receiue a Railers hire.
I haue receiued the iniury (sure I am) alreadie.
Prethee tell me, what is thy name?
Well, well, mock on sir, mock on, doo ye not know my name?
In troth I neuer sawe thee in all my life, much lesse do I know thee.
Fie, Awakeawake, ye ouersleepe your selfe.
I am awake, I know what I say.
Know you not?
, or, I know thee not.
Did ye filch a cloake from your wife this morning, and bring it hither to?
Neither haue I wife, neither gaue I any cloake to, neither filcht I any from any bodie.
Will ye denie that which you did in my company?
Wilt thou say I haue done this in thy company?
VVill I say it? yea I will stand to it.
Away filthie mad driuell away, I will talke nolonger with thee.
Not a world of men shall staie me, but ile go tell his wife of all the whole matter, sith he is at this point with me. I will make this same as vnblest a dinner as euer he eate.
It makes mee wonder, to see how euery one that meetes me cauils thus with me. VVherefore comes foorth the mayd now?
, my mistresse commends her hartily to you, and seeing you goe that way to the Dyars, shee also desireth you to take this Chaine with you, and put it to mending at the Goldsmythes, shee would haue two or three ounces of gold more in it, and the fashion amended.
Either this or any thing else within my power, tell her, I am readie to accomplish.
Do ye know this Chaine sir?
Yea I know it to be gold.
This is the same you once tooke out of your wiues Casket.
VVho, did I?
Haue you forgotten?
I neuer did it.
Giue it me againe then.
Tarry, yes I remember it: tis it I gaue your mistres.
Oh, are ye aduised?
VVhere are the bracelets that I gaue her likewise?
I neuer knew of anie.
Faith, whengaue this, I gaue them too.
VVell sir, ile tell her this shall be done?
I, I, tell her so, shee shall haue the cloake and this both togither.
I pray, put a litle iewell for my eare to making for me, ye knowam alwaies readie to pleasure you.
will, giue mee the golde, ile paie for the workemanship.
Laie out for me, ile paie it ye againe.
Alas I haue none now.
When you haue, will ye?
I will. Goe bid your mistresse make no doubt of these, I warrant her, ile make the best hand I can of them. Is she gone? Doo not all the gods conspire to loade mee with good lucke? well I see tis high time to get mee out of these coasts, least all these matters should be lewd deuises to draw me into some snare. There shall my garland lie, because if they seeke me, they may thinke I am gone that way. * I wil now goe see ifcan finde my man, thatmay tell him howhaue sped.
Thinkes hewill be made such a sot, and to be still his drudge, while he prowles and purloynes all thathaue to giue his Trulles?
Nay hold your peace, wee'll catch him in the nicke. This way he came, in his garland forsooth, bearing the cloak to the Dyars. And seepray where the garland lyes, this way he is gone. See, see, where he comes againe now without the cloake.
VVhat shallnow do?
VVhat? that which ye euer do, bayt him for life.
Surelythinke it best so.
Stay, wee will stand a side a little, ye shall catch him vnawares.
It would make a man at his wittes end, to see how brabbling causes are handled yonder at the Court. If a poore man neuer so honest, haue a matter come to be scand, there is hee outfaste, and ouerlaide with countenance: If arich man neuer so vile a wretch come to speake, there they are all readie to fauour his cause. VVhat with facing out bad causes for the oppressors, and patronizing some iust actions for the wronged, the Lawyers they pocket vp all the gaines. For mine own part,come not away emptie, thoughhaue bene kept long against my will: For taking in hand to dispatch a matter this morning for one of my acquaintaunce,was no sooner entered into it, but his aduersaries laide so hard vnto his charge, and brought such matter against him, that do whatcould,could not winde my selfe out til now.am sore afraydthinks much vnkindnes in me thatstaid do long, yet she will not be angry considering the giftgaue her to day.
How thinke ye by that?
thinke him a most vile wretch thus to abuse me.
will hie me thither.
Yea go pilferer, goe with shame inough, no bodie sees your lewd dealings and vile theeuery.
How now wife, what aile yee? what is the matter?
Aske yee mee whats the matter? Fye vppon thee.
Are ye not in a fit of an ague, your pulses beate so sore? to himsay.
Pray wife, why are ye so angry with me?
Oh you know not?
He knowes, but he would dissemble it.
What is it?
My cloake.
Your cloake.
My cloake man, why do ye blush?
He cannot cloake his blushing. Nay I might not go to dinner with you, do ye remember? to him I say.
Hold thy peace.
Ha hold my peace, looke ye, he beckons on mee to hold my peace.
I neither becken nor winke on him.
Out, out, what a wretched life is this that I liue.
Why what aile ye woman?
Are ye not ashamed to deny so confidently, that which is apparant.
I protest vnto you before all the goddes (is not this inough) that I beckond not on him.
Oh sir, this is an other matter, touch him in the former cause.
What former cause?
The cloake man, the cloake, fetch the cloake againe from the Dyars.
What cloake?
Nay ile say no more, sith ye know nothing of your owne doings.
Tell me wife, hath any of your seruants abused you? Let me know.
Tush, tush.
I would not haue you to be thus disquietted.
Tush, tush.
You are fallen out with some of your friends.
Tush, tush.
Sure I am, I haue not offended you.
No, you haue dealt verie honestly.
Indeed wife, I haue deserued none of these words, tell me, are ye not well?
What shall he flatter ye now?
I speak not to thee knaue. Good wife come hither.
Away, away, keep your hands off.
So, bid me to dinner with you againe, then slip away from me, when you haue done, come forth brauely in your garland to flout me: Alas you knew not me, euen now.
Why Asse, I neither haue yet dined, nor camethere, since we were there togither.
VVho euer heard one so impudent? Did yee not meete me here euen now, and would make me beleeuewasmad, and said ye were a straunger, and ye knew me not?
Of a truth since wee went togither to the Sessions Hall, I neuer returned till this very instant, as you two met me.
Go too, go too, I know ye well inough. Did ye think I would not cry quittance with you, yes faith, I haue tolde your wife all.
What hast thou told her?
I cannot tell, aske her.
Tell me wife, what hath he told ye of me? Tell me I say, what was it?
As though you knew not, my cloake is stolne from me.
Is your cloake stolne from ye?
Do ye aske me?
Ifknew, I would not aske.
O craftie companion, how he would shift the matter, Come, come, deny it not, I tell ye, I haue bewrayd all.
What hast thou bewrayd?
Seeing ye will yeeld to nothing be it neuer so manifest, Heare mee, and ye shall know in fewe words both the cause of my griefe, and what he hath told me. I say my cloake is stolne from me.
My cloake is stolne from me?
Looke how he cauils, she saith it is stolne from her.
I haue nothing to say to thee: I say wife tell me.
I tell ye, my cloake is stolne out of my house.
Who stole it?
He knowes best that carried it away.
Who was that?
T'was very ill done of him. Whatwas that?
You.
I, who will say so?
I will.
And I: and that you gaue it to.
I gaue it?
You.
You, you, you, shall we fetch a kennell of Beagles that may cry nothing but you, you, you, you. For we are wearie of it.
Heare me one word wife, I protest vnto you by all the gods,gaue it her not, indeed I lent it her to vse a while.
Faith sir,neuer giue nor lend your apparell out of doores, mee thinkes ye might let mee dispose of mine owne garments, as you do of yours.pray then fetch it mee home againe.
You shall haue it againe without faile.
Tis best for you thathaue: otherwise thinke not to roost within these doores againe.
Harke ye, what say ye to me now, for bringing these matters to your knowledge?
say, when thou hast anie thing stolne from thee, come to me, and I will helpe thee to seeke it. And so farewell.
God a mercy for nothing, that can neuer be, forhaue nothing in the world worth the stealing. So now with husband and wife and all,am cleane out of fauour. A mischiefe on ye all.
My wife thinks she is notably reueng'd on me, now she shuttes mee out of doores, as though I had not a better place to be welcome too. If she shut me out, I know who wil shut me in. Now will I entreateto let me haue the cloake againe to stop my wiues mouth withal, and then willprouide a better for her. Ho who is within there? somebodie tellI must speake with her.
Who calls?
Your friend, more then his owne.
O, why stand ye here? pray come in.
Tarry, I must speake with ye here.
Say your minde.
Wot ye what? my wife knowes all the matter now, and my comming is, to request you, that I may haue againe the cloake which I brought you, that somay appease her: and I promise you, ile giue ye an other worth two of it.
Whygaue it you to carry to your Dyars, and my chaine likewise, to haue it altered.
Gaue mee the cloake and your chaine? In truth I neuer sawe ye since I left it heere with you, and so went to the Sessions, from whence I am but now returned.
Ah then sir, I see you wrought a deuice to defraude mee of them both, didtherefore put yee in trust? Well, well.
To defraud ye? No, butsay, my wife hath intelligence of the matter.
Why sir,asked them not, ye brought them me of your owne free motion. Now ye require them againe, take them, make sops of them: you and your wife togither, think ye I esteeme them or you either. Goe, come to mee againe when I send for you.
What so angry with mee, sweete? Staie, I pray staie.
Staie? Faith sir no: thinke ye I will staie at your request?
What gone in chasing, and clapt to the doores: now I am euerie way shut out for a very benchwhistler: neither shall I haue entertainment heere nor at home. I were best go trie some other friends, and aske counsaile what to do.
Most foolishly was I ouerseene in giuing my purse and money to, whom I can no where find, I feare he is fallen into some lewd companie.
I maruaile that my husband comes not yet, but see where he is now, and brings my cloake with him.
I muse where the knaue should be.
I will go ring a peale through both his eares for this his dishonest behauiour. Oh sir, ye are welcome home with your theeuery on your shoulders, are ye not ashamde to let all the world see and speake of your lewdnesse?
How now? what lackes this woman?
Impudent beast, stand ye to question about it? For shame hold thy peace.
What offence haue I done woman, that I should not speake to you?
Askest thou what offence? O shamelesse boldnesse.
Good woman, did ye neuer heare why the Grecians termedto be a bitch?
Neuer.
Because she did as you do now, on whom soeuer she met withall, she railed, and therfore well deserued that dogged name.
These foule abuses and contumelies, I can neuer endure, nay rather will I liue a widowes life to my dying day.
What care I whether thou liuest as a widow or as a wife. This passeth, that I meet with none but thus they vexe me with straunge speeches.
What straunge speeches? I say I will surely liue a widowes life, rather then suffer thy vile dealings.
Prethee for my part, liue a widow till the worldes end, if thou wilt.
Euen now thou deniedst that thou stolest it fromme, and now thou bringest it home openly in my sight. Art not ashamde?
Woman, you are greatly to blame to charge mee with stealing of this cloake, which this day an other gaue me to carry to be trimde.
Well, I will first complaine to my father. Ho boy, who is within there?go runne quickly to my father, desire him of all loue to come ouer quickly to my house. Ile tell him first of your prankes, I hope he will not see me thus handled.
What a Gods name meaneth this mad woman thus to vexe me?
I am mad because I tell ye of your vile actions, and lewde pilfring away my apparell and my Iewels, to carry to your filthie drabbes.
For whome this woman taketh mee I knowe not,know her as much as I knowwiues father.
Do ye not know me? That's well, I hope ye know my father, here he comes, looke, do ye know him?
As much as I knewof. Euen him and thee I know both alike.
Doest know neither of vs both, me nor my father?
Faith nor thy grandfather neither.
This is like the rest of your behauiour.
* Though bearing so great a burthen, as olde age, I can make no great haste, yet as I can, I will goe to my daughter, who I know hath some earnest businesse with me, that shee sends in such haste, not telling the cause why I should come. But I durst laie a wager, I can gesse neare the matter: I suppose it is some brabble between her husband and her. These yoong women that bring great dowries to their husbands, are so masterfull and obstinate, that they will haue their own wils in euerie thing, and make men seruants to their weake affections. And yoong men too,must needs say, be naught now a dayes. Well ile go see, but yonder mee thinks standsmy daughter, and her husband too. Oh tis euen as I gessed.
Father ye are welcome.
How now daughter? What? is all well? why is your husband so sad? haue ye bin chiding? tell me, vvhich of you is in the fault?
First father know, that I haue not any way misbehaued my selfe, but the truth is, I can by no meanes endure this bad man to die for it: and therefore desire you to take me home to you againe.
What is the matter.
He makes me a stale and a laughing stocke to all the world.
Who doth?
This good husband here, to whom you married me.
See, see, how oft haue I warned you of falling out with your husband?
I cannot auoid it, if he doth so fowly abuse me.
I alwaies told ye, you must beare with him, ye must let him alone, ye must not watch him, nor dog him, nor meddle with his courses in any sort.
Hee hauntes naughtie harlottes vnder my nose.
Hee is the wiser, because hee cannot bee quiet at home.
There hee feastes and bancquets, and spendes and spoiles.
Wold ye haue your husband serue ye as your drudge? Ye will not let him make merry, nor entertaine his friendes at home.
Father will ye take his part in these abuses, and forsake me?
Not so daughter, but if I see cause, I wil as well tel him of his dutie.
I vvould I vvere gone from this prating father and daughter.
Hitherto I see not but hee keepes ye vvell, ye vvantnothing, apparrell, mony, seruants, meate, drinke, all thinges necessarie: I feare there is fault in you.
But he filcheth away my apparrell and my iewels, to giue to his Trulles.
If he doth so, tis verie ill done, if not, you doo ill to say so.
You may beleeue me father, for there you may see my cloake which now he hath fetcht home againe, and my chaine which he stole from me.
Now willgoe talke with him to knowe the truth. Tell me, how is it, that I heare such disorder in your life? Why are ye so sad man? wherein hath your wife offended you?
Old man (what to call yeknow not) by high, and by all the Godssweare vnto you, whatsoeuer this woman here accuseth mee to haue stolne from her, it is vtterly false and vntrue, and if I euer set foote within her doores,wishe the greatest miserie in the worlde to light vppon me.
Why fond man, art thou mad to deny that thou euer setst foote within thine owne house where thou dwellest?
Dodwell in that house?
Doest thou denie it?
I do.
Harke yee daughter, are ye remooued out of your house?
Father, he vseth you as he doth me, this life I haue with him.
, I pray leaue this fondnesse, ye iest too peruersly with your friends.
Good old father, what I pray haue you to do with me? or why should this woman thus trouble me, with whom I haue no dealings in the world?
Father, marke I pray how his eies sparkle, they rowle in his head, his colour goes and comes, he lookes wildly. See, see.
What? they say now I am mad, the best way for me is to faine my selfe mad indeed, so I shall be rid of them.
Looke how he stares about, now he gapes.
Come away daughter, come from him.
, do ye call mee to come hunt in the woods with you, I see, I heare, I come, I flie, but I cannot get out of these fields. Here is an old mastiffe bitch stands barking at mee, and by her standes an old goate that beares false witnesse against many a poore man.
Out vpon him Bedlam foole.
Harke,commaunds me thatshould rende out hir eyes with a burning lampe.
O father, he threatens to pull out mine eyes.
Good gods, these folke say I am mad, and doubtlesse they are mad themselues.
Daughter.
Here father, what shall we do?
What if I fetch my folkes hither, and haue him carried in before he do any harme.
How now? they will carry mee in if I looke not to my selfe: I were best to skare them better yet. Doest thou bid me, to teare this dog in peeces with my nayles? if I laie hold on him, I will do thy commandment.
Get thee into thy house daughter, away quickly.
She is gone: yeaI will sacrifice this olde beast vnto thee: and if thou commandest mee, I will cut his throate with that dagger that hangs at his girdle.
Come not neare me sirra.
Yea I will quarter him, and pull all the bones out of his flesh, then will I barrell vp his bowels.
Sure I am sore afraid he will do some hurt.
Many things thou commandest me, wouldst thou haue me harnesse vp these wilde horses, and then clime vp into the Chariot, & so ouer-ride this old stincking toothlesse Lyon. So now I am in the Chariot, and I haue hold on the raines, here is my whip, hait, come ye wilde Iades, make ahideous noyse with your stamping: hait I say, will ye not go?
What? doth he threaten me with his horses?
Harke, nowbids mee ride ouer him thatstands there, and kill him. How now? who pulles mee downe from my Chariot by the haires of my head. Oh shall I not fulfillcommandment?
See, see, what a sharpe disease this is, and how well he was euen now. I will fetch a Phisitian straight, before hee grow too farre into this rage.
Are they both gone now? Ile then hie me away to my ship, tis time to be gone from hence.
My loines ake with sitting, and mine eies with looking, while I staie for yonder laizie Phisitian: see now where the creeping drawlatch comes.
What disease hath hee said you? Is it a letarge or a lunacie, or melancholie, or dropsie?
Wherfore I pray do I bring you, but that you shuld tell me what it is? and cure him of it.
Fie, make no question of that, Ile cure him I warrant ye. Oh here he comes, staie, let vs marke what he doth.
Neuer in my life had I more ouerthwart fortune in one day, and all by the villanie of this false knaue the Parasite, mythat workes such mischiefs against mee his King. But let me liue no longer, but ile be reuengde vppon the life of him: his life? nay tis my life, for hee liues by my meate and drinke, Ile vtterly withdraw the slaues life from him. Andshee sheweth plainly what she is: who because I require the cloake again to carrie to my wife, saith I gaue it her, and flatly falles out with me. How vnfortunate am I?
Do ye heare him?
He complaines of his fortune.
Go to him.
, how do ye man? why keepe you not your cloake ouer your arme? It is verie hurtfull to your disease. Keepe ye warme I pray.
Why hang thy selfe, what carest thou.
Sir can you smell anie thing?
I smell a prating dolt of thee.
Oh I will haue your head throughly purged. Pray tell me, what vse you to drinke? white wine or claret?
What the diuell carest thou?
Looke, his fit now begins.
Why doest not as well aske mee whethereate bread, or cheese, or beefe, or porredge, or birdes that beare feathers, or fishes that haue finnes.
See what idle talke he falleth into.
Tarry, I will aske him further., tell me, be not your eyes heauie and dull sometimes?
What doest thinke I am an Owle?
Doo not your guttes gripe ye, and croake in your belly?
When I am hungrie they do, else not.
He speakes not like a mad man in that. Sleepe ye soundly all night?
When I haue paid my debts I do. The mischiefe light on thee, with all thy friuolous questions.
Oh now he rageth vpon those words, take heed.
Oh this is nothing to the rage he was in euen now. He called his wife bitch, and all to nought.
Did?
Thou didst, mad fellow, and threatenedst to ryde ouer me here with a Chariot and horses, and to kill mee, and teare me in peeces. This thou didst,know what I say.
say, thou stolestCrowne from his head,and thou wert whipt through the Towne for it, and that thou hast kild thy father, and beaten thy mother. Doo ye thinke I am so mad that I cannot deuise as notable lyes of you, as you do of me?
Maister Doctor, pray heartily make speede to cure him, see ye not how mad he waxeth?
Ile tell ye, hee shall be brought ouer to my house, and there will I cure him.
Is that best?
What else, there I can order him as I list.
Well, it shall be so.
Oh sir,will make yee take neesing powder this twentie dayes.
Ile beate yee first with a bastanado, this thirtie dayes.
Fetch men to carry him to my house.
How many will serue the turne?
Being no madder then hee is now, foure will serue.
Ile fetch them, staie you with him maister Doctor.
No by my faith, Ile goe home to make readie all things needfull. Let your men bring him hither.
I go.
Are they both gone? Good Gods what meaneth this? These men say I am mad, who without doubt are mad themselues. I stirre not, I fight not,am not sicke. I speake to them, I know them. Well what were I now best to do? I would goe home, but my wife shuttes me foorth a doores.is as farre out with me too. Euen herewill rest me till the euening, I hope by that time, they will take pittie on me.
* The proofe of a good seruant, is to regard his maisters businesse as well in his absence, as in his presence: and I thinke him a verie foole that is not carefull as well for hisribbes and shoulders, as for his belly and throate. When I think vpon the rewards of a sluggard, I am euer pricked with a carefull regard of my backe and shoulders: for in truth I haue no fancie to these blows, as many a one hath: methinks it is no pleasure to a man to be basted with a ropes end two or three houres togither. I haue prouided yonder in the Towne, for all our marriners, and safely bestowed all my masters Trunkes and fardels: and am now comming to see if he be yet got forth of this daungerous gulfe, where I feare me is ouer plunged, pray God he be not ouerwhelmed andpast helpe ere I come.
Before Gods and men,charge and commaund you sirs, to execute with great care that which I appoint you: if yee loue the safetie of your owne ribbes and shoulders, then goe take me vp my sonne in lawe, laie all hands vpon him, why stand ye stil? what do ye doubt? I saie, care not for his threatnings, nor for anie of his words. Take him vp and bring him to the Phisitions house: I will go thither before.
What newes? how now masters? what will ye do with me? why do ye thus beset me? whither carrie ye mee? Helpe, helpe, neighbors, friends, Citizens.
O, what do I see? my maister abused by a companie of varlets.
Is there no good man will helpe me?
Helpe ye maister? yes the villaines shall haue my life before they shall thus wrong ye. Tis more fit I should be kild, then you thus handled. Pull out that rascals eye that holds ye about the necke there. I'le clout these peasants, out ye rogue, let go ye varlet.
I haue hold of this villaines eie.
Pull it out, and let the place appeare in his head. Away ye cutthroat theeues, ye murtherers.
O, O, ay, ay,
Away, get ye hence, ye mongrels, ye dogs. Will yebe gone? Thou raskall behind there, ile giue thee somewhat more, take that. It was time to come maister, you had bene in good case if I had not bene heere now, I tolde you what would come of it.
Now as the gods loue me, my good friend I thank thee: thou hast done that for me which I shall neuer be able to requite.
I'le tell ye how sir, giue me my freedome.
Should I giue it thee?
Seeing you cannot requite my good turne.
Thou art deceiued man.
Wherein?
On mine honestie,am none of thy maister,had neuer yet anie seruant would do so much for me.
Why then bid me be free: will you?
Yea surelie, be free, for my part.
O sweetly spoken, thanks my good maister.
, we are all glad of your good fortune.
O maister, ile call ye maister still, I praie vse me in anie seruice as ye did before, ile dwell with you still, & when ye go home, ile wait vpon you.
Nay, nay, it shall not need.
Ile goe staight to the Inne and deliuer vp my accounts, and all your stuffe: your purse is lockt vp safely sealed in the casket, as you gaue it mee. I will goe fetch it to you.
Do, fetch it.
I will.
I was neuer thus perplext. Some deny me to be him that I am, and shut me out of their doores. This fellow saith he is my bondman, and of me he begs his freedome: he will fetch my purse and monie: well if he bring it, I will receiue it, and set him free, I would he would so go his way. My old father in lawe, and the Doctor saie I am mad, who euer sawe such straunge demeanors? well thoughbe neuer soangrie, yet once againe ile go see if by intreatiecan get the cloake on her to carrie to my wife.
Impudent knaue, wilt thou say that I euer saw thee since I sent thee away to day, and bad thee come for mee after dinner?
Ye make me starke mad: I tooke ye away and reskued ye from foure great bigboand villaines, that were carrying ye away euen heere in this place. Heere they had ye vp, you cried, Helpe, helpe, I came running to you, you and I togither beate them away by maine force. Then for my good turne and faithfull seruice, ye gaue mee my freedome: I tolde ye I would go fetch your Casket, now in the mean time you ranne some other way to get before me, and so you denie it all againe.
I gaue thee thy freedome?
You did.
When I giue thee thy freedome, Ile be a bondman my selfe: go thy wayes.
Whewe, marry I thanke ye for nothing.
Forsworne Queanes, sweare till your hearts ake, and your eyes fall out, ye shall neuer make me beleeue that I carried hence either cloake or chaine.
O heauens, maister what do I see?
What?
Your ghoast.
What ghoast?
Your Image, as like you as can be possible.
Surely not much vnlike me as I thinke.
O my good friend and helper, well met: thanks for thy late good helpe.
Sir, may I craue to know your name?
I were too blame if I should not tell thee anie thing, my name is.
Nay my friend, that is my name.
I am ofin.
So am I.
Are you a?
I am.
O, ho, I know ye: this is my maister, I thought hee there, had bene my maister, and was proffering my seruice to him, pray pardon me sir, ifsaid any thingshould not.
Why doating patch, didst thou not come with me this morning from the ship?
My faith he saies true, this is my maister, you may go looke ye a man: God saue ye maister: you sir farewell. This is.
I say that I am.
What a iest is this? Are you?
Euenthe sonne of.
My fathers sonne?
Friend,go about neither to take your father nor your country from you.
O immortall Gods, let it fall out as I hope, and for my life these are the two Twinnes, all things agree so iump togither. I will speake to my maister.?
What wilt thou?
call ye not both, but which of you came with me from the ship?
Not I.
did.
Thencall you. Come hither.
Whats the matter?
This same is either some notable cousening Iugler, or else it is your brother whom we seeke.neuer sawe one man so like an other, water to water, nor milke to milke, is not liker then he is to you.
Indeed I thinke thou saiest true. Finde itthat he is my brother, andhere promise thee thy freedom.
Well, let me about it. Heare ye sir, you say your name is?
do.
So is this mans. You are of?
True.
So is he.was your father?
He was.
So was he his. What will you say, if I find that ye are brethren and twins?
I would thinke it happie newes.
Nay staie maisters both, I meane to haue the honor of this exploit. Answere me: your name is?
Yea.
And yours?
And mine.
You are of?
I am.
And I.
Well, this goeth right thus farre. What is the farthest thing that you remember there?
How I went with my father to, to a great mart, and there in the preasse I was stolne from him.
O!
Peace, what exclaiming is this? How old were ye then?
About seuen yeare old, for euen then I shedde teeth, and since that time, I neuer heard of anie of my kindred.
Had ye neuer a brother?
Yes, as I remember, I heard them say, we were two twinnes.
O Fortune!
Tush, can ye not be quiet? Were ye both of one name?
Nay (as I think) they cald my brother,.
It is he, what need farther proofe? O Brother, Brother, let me embrace thee.
Sir, if this be true, I am wonderfully glad, but how is it, that ye are called?
When it was tolde vs that you and our father were both dead, our Graundsire (in memorie of my fathers name) chaungde mine to.
Tis verie like he would do so indeed. But let me aske ye one question more, what was our mothers name?
Brother, the most welcome man to mee, that the world holdeth.
I ioy, and ten thousand ioyes the more, hauing taken so long trauaile and huge paines to seeke you.
See now, how all this matter comes about. This it was, that the Gentlewoman had ye in to dinner, thinking it had bene he.
True it is, I willed a dinner to be prouided for me heere this morning, and I also brought hither closely a cloake of my wiues, and gaue it to this woman.
Is not this the same, Brother?
How came you by this?
This woman met me, had me in to dinner, enterteined me most kindly, and gaue me this cloake, and this Chaine.
Indeed she tooke ye for mee: and I beleeue I haue bene as straungely handled by occasion of your comming.
You shall haue time inough to laugh at all these matters hereafter. Do ye remember maister, what ye promised me?
Brotherwill intreate you to performe your promise to, he is worthie of it.
am content.
Brother, will ye now go with me to?
So soone as I can sell away such goods as I possesse here in, I will go with you.
Thanks my good Brother.
, plaie thou the Crier for me, and make a proclamation.
A fit office. Come on. O yes. What day shall your sale be?
This day sennight.
All men, women and children, in, or elsewhere, that will repaire tohouse this day senight, shall there finde all maner of things to sell: seruaunts, houshold stuffe, house, ground, and all: so they bring readie money. Will ye sell your wife too sir?
Yea, but I thinke no bodie will bid money for her.
Thus Gentlemen we take our leaues, and if we haue
pleasde, we require a.