How now children, will you not rise to day?
What ist a clock?
It is seue~ a clock.
I beleue you not
Why do you not beleue me?
Because I am yet all sleepye andthat I am accustomed to awake alwayes at fiue of the clocke.
Beleue this bearer: he is scant well awake at eight of the clocke, how then could he be awaket at fiue?
You say true.
You will iest.
Rise quickely: It is tyme to go to schoole: your maister will ierke you, if you can not say your lessons.
Oure maister hath no roddes.
I will carye him som.
It is needelesse for we will study well.
Geue me my hosen.
Which of them?
My redd hoses.
And to me my blacke ones.
Bring me my whit hoses, and a cleane shyrt: Or els, bring me my graye hoses, my greene dwbletand a handkercher.
Holde, here be your hosen.
Here lacke some pointes.
You played the~.
I haue not, they be broken.
Button your ierkin Peter: where be your garters?
I lost them.
You deserue to be beaten: But you feare nothing, why doe you not gyrt you Stephen?
I can not bowe downe.
Truely you are but a wagge, whiche lookes but for the death of the day.
Geue me my doublesoulshoes
Here be them.
Where is the showing horne?
Take it vpon the table.
Geue me my pantables, and my pompes: But where be my sockes?
Here be them, Iames, put on your hatte: make cleane yourcap:Peter, where layde you your night cap?
I left it vpon the bedde.
Are you ready?
How should I be ready? You brought me a smock, in steade of my shirt.
I forgat my selfe: holde, here is your shirt.
Now you are a good wenche.
Why doe you not put on your showes? you goe alwayessleepe-shotte.
My showes be naught.
Better is to haue a bad excuse, then not at all.
Now, we be ready: Geue vs our breakefast, that we may goe to schoole.
Did you say your prayers?
Not yet.
It is not well done: Pray God, then you shall haue your break fast.
Brother, it is for you to day topray God: and my cosen shall pray GOD to morowe: Then, it shalbe my turne to pray. Sonneday Monneday Twesday Weddenesday Thursday Friday Sathurday.
Kneele downe all.
Our helpe be in the name of GOD, whiche hath made heauen and earth. So be it. Ovr Father whiche art in heauen, halowed be thy name. Thy kingdome come. Thywill be done, in earth, as it is in heauen. Geue vs this day our dayly bread, and forgeue vs our offences, as we forgeue them that trespasse agaynst vs: And let vs not be led into temptation: But deliuer vs from euill: For thine is, the kingdome, the power, and the glory for euer and euer.
So be it.
Let vs eate, and drinke, acknowledging, that all goodnesse doe come from God, In the name of the Father, andof the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost.
So be it.
Now breake your fast, then go aske your fathers, and mothers blessing.
I pray you Father, pray to GOD to blesse me.
God blesse you youmy sonne.
I pray you mother, geue me your blessing.
God blesse you all, my children.
Go to children.take your books and goe you to schoole: But play not by the way. Go you in peace and learne well, then you shalbe called the children of God.
Where is my booke?
Where did you put it?
I layde it ysterday vppon the window.
Take it then.
Geueme my paper booke.
Hold, here isyour paper, and your inkehorne also.
There is neither pennes, nor ink.
What did you with all?
He lost them, and he sold his penneknife.
Truely, I will tell it to your mother.
I pray doe not tell her, and I will loue you well.
Will ye doe so? Goe to, I will not tell her: Here is a peny to buy you somequilles.
I thanke ye, I will buy some as I go to schoole.
Well sayd, Goe in Gods name.
Is it not tyme to goe to the market? It is almost ten a clocke: Goe I pray, and make hast to come agayne.
I goe by and by: But is it so late as you say?
Yes truely, Goe quikely.
Good morow cosen Androw.
And to you also cosen Ralf.
How doe you? How is it with you?
Well thankes be to God: So so.
From whence come you?
I come from home.
Whether goe you?
I go to the market.
And I also: We shall goe together, if you will.
I am glad of your company: But before we goe, it were good to drinke a pinte of wine.
Whether shall we goe?
At the Byshops head, or at the Cardinals hat.
Let vs goe: How Symon, shall wehaue a pynte of wine well drawen?
You be well come: What wine will you drinke? Will you eate any thinke.
Geue vs of the best wine you haue: Geue vs some whitte wine. Clairet wine, Red wine. Frenche wine. Gaskyne wine. New Renishe wine. Good Sakke. Good Mamesie. Good Muscadene. New wine. Old wine,
Bring vs a quart of your best Whitte wine: For it is wholesommer in the morning: and a role and some butter.
You shall haue it: How like you this wine?
I like it very well.
This wine is faire and pure.
To you gosseppe Ralf.
I thanke ye, Gra~mercy, good brother.
Let vs dispach: Let vs make hast, to breake our fast.
Pure some wine: Geue me some wine.
The pot is emptie: There is no more: Shall we haue an other pynt?
No, It is tyme to goe to the market.
Whe~ you please.
How Simon.
Doe you lacke any thinke? Doe you call?
What doe weowe? What haue we to pay? What must you haue? Let vs haue a reakening: What is to pay?
You haue to pay: you owe, eight pence, and you be well come.
Hold your money, Fare you well gossippe.
GOD be wy my frendes at your commaundement.
Now let vs goe to the market.
Let vs go.
What doe youbuye? What doe you lacke?
Showe me a coupell of good, and fatte Rabettes, A fat Capon. A good henne. A fatte goose. A good goseling A dosen of larkes. A stoke doue. A Hayre. A mallart. A ducke. A drake. A crane. A sparow. A woodcoke. A swanne. A blackbirde. A Parret.
Here be them,that be very good and fat.
They be very stale.
Truely, they be very new.
How sell you them? How much?
Ten pence the couple.
It is to much, you are to, deare, They be not worth so much. They be worth but a grote.
They be not mine for that price. They coast me more.
Tell me your lowest word.
Are you willing to buye?
Yes, if you will, be reasonable.
At one word: you shall pay two grotes for them.
I will pay but six pence for.
I may notsell them so.
Fare you well then.
Here ye Syr: Cast th'other penye.
I will pay no more for.
You are a very hard man: Well, you shall haue them: I sell this day. Robin-hoodes peners: Shall I fleae them?
Yea, here is your money. God be wy Ser.
Well come Ser, at your commaundement.
Buyyou any apples? Who buye of my apples?
How many for a peny? How sell you the hundreth?
I sell them, twelfe a peny. You shall pay two shillings for the hundreth.
Haue you any pepines?
The fayrest in London.
Shal I haue thirtie for a peny? Or els, you shall haue a shilling for the hu~dreth of your pepines.
Here ye, fayre mayde: Will you haue them for twenty pe~ce the hundreth.
I am at one word.
Go to, you shall haue them: Where will you haue them.
Put them in myne apurne.
One, Two, Three, Foure, Fiue, Sixe, Seuen, Eight, Nyne, Ten, Eleuen, Twelfe, Thirten. Foureten. Fiften. Sixten. Seuenten. Eighten. Ninten. Twenty. One and twenty. Two and twenty.Three and twe~ty. Foure and twe~ty. Fiue and twenty. And here be foure, whiche makes fiue score and foure.
You shall geue me one aboue.
Hold, here is, for you: As you shall finde the~, come agayne.
So I will.
What lacke ye? What doe ye buy. What will you haue. What will youbuy. What please you to buy. What please you to haue. What seeke y. Will you haue any cloth. Come in, I will show you some. Come hether Ser. Come in, you shall haue good cheape. See if I haue any thing that likes you. I will vse you well. You shall finde me as reasonable, or more, as any other, you shall see good wares. Come in, if youplease.
God be here.
Well come Ser.
Haue you any good broade cloth. Haue you any fine Caresie. Haue you any Caresie Flanders deye. Haue you any Cottun. Any Fryse. Any rugette. Any stamell. Any frisadoe. Any sardge. Any skarlatte. Any veluet. Any granadoe silke. Any Spanishe silke. Any satten.Any damaske. Any taffettey. Any sarsenet. Any grosgrayne. Any chamelet. Any worstede. Any mokadoe. Any braunched veluet. Any tuffte taffetey. Any Welshe plaine. Any fustiane. Any buckeren. Any sacke cloth. Any holland. Any trype veluet. Anytuffte veluet.
What collour will ye haue.
What collour haue ye.
I haue fayre whitte. Blacke. Gray. Fayre French taney. Violet. Greene. Mingled collour. Sheepes collour. yallow. Blue. Orenge collour. Fayre straw collour. Fayre purple collour. I haue of all collours, and of all prices.
Showe me some fayre darke greene if you haue any.
yea forsoth, Ihaue that which is very fayre, and good. There is no better in this towne. It is of good syse. Vew it well. Did you euer see better.
I haue sene better, and worse also. Haue you any better.
yes marye: But it is of more higher price.
Let me haue the sight of it.
Here is of the best you did euer see.
It is good indid: But showe me of the very best that you haue.
It shalbe done. Hold, here is of the best that I haue.
If you haue no better, you haue nothing for me.
What say you to this same.
It is indifferent. So, So.
I haue no better. The collour is sure. It is in grayne.It will not stayne.
How sell you the yard of it? How do you sell the yard. How is it the yard. What shall coast me the elle? What shall I pay for the yard. What shall I geue for the elle. What is worth the yarde of this cloth.
At one word, I would sell it fayne: for twelue shillinges and eight pence the yard. I sell it for fiften shillings the yard.It shall caost you sixtene shillings, and sixe pence the elle. you shall pay a marke for the yarde of the same. It is well worth eleuen shillings the yard. you shall geue me twenty shillinges for the yard.
It is to much. you are to deare. you hold your wares to high.
What is it worth of your money.
I will geue nine shillingsfor the yard.
you offer me not that it caost me. What will you geue. What will ye geue for. Tell me a good word, that I may sell.
I will geue ten shillinges sixe pence for the yard.
I can not sell it for that price. you offer me to much lost.
Shall I haue it for foureten shillinges.
No truely. I should be a loser by, it caost me more.It is better worth.
It is worth no more. Will ye take sixten shillinges for the yard.
It caost me more then you offer me.
You shall not sell it at your owne word.
I could sell it for no lesse. But bycause I am desirous to sell: I will bate out a shilling of my price.
At one word, I will geue but seuentenshillinges for.
It is not mine for that price. Neuerthelesse, you shal haue it. Haw much will ye haue of it.
I must haue three elles and a half.
You shall haue what you please. One. Two. Three, and a halfe good measure.
Make a good measure I pray.
Measure it your selfe if you please.
It is needelesse, I would trust you in greater matter. How much must you haue in all.
Three elles, and a halfe, come to foure yardes, and two third partes of the yard: So at seuenten shillinges the yard, the whole, comes to three pound nineten shillinges and foure pence.
you say true: Here is your money.
God geue me a good handsell, Ido buy your custome: I hope that you shall bare me good lucke, and that I shall haue more of your money.
Dout not of it: Fare ye well Syr.
God be wy Syr, at your co~maundement.
But I pray Syr. Could you not mache this collour?
yes forsoth, I can: We must see: Let me see: Here is the nearest that I haue.
This like me not.
I haue none other.
Fare ye well the~.
What doe you lake.
What fishe haue you.
I haue good salt fish, Soles. A good plaise. Viuers. Rotches, or Gornettes. Whittinges. Waisters. Thurnebacke. Smeltes. Redde hering. Whitte hering. Shrimpes.A loupster. Crabbes. A Picke. A pickerell. A millers thu~be. A saumond. A lamproye. Elles. A dorey. A makerell. A trouette. Small la~proyes. Moskels. Cockelles. A tenche. A carpe. Kempes. A whale. And of sondry other fishes.
What shall I pay for a quarteron of waisters, for this side of salt fish. For this Thurnbacke, and forhalfe a hu~dreth of smelts.
Will you haue but one word.
No.
you shall paye eight grotes for.
I shall not: I will pay, but fiue grotes for.
you come not to buy.
But I doe: But you will sell your waeres to deare. Will you take money.
yea, with other:A word wye Syr. I will buy your custume. Take all for two shillinges.
I will pay no more for.
I should be a looser by: Cast th'other two pence.
I can not.
Take it in Gods name.
Hold here is your monney. Fare you well.
What doe you buy? Come hether Syr. What will youhaue? What lake you?
A fatte shippes flesh. A side of porke. This breast of beefe. A quarter of vealle. A nettes toung. This roumpe of beefe. A calfes plucke. Calfes feete. Sheepes feete. A sheepes head. A sheepe gather. A calfes leagge. A shoulder ofmotton. A loygne of veale. A quarter of lambe.
I haue the beast meate in this towne and the fatest. Choose,
How sell you the waight of this beef.
Foureten pence the waight if you will.
I will pay for it twelfe pence at a word.
You must come higher: For my wares is not leane: See in an other place,and if you doe finde, fatter flesh then myne you shall haue it at your prise.
I am a ma~ at oneword.
Take the wares without money, andas you shall finde it, you shall pay me for.
I thanke you: Take my money if you may.
You shall haue it, for the old acquaintance sake: Will you haue all the whole side.
Yes, what doth it waight?
It waightes, fiue waightes, two poundes, and a halfe good waight.
Hold, here is fiue shillinges and foure pence I pray GOD to graunt you a good market.
Fare you well brother Simon. At your co~mau~dement.
Dicke.
Anone forsoth. What is your pleasure.
Goe tell my neighbour roper, that I pray him to come to morow to dine with me: And fro~ thence. Go thou desire my sonnes schoolemaister, to beare vs co~paignie.
Well Syr. Good euen maister roper.
Good euen my frend.
My maister desireth you to beare him company to morow at dyner.
How doth your maister, and your mistresse.
They be in good health, thankes be to God.
Where be them?
They be at home.
Haue me recommaunded To him. To her. To them. And tell them,that I will not misse.
I will tell them so: God saue you Syr.
And you also my frend: What newes?
My maister, and my mistresse desire you, to dine to morow with them.
I trouble them euery foote: But sence they will haue it so: I will come.
Fare you well Syr.
God be wy my frend Dicke.Haue me recommau~ded to your maister, and to your mistresse also.
I will tell the~ so.
Will they come?
I Syr. They promised so.
God be here.
Good morow neighbour. Here well come.
I thanke ye mistresse.
God saue all the company.
Well come Syr.
I thanke you Syr.
Why is not come my gossip your wife?
She is very busie at home. She is gone forth. Shee is gone to the market.
What to doe?
She is gone thether to buy some egges. A pigge. Some nuttes. Some peasen. Some beanes. Some aotte meale. Some pudinges. som saucerlings.Some apples. Some peares. Some pease cottes. Some cherises. Some raisins. Some figges. Some butter. Some rise. Some milke. Some plummes. Some prunes. Some almondes Some turneps. A pye, or a pasty. A caeke. A custarde. Some oringes. Some lymones. A cabushe. A henne.
Be her affaires so great that she may not come?
I, in deede.
It shalbe then for an other tyme.
Be it so.
You be all well come. Much good may it do to you. You see your fare.
Pore here some drinke. To you Syr. I recommaunde you my sonne.
I thanke you mistresse: your sonneis altogether recommaunded vnto me: He is a very prety child.
But a very shroude boy.
He is the mothers sonne.
I loue him in deede.
What newes?
There is no other newes, but of the sickenesse and the dearth, which be now a dayes almost thoroughout all Fraunce.
It is Gods hand which reue~geth the iniurie done to his Church.
you say true.
I beleue, that there scappes alwayes some of them.
Few, or none at all.
Is the number of them great, that are come ouer into this cou~trey?
Very great: and there be many of them whiche doe liue very hard, so great is their pouertie.
Truely, I take great pitie of their miserable estate: But I hope that God will remember them: for heneuer forsaketh them which doe thrust in him.
Commen Syrs, let euery one take rowme. Iames pray God.
The eyes of all thinges do looke vp, and thrust in thee, O Lord, thou geuest the~ meate in due season: Thou openest thy hand and fillest with thy blessing euery liuyng thing: Good Lord Blesse vs, and all thy giftes, which we do receaue of thy bou~teous liberality through Iesu Christ our Lord.
So be it.
Let vs eate, and drinke, acknowledging, that all goodnesse doe come of God. In the name of the Father, and of the sonne, and of the holy ghost.
It is a most true saying.
You spend the tyme in talking, and you eate nothing. Geue vs some whitte bread. Some mancher. Bring the seco~d course. Goe fetche the fruite: Geue here atarte, and a custarde. My frend, haue we not a cake.
Here is one.
you be very litle eaters: Take away, and pore vs some wine: My sonne come say graces.
The kyng of eternall glory, make vs partakers of his heauenly table.
So be it.
God saue his vniuersal Church our Queene and the Realme, and graunt vs peace,and truth in Christ Iesus.
So be it.
God blesse you my children: Syrs, come nere the fier. There ayre of the fire is alwayes good. Make vs a good fire. Bring a byllet, or twayne. Now goe fetch a Fagot and some coales.
Syr, It is tyme to goe.
What hast haue you?
I must goe to myschollers, to the end they leese no tyme.
You haue yet tyme enough.
I pray you to geue me leaue this once, an other tyme you shall commaund me.
Syr, you shalbe alwayes, well come to me: I would be loth to let you from your good worke.
I thanke you sir: Good euen mistresse.
God be wy sir, and you also mistresse. I thanke you for your good chere
It is not worth thankes, good euen neighbour, you are well come.
Fare ye well Syrs: We doe thanke you for your good company. Iames, Goe to schoole, with your maister.
Well mother, I goe.
What is it of the clocke?
It is almost two a clocke. Tyme to goe to play if it please you to geue vs leaue.
Children, Goe play: But take heede that you hurt not one an other.
I thanke you maister.
Doe soe, that we here no complaintes on ye.
We will play quitely.
What game shal we play at?
Let vs play at dyce.
I did neuer learne to play at dyce.
Let vs then play at tables.
Our maister should not be wel pleased with all.
Shall we then play at boules?
No: But we shall play at tanyse, or els at Cartes.
Let it be at Cartes, we bestow our tyme in vayn: and I feare much, that our maister calles vs to our bookes, before we haue bego~ our game.
Let vs then play for pynes.
Let it be so: But let vs hast to begin. Shall we play at Trumpe?
Yea.
How shall we play?
The kyng shalbe worth six pynes. The Queene, foure: The knaue, two: and eche carte one: and who haue the asse shall rubbe.
You say well: We will play my brother, and I agaynst Stephen and against you.
Will you haue it so Stephen?
Yea.
Let vs begin the~. Who shal deale?
The same shall deale, that shall cut the fayrest carte.
Let vs see then: Who shall deale.
I must deale: for I did cut a kyng.
Deale twelue a peece.
Nine for euery man is enough.
Well deale then.
I dealt right. The trumpe is. Of clubbes. Of hartes. Of speades. Of dyamondes.
I rubbe: But you dealt all to the~.
I can not mende it:The cartes did rise so.
You did not shufle them wel.
But I haue.
You doe owe me euery man two pinnes, for the knaue that I haue.
Let see.
Here it is.
And you do owe me euery man ten, for the king, and the Queene
Show them.
Here be them.
Notwithsta~dyngall your fayre cartes, I haue the game: And you do owe me euery man, for six cartes.
Children, Come to your bookes: The schoolemaister doth tary for you in the schoole.
We doe but begyn to play. Do you call vs allready? you ieste I beleue.
I doe not: Come I pray you, least you be beaten.
Let vs goe then, and we shall make an end anothertyme.
Our maister co~meth himselfe for vs.
Will you neuer be weary of playing: To your bookes, and learne well your lessons: The~ goe you home quietly.
So shall we doe maister.
Good euen maister.
Where is your cutsie? you forget it alwayes: Haue me recommau~ded to yourparentes, and be here to morow betymes.
Neadd bring hether my horse, It is great tyme to be goyng.
Whe~ you please: sir here is your horse.
Let vs ride a good passe, to ouertake that man, which doth ride there afore vs: God saue you sir.
God blesse you Syr.
Whether go you sir.
I would fayne be in Fraunce.
And I also. But where about do you mynde to take shipping?
At Rye, God willing.
I would we were there.
I hope we shalbe there to morow betymes.
Nedde, geue me a waund: For I will not spurremy horse.
Here is one sir.
Is it a hasell wanne?
No Syr: It is a holly wanne.
But I pray you Syr: Be we not out of our way?
I can not tell in deede: This plowman, which tilleth his grounde, will set vs againe on our way, if we be out of the same. Here ye myfrend: Is this the ready way to goe to Rye?
Yes syr: Keepe still on the right hand.
Is there neuer a house here by, wherein we may lodge.
Yes forsoth: you haue two milles hence, a very good Inne.
I thank ye my frend. God be here: Shall we lodge with you, this night? Haue you any beadyng? Good stables?Good hay? and good oates.
You be very well come Syrs.
I pray rubbe well our horses and geue them good litter: Bring some hay, and some oates.
How much will you haue.
Bring halfe a bushell of oates for our three horses and full the manger of hay.
You shal haue it.
Nedd, pull of our bootes, and make the~ cleane and our spurres also: Let the bridle of my horse be hu~ged on the pommell of his sadle.
It hungeth there already? But there is one of your styruppes broken: and one of the gyrtes ready to breake.
Goe buy others, and bring me a new gyrdle: For myne is worne. Goe fetche A saddler. A spurrier. A teyler.A shoemaker. A cabeller. A hattemaker. A capper. A seamester. A habredasher. A mercer. A grosser. An armourer. A cutteller. A chandeler. A grinder. A carier. A vintener. A brewer. A cooke. A cooper. A fishmonger. A butcher. A baker. A draper. A pewterer. A peinter. A smith. A locksmith. An yronmonger. A broker. A poulterer. A goldsmith.A carpendore. A loygner. A fruiterer. A woodmonger. A gyrdler. A clockmaker. A coalier. A thinker. A glouer. A ieweller.
Syr. Is it not tyme to goe to bed: We must be on horsebacke to morow verye earely.
You say true: Myne host, let our beds be made, and let vs haue a fire made, & cleaneshittes.
It shalbe done. Syrs, your beds be made: When it please you, you may go to bed.
Nedd, take thou the candell, and showe me light to the priuyes.
When it please you Syr.
Good euen Syr.
God geue you good night: But it were good for vs to pray before we go to bed.
Let vs pray whe~ you please.
O lord whiche art onely good, true andgracious and mercyfull, which commaundeth them that loue thy name, to cast all feare, and care from them, and to cast it on thee promising most mercyfully thy selfe to be their protector against all their enemies, and their refuge in daungers: their gouernour in the day: their light in darkenesse, and their watchman also on thenight: Neuer to slip, but to watch continually for the preseruyng of the faythfull: We beseeche thee of thy bounteous goodnesse, O Lord, to forgiue vs, where in we haue offended thee this day, & to receaue vs in thy protection this night, that we may rest in quietnesse both of body, & soule: Graunt our eyes sleepe: But let our hartes watch perpetuallye vnto thee that the weknes ofthe flesh, cause vs not to offend thee: Lord, let vs at all times feele thy goodnes toward vs, that we be at all tymes styrred to prayse thee & that late, early and at mid day thy praise be in our own mouthes and at midnight: Lord instruct vs in thy iudgme~ts, that al the dayes of our life beyng lead in holines, & puritie, we may be co~ducted at late into the euerlastyng rest, which thou hast promised by thy mercy to the~ that obey thy word: To thee O Lord, be honor, prayse & glory for euer.
So be it.
The peace of God, which passeth all vnderstandyng, keepe our hartes, and myndes, in the knowledge and loue of God, and of his sonne Iesus Christ our Lord: and the blessing of God all mightie: The father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, be amongest vs, and remayne with vs alwayes.
So be it. Now Syr, I byde you the good night.
He that mayd the good nights Graunt to geue you foureten in stead of foure.
Syr, Is it not yet tyme to goe?
What is it of the clocke.
It is almost fiue of the clocke.
Is it a fayre weather.
Very fayre Syr.
Are you ready Syr? Let vs pray God?
Whe~ you pleaseSyr.
O LORD good God, eternall and almightie Father, whiche hast by thy grace, guided and conducted vs vnder thy holy protection to the begynnyng of this day, we most humbly beseeche thee, to keepe, and susteine vs alwayes by thy vertue, that in the same we may fall into no sinne: But direct vs rather to obey and serue thee accordyng to thy holy will: Let all our thoughtes be wholly lifted vpvnto thee, and guide so our wordes, and our deedes, that we may say, nor thinke, nor doe any thyng contrary to thy holy will: Here vs our GOD, and Father, and so replenishe vs with thy graces, and mercy, that we employ all this day in ioye, and that we may delite in singing of thy prayses, through Iesus Christ thy sonne our Lord.
So be it. Now it is tyme to goe.
When you will, I am ready: I hope we shall haue a fayre weather to day.
God graunt it.
Nedd, bring my sword, my dagge, My harkebuse. Bring heather our horses. My mowile. Mine asse. Mine oxe. My hogge. My dogge. My grayhunde.
Syr, here be your horses and all that you commaunded me.
Thou diddestforget my head peece.
I goe for it, Syr.
Myne host, let vs haue a reakenyng. Let vs reaken. Reaken with vs. And come for your monney.
God saue you Syrs.
And you also myne host.
Syrs, you doe owe for you and for your men, and horses, foure shillings and six pence: And you be well come.
It is to much.
Truely Syr, all is very deare now a dayes.
Hold your monney.
Are you pleased myne host.
Yea, forsooth: I thanke you.
I pray you myne host set vs on our right way to Rye.
Folow on this path till youcome to the high way. Then keepe alwayes on the left hand, leauyng on the right hand, a high hedge the whiche you shall finde, about a myle hence: Doubtlesse that way will bryng you straight to Rye.
How farre is to Rye?
There is about twenty myles.
Is it a fayre way?
Yea Syr very fayre.
I thanke you myne host: I commit you to God.
God be your speede Syrs: Fare you well, at your co~maundement.
Lord GOD, we beseeche thee most humbly to be our conductor in this our 
voyage: So that (beyng by thy bountifull mercy, preserued in the same 
from all daungers, and perils) we may returne in peace:Blesse vs good Lord, and bryng our affaires to a good ende. 
Through Iesus Christ thy sonne our Lord. To whom be geuen all honor 
and glory for euer. 
So be it.