See you neighbourwhat hote spurring there is made after the Buck ouer yonder land? were it with you and me as it hath bene since each knew other, we could not behold such sport thus farre of, but rather so farre as might become vs, keep way with the formost.
Sir then was then, and now is now, they that cannot do as they haue done, must content themselues with what they may do: pleaseth it you therefore to giue ouer the game in the plaine fielde, and let me tie vp our horses to yonder bough, reposing our selues awhile vnder the shade of this goodly greene Oake.
I readily consent to your indifferent motion.
Because it is vnwholsome and not altogether safe to sleepe in this wilde wood, let me beseech you to discourse such matters as our experience may delight vs to remember: withall, voutchsafe I pray you, to report the newes of London, for thence I vnderstand your maistership is lately come.
With a glad will, but ere we enter into them, let me first tell you what I latest heard, which proouing true will equally glad vs both. This noble Earle is not come hither to take an honorable recreation only, as heretofore he was wont, but purposeth withall to keepe a standing house here the whole yeare thorough.
But that I feare the contrarie, how should I reioyce these glad tidings.
My selfe in like manner hold the matter doubtfull, knowing the speciall imploiments her Maiestie hath daily to make of his most approoued good seruices, being full as he hath bene alwaies so excellent a becomming states peare, that his worthinesse cannot but carrie him from vs to matters of farre greater consequence. To say truly,our vntoward deseruings haue merited no such benefit from him for longer then we are receiuing good turnes at his hands,
Since it is your pleasure to stay your discourse with a desire to heare my plaine eloquence, I rather blame you for speaking too little against that which is so worthy reproofe, then otherwise thinke much or that you ouer said in the Earle his praise. To say truly, such are our grosse manners, not caring what we say so we say somwhat, and somwhat we must say, else could not the world take knowledge of our sufficiencies, which serue vs much better to finde wants in other men, where they are not, then to feele the burthen of our owne extremities, lying heauy vpon ourshoulders ready to breake our weake backs. For my part, I meane to turne that cursed speaking you named into hartie praier, that it may please God to further this noble man his purpose and desire, both to this whole countries benefit, and also to the encoraging of other noble and worshipfull Gentlemen, who accompanie him in loue and good will, to do the like by his example, where they dwell. A thing so much discontinued and so farre worne out of fashion, that vnlesse by some notable man it be reduced and set vp againe, the old ancient patterns lost and gone, I feare me, it will hardly or neuer catch the right shape againe, men haue swarued so much to the new cut, wearing all on London fashion, where they neuer thinke on their poore countries, saue on quarter rent daies only.
Though you spared me on the maine which stood in your way, you thought to nick me on the bye, not set for you.
Surely you fauour me rightly; for it was my meaning to shew the dislike I had of such as weare more on their backs inone day, then their fathers did in their whole life time.
Now I dare vndertake by your waightie words, you meane such as weare more armour on their backs in one day, or are girte with more wounds and stripes then their Fathers were.
Nay rather, I speake against that excesse, where commendable Farmes which were wont to maintain & bring vp honest tennants and their children, ouer and aboue the rent, are dasht vpon one sute of apparrell together with one daies vnmeasurable expences.
Through your gentle teachings, I begin to perceaue an approoued error, in ouerdoing, as well in things that haue good purposes and intents, as also in matters grounded vppon mischiefs, carrying an outward shew of holy and religious deeds. I confesse, Monasteries and Priories were not so likely to haue bin causes hereof, as the otherdissolute houses, where refreshings were without respect or partiality. The Moncks and Abbots of my knowledge, cut large shiuers of the loafe for which they neuer sweate, to make them selues strong in the peoples fauour and opinion, or else spent their whole gettings vpon vnlawfull children. Yet notwithstanding by your fauour, you haue not attained vnto the full of my meaning and desire herein.
I confesse I haue not, for the sight of beefed beggers that thronged so thick in my way: but now I haue got past them, I will go neare to meet you on your owne bawlke. Your desire is to haue houses kept to beare the Lord of misrule company at Christmas, spending then vpon Hick and Stephan, who haue no need of it, what would maintaine a seemly family more then halfe a yeare. Such may well be called the Lord of misrule his guests, who besides excessiue ouer-eating & drinking the~selues, spoiling by misuse that they cannot deuour, leaue behind them also such vnmannerly annoyances, called bestialities, that the Nobleman and Gentleman that hath thus crammed his quoistrels, must of necessitie forsake their house and housekeeping, till a good winde blow away the vnpleasant sauours their Christmasse Poulcats leaue behind them. Thus besides excessiue cost and trouble by the fruits of this carelesse hospitalitie, their houses are left in worse case then common Innes or ostelries. If it be a sheep-shearing feast, maister Baily can entertaine you with his bill of reckonings to his Maister, of three sheapheards wages, spent on fresh cates, besides spices and Saffron pottage. So that the Nobleman & Gentleman should haue nothing come in clearly to them at any season, if your ancient patterns might be rightly obserued. I know your meaning is not to haue the Hockedame waited on by them, who for the most part let their lands to halfes, or else conuert all into rent. The entertainment one of them giues vnto another cannot be that you call so hotly vpon: for those fashions you haue a homely terme I list not to remember you of.
The money your maistership hath spent in learning and trauell, is euery penny better bestowed then other. Now I plainly see, let an ignorant man be neuer so wise, or of neuer so great experience, but if he meete with a man ofgifts and bringing vp, his presuming to know all things prooueth plaine ignorance, and meere mistaking. Once to day I tooke my selfe to know as many wayes to the Church as maister Vicar himselfe, but now I see Plowmen are no preachers. I haue a Sonne that hath cost me many a quarter of corne, on whome for this dayes worke I will bestowe one Peck of pure graine, which toucht no chaffe this many a day, to buie him more learning; and though I am not able to breed a Gentleman, I may perhaps, as well as some of my neighbors, bring vp one.
I meruaile how you stumble on the Church and the Minister: this hote weather and our long talke should rather haue put you in minde of the Butler and the Butterie. Besides I cannot bethinke me what vertue should be in your peck of pelfe, especially to alter nature; my selfe withall the proofe I could make, could neuer finde the skill to cause a barking mongrell to become a true questing Spaniel. To be plaine with you, I neuer thinke an Ape more deformed, then when he striueth by borrowed skill, to put on that which nature cannot grace: nay rather those things are most vgly, which are forced and done in spight of nature. Euery one to whome Mastership belongeth is not a Gentleman, what purchase soeuer his father maketh, vnlesse he can procure bloud to alter kinde: that you cannot giue your sonne, because you haue not attained vnto it your selfe. The notabilitie hereof proceeds from chiualrie and marshall prowesse, where for princes right, and commonweales saftie, through worthy aduentures of bloud and life, purchase is made at the dearest price and rate. Therefore as there cannot be a greater cause amongst men, then the Prince and commonwealths businesse, nor a greater matter then bloud and life, to be powred out and parted withall, of necessitie the greatest and principallest respect and regard hath euer bene had therevnto.
By your fauour sir, there are no such lawes yet made to prooue Souldiers Gentlemen: or if there be, it is left out of their stile in all that I can reade or vnderstand of their profession.
If you speake ignorantly, I am contented to helpe you ouer the stile, you seeme not able to clime, but if you play the Foxe with me, grapes are no meate for you,
Without offending you with my rude answers, let me aske you this mannerly question. Do you meane those that are begotten and borne in a Campe, to be onely Gentlemen of bloud, or how otherwise I beseech you to shew me? I haue heard this matter often debated, but neuer fully agreed vpon.
Because you haue alreadie heard it doubtfully handled, and at no time discust, it may in like sort become me to giue place to some doctor of the Ciuill law, to whose profession it especially appertaineth to know the certaintie of all worthie antiquities.
It fits me not to importune you, otherwise I should receiue a great good turne at your masterships hands thereby, for my sonne takes great delight in petegrees of Gentlemen, and hath some skill in quartering their coates. God willing he shall one day waight vpon you to better his knowledges, if it may please you to accept of hisvnworthinesse.
Bring him with you on Sonday next to dinner, where you shal be sure of a Pigge for your sonne his welcome, therein I meane to proue his skill, how he can head and shoulder the same, the iawes and eares he shall bestow vpon you after he hath quartered them. The head so spoiled, he shall charge his quadrate trencher with.
I thought I should make you merry with my mistakings, I now and then catch a word or two from my sonne, which for lack of due placing, marreth all in the making.
You shall in earnest (if you list to carry it with you) heare what I can do in your sonne his Art. The Pigs head shall be vpon a Spit couchant, the toung pendant, the braines dormant in the sauce poinant. Now for a supporter or crest, because of the quadrufoile in his bare head, there shall be a recompence made by purchase of the back ribbes and chinebone. All these thus put together, must of necessitie conclude somwhat, especially in a morning fasting.
Most of these termes my sonne hath by heart, and will talke them to a glasse window I haue, when many times it is my fortune to ouerheare him. According to your saying also he hath often confest vnto me, that his wit and memorie haue serued him best to those purposes in a morning eare he haue eaten any thing. But still I am to put you in minde of my former desire, wherein I am perswaded you are able to satisfie a much better man then my selfe.
Surely Sir, you haue spoken so darkely, that for the thick spleigh of boughes and broad leaues of this tree, I cannot discerne your meaning.
Thinke you I go about to deceiue you with darkenesse of words? If a field be said to haue eyes, a wood may likewise haue eares. But whether you heare me not, or list not to beleeue me, the likelihood hereof shall carrie me to credit the same, knowing that matters of lesse proofe and more vnlikely trueth, haue bene receiued from worse grounds and beginnings then this commeth from. But you may see how the loue I beare you hath carried me to clime vnknowne hauntes, and such difficult pathes, as there are no steppes or traces left mee to follow; therefore you may say, it is like to proue a hard iourney to a weake traueller.
Now I better remember my selfe, I haue read many stories agreeing with your worthies in their notable deedes and exploites, done by couragious and bold attempts.
I will not seeke to winne you by extremitie of speeches, but leaue you to the libertie of your owne better conceauings. To keepe whole the vnderstanding of the matter, I will come to that which shall neereliest agree with that I said before. After this principall Worthie was enthronized by others, himselfe was also addicted and disposed, for the better conseruation of all things in order, in the integritie of his iudgement and discernings, to consider with rewards and dignities such deseruers and beautified mindes, as himselfe had seene forward by ready and feruent dispositions, placing and crediting vnto them for their tryed and approoued seruices, such degree of trust and superioritie, as might both stand in stead towards a recompence of their trauailes, and also the more incourage them to go on with him in perfecting things necessarie to vphold societies and vocations, wherevnto he had lately sorted the whole people. Afterward, such ofall sorts as had defected and come short in sufficiencie, to performe matters and places committed vnto them, so as the rest receiued losse and hinderance by their fault or negligence; such iniurious deceiuers were deposed, thrust downe, and disfranchised, as persons vnfit to become the strong vertues and properties beseeming men euer after compelled to exercise weake things, and withall enioyned to liue out the rest of their dayes in the company and conuersation of women. What occasion soeuer notwithstanding vrging the vse of them, such were neuer recalled nor suffered to execute duties amongst men.
I thinke it hath bin the warmth of gentle bloud, which beating within your brest, hath thrust out this formalitie you indent your words withall: could my consent helpe towards it, you should be made a gentle maister Scriuener, for your orderly frame of words are so well suted, that as me thinketh you haue much amended the old patterne you began with in the morning. If you mistake me in sence also no worse hereafter, it shall not repent me to talke of this fashion yet a while longer with you.
Though of my selfe it soundeth not well, yet without brag be it spoken, there be Gentlemen of bloud in this countrey that sit not so high in thesubsidie booke, neither are rated in furnitures and setting out of men to the warres in sort as I am.
Had I thought your maistership would haue taken my free speeches in so ill part, which concerned onely my selfe and my ready abilitie, to forward to my power my Prince her occasions and seruices, I would haue forborne to haue vttered my minde, wherein I onely grieued, that any should exempt themselues or forbeare to extend their vttermost helpe and indeuour in such good workes. My intent was not to repine at my owne easie charges, especially to performe so necessarie a dutie. If it please you to forget my foolish speeches and scattering questions, beginning where the matter brake off, you shall fauour me; in that I haue a speciall desire to heare at the full, you hauing so notablie entred into the declaration thereof. You left at absolute vertues, which are the gifts of nature, and accompany Gentlemen from their birth.
Belike then, if the worthie progenitour had attained to the tipe of all perfections, his worthie of-spring had at the first immediately bene seasoned with that most precious liquor, according to the influence into the former vessell.
Yea vndoubtedly, but the mysterie of the perfection celestiall, which you rightly termed a most precious influence, it is too deuine to dwell vpon earth, or to be discust by mortall sence and vnderstanding: but the next vnto that omnipotencie, are Kings and Princes, because they receiue theyr blessings from God directly, without other benefit or additament whatsoeuer.
Then I pray you Sir, how to diuerse without the benefit of this generous bloud, attaine to such ripenesse as may make them worthie high place and dignitie in the word?
Through forward inclination and disposition, taken with the loue and desire to immitate such seruiceable vertues as they haue seene approoued and rewarded in others, whose more properly at the first they were, and so vpon iust cause, are both receiued and held worthie men. In the first vertuous man, I shewed you euen now, after his good speed was seene, and the way knowne, how he did great things, others were stirred vp to haue pleasure and delight in the like, yet such also as were better endued, and of a more ready motion then the rest. For all could neither be incited by example, nor forced by compulsion to needfull and concerning duties, to the pleasuring of themselues.
By this reckening, wisdome to forethinke is not the least helpe both to seeke and also to become great places attained vnto.
All my speeches haue tended to that end and purpose,Yet first I shewed you, how bold courage did rouse and waken men from out the cradle of securitie, before they were assisted by consultation: euen then also had they failed of resolution to enterprise and breake through difficulties, such also as perhaps were repugnant vnto reason, and aboue that wit could perswade to be possible, then all had fainted, and nothing had bene atcheiued. Now wit, arte, and counsell, which you spake of right now, might haue serued them to prolong their plenty, and to haue held them still in ease, to haue lestened and made away by deuise, some of their superfluous and rising numbers; but the strong vertue was first, and it preuailed to best purposes and blessings.
Now sir I beseech you, speake somewhat of the defects that were found in them that neuer came forward.
I haue promised so to do. You may imagine, that while the sunne is oppressed and surcharged with cloudes, her vertue of comforting is for the while hindered; but when she hath outwrought them, and broken thorough the black prison, her light is then cleare, and her operations effectuall. Likewise, whilest wantonnesse, belly cheare, and other entangling delights, held men back from the vse and knowledge of themselues: till I say, the maisterfull spirit had by maine force, spoiled and driuen away all impediments, they could purchase no freedome nor rest contented, vnlesse they were able also to make a through conquest of themselues, then which there could not be a greater victorie.
A faire and a vertuous generation of worthy men, fit to take example at.
I pray you sir suffer me yet to aske you this one question more, whether you thinke courage or counsell the more beneficiall vertue, to aduance and set forward actions of greatest moment?
Alas Sir, hard lodging and bad diet would be as good as a murthering piece to kill me out right. Yet for one day I could be content to see fashions amongst them with a quarter of a cold Pig, and anbottle vnder my girdle.
Nay, I can assure you, the warres and a colde stomack will neuer agree: at these yeares, you and I will pray from them that may. To martch in Armour, and to vnder the waight thereof, would breake our bones, being, as they are, cold, drie, and marrowlesse.
My sonne telleth me, it is nothing now a daies to be a souldier, for they neuer come to pitcht fields, as they were wonte in our olde English warres, when the deuision of houses was.
Is your sonne a Fencer that wayes to; I thinke he be an vniuersall man. But I pray you what warde hath he to beare of a Musket bullet? it must needs be with his legges, for his hands I know are not Pistoll proofe.
I confesse those gunnes are diuelish things, and make many men runne away that other wayes would not turne their heads. But when I said a Souldier, I meant the Generall or commander in the warres. He telleth me many times he could discharge the place himselfe, though he neuer saw an enemy in the face.
Not vnlike, but shew me I pray you, wherein the commaunders office consisteth, according to that you haue heard your sonne report.
Marrie sir, in ordering and ordaining the field, and in well lodging his campe, neare riuers and places defended from contagious noisome winds.
What shall then be the Lord Marshall his place vnder him, if his Generalship be thus imploied!
He saithsupplied both the romes himself, and made the offices one: he alwaies when he came to ioyne battels and prepare his fights, bestowed his footmen vpon hils and places of aduantage, and his horsemen in the plaines and euen valleis beneath.
If yongyour sonne were chiefe in the field, his footmen should be Astronomers or wisards, to know when they should not fight, then from the hilles to giue signes to the horsemen to be gone, and flie away together, and so your sonne his hoast should consist of a running campe. Though I was neuer worthy to beare the name of a companion in the warres, yet vnder his conduct I could be content to refuse the offer of a very good place and office.
What office is that, and why? I pray you sir let me know.
No entertainment could tempt me to be maister of his carriages, to carrie & recarrie hils and dales, windes and waters; besides I know the great librarie that hath cost you so many quarters of Corne, must also waite vpon his remoues. If that fleet vp and downe with him, well he may loose an eye with poaring vpon his, but with climing the Alpes asdid, for catching an ill humour in that sort, I dare put you in comfort and be his warrant.
May it please you sir to take a hard lodging at my house to night, for I see by the Moones leape into her waterie circle, if we sit long here, vnwholesome dewes will be sent downe vpon vs.
Not now I thanke you, I haue such businesse with my Lord that I cannot, whe~ I come into the countrey againe in winter, it is like I will bid my self vpon this warrantise.
I haue a case of some extremitie, wherein I would be glad of your worships counsell, might I be so bold to craue it.
To morrow in the morning when my Lord is gone forth againe to hunt, I wil be ready for you, and as glad of your companie as to day.
God keepe you Sir, as it becommeth me, I will waite vpon your comming abroad in the morning.
Good night neighbour.