Well ouertaken, father Pilgrime, and in good time.
Good Madam you are moste hartely welcome.
Father I pray you, whether doo you iourney this waye.
ForsoothMadam now God willing I meane to passe to, and from thence into.
I perceyue your Pilgrimage hath bin longe, but when meane you to cease and take your rest.
Madam when my body is layed in Graue. For truely, al mankinde hath but a pilgrimage in this worlde: yea although they liue at home in their natiue Countrey and delectable houses, an ende they must haue of their pilgrimage. But I and suche other poore Pilgrimes doo often see by Lande and Sea, the admyrable workes of the almightie. The which to tell when I come home, the foolish wyll holde me for a lyar: yet I dooe dayly more and more, praise God, who is so great, and this is my only contentacion
But tell me father Pilgrime go you now to visit any monument of the Goddesse, here in.
No Madam I care not for such relikes. For my frend aPhilosopher warned me by y=e= waye as I came, saying.: yea also he wished me not to buye repentance too deare, among Damedames.
Well father, doo you meane to abide heere any long season?
No lenger Madam then I may amend my Shooes, Hose, and also prouide other furniture for my Scrippe and Bottell.
I pray you good father holde me not for importunate, to demaund of you a question or two.
Rather Madam you seeme so wise, that I receyue pleasure by your communication: therfore good Madam say on.
I will not require of you to signifye vnto me the lawes, customes, rites, ceremonies, and strainge vsages of the, among whom you haue trauailed, for I know the same to be horryble and abhominable. But tell me I pray you, haue you bin among the Christians in.
YeaMadam I abode a certaine time, in the famous Cittie called, which standeth scituated neare the pleasaunt Riuer of. This Cittie is not onely adorned with beautie of sumptuous Temples, Towers & costly Howses, plesant Orchards, & sweete Gardens: but cheefely decked with notable gouernment and celestiall Iustice.
Hath this Countrey a Kinge or a Prince for chiefe Lord and Ruler.
A Prince forsooth called.
Then I praye you tell what reuerence doth those subiects to their Prince.
O Madam truely exceeding great. But first they say, yea and stedfastly beleeue, that theyr Prince, is the onely Deputie and Lutenaunt of God him selfe within his dominions, to execute and maintaine Iustice, yea such a one, that is not noted of any great crime, for say they God is pure and holy, euen so ought his Deputie tobe in maintayninge right and Iustice. So that the subiects of this Prince, are wonderfull obedient, with life and goods, and other loyall seruice.
Then must needes follow, that the Nobilitye are vertuous and prudent.
Yea Madam, as members so necessarye to so godly a Prince, they are decked with humble harts, and farre from all corruption.
The Cleargye then should seeme, to liue according to the Gospell.
O Madam I cannot let, but highly co~mend y=e= Cleargye, for the ritchest Bishops & Prelats are not trimmed in sylkes, but clothed in honest dece~t attire. These men name themselues the Criers of God, and Steward of the poore. For saye they euen as the lawes of the Prince are Proclaimed, through his dominions to the intent his subiects should know his will, euen so say they, are we the Cryers of God to proclayme, preache and set foorththe lawes of the euerlasting God, as well in teaching, as in our liuing & behaueour: for if we do not so say they, the Prophet telleth vs that the bloud of our flock shalbe demau~ded at our hands.
But why do they go so plaine appareled, being Lords and of great calling?
I of my selfe Madam, will say no more then I haue harde at their owne mouthes. They say that Christ willed his holy Apostels, to leaue their Nets and other worldly goods, and follow him, who in at the time, that his sacred Maiestie abode vpon earth, had neuer any great bodilye rest: but continuallye like a good Shepheard went from valley to valley, from hill to hill, from pasture to pasture, to seeke his lost Sheepe, and being fou~d, brought them home vpon his blessed shoulders, to his hierd and Sheepefolde, calling allwayes synners to repentaunce: so say they we being his disciples mustevery one of vs take vp his owne Crosse and followe him.
Why the~ how can they dispend the great profit and reuenues of their bishoprikes and other benefices.
Why Madam doo you maruell at that, Then harken I pray you. These good Prelats doo weekely go vnto the common Iaile, where a great number of prisoners are, some for debt, and some for other offence, and there doo they preache the worde of God amonge them, perswading them to repentance and to forsake their euill liuing, they doo not onely in this sort comfort the poore afflicted prisoners, but also do according to neede, cloath them which want clothing: yea and three times in the yeare, at the principal feasts, all such prisoners which lie in prison for the sum of twentye Markes or vnder, theese good religious men, doo pay the debt, and set the poore at liberty with great admonishion, how toflee from fallinge into daunger againe. This liuely worke of faith springeth not alone in them, but also the poore Orphants and Maydens, which want dowries for mariage, are prouided out of theyr house of Mercy, yea euery sorte of poore people are wel remembred amonge the~. And in this sort say they we are Stewarde of the poore according to Christ his commaundement.
Why then they deale not in Vserye, or other like Marchandize.
O no good Madam those wicked vices, are farre from them, for truely I may boldly saye, that at the yeares end, all their great reuenues are consumed, in order aforesayde.
And is there no other sorte of religious persons, within the dominion of?
Yes Madam, there is an other sorte of Contemplatiues, who liueth by the labour of theyr handes, in the Mountaines, and these areSilkeweauers, which liue onely vpon that occupation, and at certayne tymes doo occupye themselues in prayer, calling vpon the name of Iesus.
Truely father Pilgrime I doo reioyce to heare of such vertuous and religious men, who are occupied daye and night in the lawe of God, for I would scarcely haue beleeued that any such had liued on earth, well good father proceede to the Ministers of the Lawe.
I I shoulde not seeme vnto you good Madam tedious: I would say somewhat of theyr behaueour.
Naye rather you doo me pleasure, and I geue you moste hartye thankes.
Firste their Iudges are excellent learned men, & such as are chosen out of the Vniuersity, by the Princes Counsell, for their excellency, grauitye and learning. These graue Iudges haue no kinde of fees, for seales or reknowledging of writings, or suchlike, but are maintained with reasonable stipend at the Princes cost.
Why then there are no Iuries of twelue men to trye the right of any?
Alas no Madam would you wish twelue simple men, without learning to decide the doubtfull and hard cases in lawe: no, God forbid.
Will not those Iudges now and than take bribes?
No Madam, for the punishment is greeuous for such an offence: yea and the Prince to auoide that wickednesse, dooth yeerely make preuie enquiry of the administration of Iustice, to gratify the good Iudges and to punish the wicked. But yet I doo remember of one Iudge, that tooke a Goose stuffed with gold for a bribe. But when the case was knowen to the Prince, he commaunded the Iudges legge to be sawen off, with a woodden sawe, in the open Market place. And when the execution was doon, the Prince caused theIudge to come before him, saying vnto him: sirra is the stuffing of a Goose good meate, but the Iudge answered not one word. Wel quoth the Prince receyue your office againe, and looke well what meate you eate: who ruled afterward exceeding well. The example whereof did so terrifie, that bribes were cleane banished.
Now assuredly, this Prince may welbe called the Deputie of God, but sythens the Iudges are so vpright in Iustice, than what say you to the Counsellers and other ministers of the law?
I must needes commend them Madam, for there the good Lawyers haue verye fayre and large studies, and beset with many fayre Chayres, so that the client when he commeth is commaunded to sit him downe in one of those chayres, and to put on his bonet. Then he openeth his case, if it appeare a iust and lawfull sute: then the sayd Lawyerdeuiseth his Plea, and his Clarke penneth the same, with the lines neare together, for they know not what great spaces betwixt lines after eight pence a sheete, meaneth. Now the Plea being drawen, and contayne a large sheete of paper, written as aforesayde, the Clyent paieth to his Lawier two shillings and three pence for the Clarke, wherewith they are well satisfied. But if the cause apeareth not good and iust, then the Lawyer perswadeth the party, not to deale any further: and so alwayes wronge is thrust out of the dores. These Lawyers abhorre couetousnesse, and know not what Golden Angels meane. The Iudges syt dayly through the yeare in iudgement, the Festiual dayes excepted, so that there is no issue or tryall vpon one point or braunch of a matter, but rather by those learned Iudges, a whole matter is ended at once,which is a good and godly waye. The Counsellers in Lawe, sit on each syde of the Iudges: I meane not on the same benche where the Iudges syt, but rather on each syde of the iudiciall place, and the Iudges at the vpper end. So there is no strife who shal come to the Bar: But when any ple is related. Then it is lawfull for euery Lawyer to exclaime the meaning of the words on his Clyents behalfe: but with very fewe wordes.
But may not the party agreeued, appeale of any sentence?
Yes, if the cause amount aboue the sum of one hundred pounde, the partie agreeued may appeale to the Princes Counsell: where alwayes two synguler Counsellers attendeth such causes, euen as a Chauncery to mittigate extremity of Law.
Then how dooth the poore folke obtaine Iustice against the riche and mightye.
O Madam wounderfull well.For the poore shall haue rather more fauour then the ritch, it is so Madam that the most famous learned man within the precynct of the whole Cittie, he I say is appointed for Aduocate of the poore, and hath a great stipend of the Cittizens for his paynes. And thinke you Madam that he is the basest office in a Common weale? No: for this aduocate is had in greatest honour, next vnto the Princes Councell, & chiefe Iudges. And againe when the complaint of the poore commeth before the Iudges in the iudicial Hall, then saith the Attorny of the poore, who hath also his wages of the Citizens. My Lords, it may please you to heare a poore mans cause. This voyce is no sooner heard, when the Iudges staieth all matters, except it touch the estate, and incontinent the poore mans sute is dispatched: for if it should not be so, then many times would it happen, as once asute depending betweene a poor Poticary and a Butcher, for when their Plea is determined by the inferior Iudge: the Poticary caried priuely to the Iudge a little Pot of Conserua, beseeching him to reme~ber his matter against the butcher. The Iudge tooke it and sayde he would prouide Iustice. But when the Butcher heard of the presenting of this bribe, he went and killed a good fat Hog and brought it to the Iudge, requesting his fauor against the Poticary: y=e= Iudge also receiued it, and bad him depart. It so fell out, that the sentence passed on the Butchers syde. But whe~ the poore Poticary had notice thereof, he came railing to the Iustice house, saying to the Iudge: syr how chaunst you remembred not both my right & pot of Conserua. Yes quoth the Iudge, I remember them bothe, but as for your Conserua, there came a Hog & threw down your pot, ye & spilt it, sothat I neuer found any sweetenes therein. Mary sir quoth y=e= Poticary a murraine and a pestilence take such a Hog that spilt both my Iustice and Conserua. So that Madam I tell you this merry tale, to the ende that you may know how in this happy Lande, it preuaileth not for the ritch to say I haue a fat purse: for why, the good Iudges, hath so great a feare of God and the Prince, that no corruption can auaile. And certainely the godly Diuines, are a great cause thereof, for they will not let to tell all estates their faultes, by some honest meanes: by reason whereof, they doo well know, that they the~selues, shall come to iudgement, and be Iudged, so that according to the oppinion of S., they haue dayly the sounde of the Trumpet in their eares, that shall call to Iudgement. And this is the principall cause, that they do liue inthe feare of God, and are blessed.
I doo most highly praise this godly rule and order. But how are Criminall matters decided.
Forsoothe Madam the Iudges which haue the charge of Criminall matters, doo likewise sit all the whole yeare in the iudiciall place: but as I sayde before, festiuall dayes excepted. These Iudges vse great pollicye to searche out the troth, against any accused of crime, and the troth manifestly knowen, the offence is corrected with greeuous punishment: but otherwise they haue great feare of shedding innocent bloud, by reason wherof euery prisoner is permitted to haue an aduocate, & make exceptions against his accusers. And when any offender is condemned to suffer paines of death, he hath three dayes respite to repent his former life, they also haue good men that neuer leaueth perswading them earnestly torepent, and only to stick vnto the mercy of our Lord Iesus. Truely Madam I haue seene some dye, with such penitent & humble harts, that any good Christian would haue co~mended their constant faith.
Sure this is a charitable act.
I must needes confesse Madam, that the people in this Country are fully perswaded, that there are but two wayes of eternitye, the one leadeth vnto perpetual ioy and euerlasting, felicity, and the other to euerlasting, horrible and vnquenchable hell fier, the which bothe places, shall haue no end, whilest God is God, and y=t= is infynite.
The name of Iesus be praised for such a Country and people.
Also Madam whilest I abode in, I saw three persons punished, the one was a woman, and she was conuicted of Sorcery & Witchcraft, but no hurt doone by her to either manor beast, approoued: yet for her dealing inthat arte, she was condemned. The execution was, she was set vpon an Asse, her body naked vnto her Nauill, and annoynted all ouer with Honny, the which was beset full of small Feathers of Downe, with a Miter on her head, of a yarde long, and in this sorte she rode about the streets accustomed, with a Trumpet blowen before her, and a Cryer manifesting her offence. An other was punished for periury, this man rode likewise vpon an Asse, about the accustomed streetes: but not naked. And in the Market place, there was a Barbor attending for hym, with his Instruments, and there he was foreced to open his mouthe, and all his teeth being accoumpted, the Barbor drew out euery fifthe toothe, in such sort Madam, that neither money, nor friendship can redeeme any punishment in that Countrey. The thyrde person thatI saw punished, was a wittoll and he I say, rode vpon an Asse about the sayd streetes, with a Hartes horne on his head ful of small Bels, and his wife rode after whipping him, and then followed the hangeman whipping them bothe.
O moste happy Land, where vice is so punished. But I pray you say father the poore Prisoners that are imprisoned for det, are they put in yrons?
No Madam, for there they hold opinion, that none ought to were Yrons, but such as hath co~mitted odious crimes, for otherwise say they y=e= Iaile is no other thing but onely a safe custody.
Yet they pay fees for their Yrons.
Alas Mada~ God forbid: for thinke you, that it were a iust cause, that a poore man, who hath fallen into debt by sundry mishaps, should now in prison be punished with fees of Yrons, and incurre into a new debt: nay they hold such vsage for abhominable extorcion,and a thinge odious in the sight of God.
But yet I thinke they paye eighteene pence a day for their meate, and a groate for their bead, or at the least twelue pence a day, and a groate for their bead.
That also Madam is holden for an abominable vse. But troth it is that any Prisoner for debt, may bring his bead, his meate and drink from whence he wil. And if he be so poore that he hath nothing wherewith to maintaine himselfe. Then the house of charitie prouided for such a one.
What fees hath the Iayler then?
Forsooth syxe pence for euery Prisoner, and also a yearely stipend of the Cittizens, sufficient to mainetaine an honest man.
I haue father Pilgrim throughly vnderstood all your talke. But now I pray you how dooth the Notaries, Skriueners, and such like officers vse themselues.
Madam I must also commend their vsage: for whyyou shall vnderstand, that euery Notary, Scriuener or suche like officer, concerninge either temporall or ecclesiasticall affaires haue their offices from the Prince, for a certayne summe of money vnder the Princes Seale: the which offices each one dooth enioye for terme of life, except he make resignation thereof to his sonne, or some other friend, fifteene dayes or more before his death and for wante of suche resignation the office commeth againe to the Prince: but in effect, euer such officer geueth sufficient Sureties to the Prince, for the true and faithfull executing of his office, by meane whereof all false wrytinges, and abhominable deceipts are vtterly banished. More euer euery such Notary or Scriuener hath his bookes of Recordes, wherein the parties obliged dooth set their firmes and seales, with two or three witnesses, which testifyethat they do know, that the parties so obliged, are the very selfe same men, to auoide all collusion. This doon the Scriuener vnder his firme and sygne, geueth the partie creaditor the copye of the Bonde, which is auaileable, and pleadeable in Lawe: the cause hereof is to auoide all subtiltie, for many times poore men by some sinister meane or casualty, hath his writings stollen, enbesseled, burned, or loste: yet were it not iust, that those men should lose their right and title. In consideration whereof the originall matters remayneth aliue in the sayde Scriueners bookes, in order aforesayde. Euery Obligation contayneth a sheete of Paper, neere written, for the which the Scriuener is to haue syxe pence and no more, and other syxe pence for the Copye if the partye wyll haue it. But thys muste I saye vnto youMadam the cause of this godly gouernment is, that once in two or three yeeres, the Prince sendeth secret visitors: who taketh all these Scriueners or Notaries Recordes into theyr power, and commaunde to Proclaime through the Cittye, that if any person or persons, know any falshood in the sayde Officers, concerning their Offices, that then they come and manifest the same: and the offence or offences knowen, some hath their hands cut off, other some depriued from their offices and others condemned to the Gally for slaues: yea the Lawe is that if any writing chaunce to be enterlyned, then must the Scriuener recite the same words at the foote of the writing, before the partie or parties seale thereto.
But is this order throughout all the Princes dominions, in Citties, Viliages, and Townes?
Yea truely Madam, and all other writings of noeffect, except some Billes or writing made in extreme necessity, which are afterward recknowleged before the Iudge, or els remaine of none effect.
This godly order must needes be profitable to the Prince.
Nay Madam much more profitable I say to the common weale, for the auoyding of many brabling and wicked sutes attempted in law.
Father Pilgrim, I am well satisfyed in these pointes. But how dooth Maiors or other gouernours of great Citties behaue the~selues?
O Madam exceeding well. For each ruler of a famous Citty delighteth not in Glottony, and Belly cheere, but rather is very vigilant and carefull for the benefyt of the Citty: he I say, commeth not vpon dayes appointed, to visyt the Bakers and other Vittellers, but rather followeth the order that Christ hath prescribed, which is how his comming shalbe when he is notlooked for: euen so dooth this good Ruler of, come at suche tymes to visyt the Cittizens, that some dooth reioyce, but others doo tremble at his sodaine comming, ye in the night season when others sleepe at quyet rest, he wandereth round about the Cittie, personally in all blinde lanes, and solitary places, to see what watch is kept, to harken for bibbers and dronkerds, to searche out Hoores, and Hooremongers, and to examine suspitious guestes. I am sure Madam that the Gouernour of, hath expulsed a number of such vicious persons, out of that Cittye, yea it seemeth now a terrenall paradice: but wot you what is the cause of this? Forsoothe at the time of the terme of expiration of the sayde Gouernours charge, the Prince appointeth a new Gouernour, who commaundeth the former Gouernour and al his officers,to keepe their owne houses as prisoners for the space of fortye dayes: and then Proclaymeth throughout the Cittye, that if any person or persons, poore or ritche, can laye any extorcion, bribes, or other offence, against the sayde Gouernour or Officers, that then they come and complaine, and shall haue present remedy and satisfaction. But when those fortye dayes are expired, and no offence founde: O what great Honour receyueth such a Gouernoure: yea and how highly is he esteemed of his Prince?
Truely father Pilgrime that is a blessed Lande: but what can you saye of all such officers, which hath the receite and dealinges aboute the Princes reuenues?
Once in three yeare Madam secret enquyrye is made of theyr dealinges, and theyr bookes narrowlye searched, so that the Prynce cannot bee deceyued.
O father Pilgrime, the sunne declyneth apace, and loth I am to leaue your godly conuersation: but yet I pray you say, how dooth women behaue themselues in that contrey?
Very honest and vertuous they are Madam. For in that Citty, you shall not see neyther Wiues, nor Maydes with hand Baskets, or otherwise wander about the Citty, because the Husbands and theyr men slaues do prepare all necessaries, for their houses and Families: so that the women straye not abroad, except on the Sabboth day, or other Festiuall dayes, when they go to the Temple, or els when they go abroade in their Husbands company to recreate themselues: for otherwise the Husbandes feare that they should haue some euill wares brought home in those hand baskets.
I haue yet many other things to enquire of you: but I pray you tel me, haue you bin at any timein England?
Neuer but once Madam, and then I came to the famous Cittye of, to take Shipping into.
But that Lande?
Forsoothe Madam at that time Raygned, and I hope yet dooth, a vertuous Mayden Queene, whose beautye and rare vertues, whose wisdom and synguler learning: yea her wonderful knowledge in sundry languages: the like, I neuer heard nor knewe in in any parte of the worlde where I haue traueiled into: And yet haue I byn in some part of, in some part of, and in some parte of.
This is beleeue me the straungest thinge that as yet you haue tolde mee. God preserue her, and if I were as younge as I haue byn, I would gladly go see so gracious a Lady and Maiden Queene. But I perceyue consydering you went that way to take Shippinginto the Lande of, you had no leysure to enquire of the commoditie of that Lande.
No truely Madam, tyme would not permit me: for I was no sooner come to, but the shippes were readye to hoyse vp sayles and depart.
I feare father Pilgrime, the shutting in ofGates, because night approcheth on so faste: Wherefore good father, let vs now make the more haste, and sythe you are a strainger here, you shall abide this night with me, with such poore cheare as I may make you.
God reward you good Madam, I wyll not refuse your gentle offer.