Holla Marocco, whose mare is dead, that you are thus melancoly, vp I saie, and let you and me conferre a little vppon the cause, wherby matters & dealings may seeme to be so, you know my meaning.
Whereby matters and dealinges may seeme for to be. Verie good sir, spoke like a wholesome haberdasher, and as wisely by Lady master, as he that was sworne to hiswiues friends, not to credit out his waresto anie man for the first fifteene yeeres hee was married.
And therewith mee thinkes I see him hang the hat vpon the pin againe. Wast not so Marocco? I am glad sir to heare you so pleasant in the threshold of my discourse, for I am come in purpose to debate a while and dialogue with you, and therefore haue at you after your watering. Laie out your lips and sweep your manger cleane, and summon your wits together, for I meane (by mine host leaue) to recreate my selfe awhile with your horsemanship.
And I am as like master to shew you some horse plaie as ere a nag in this parish, for tis a iade can neither whihie nor wag his taile, & you haue brought me vp to both I thanke you, and made me an vnderstanding horse, and a horse of seruice, master, and that you know.
I Marocco I know it and acknowledge it, & so must thou if thou haue so much ingenuitie, confesse my kindnes, thou art not onely but also bound to honest Bankes, for teaching thee so many odde prankes. I haue brought thee vp right te~derly, as a Bakers daughter would bring vp a Cosset by hand, & allow it bread and milke by the eie.
, master you haue the more to answere, God helpe you. For I warrant you, (though I saie it that should not saie it) I eat more prouender in foure and twentie houres, than two of the best geldings that Robin Snibor keeps, that a hires for two shillings a daie a peece.
Two shillings Marocco, nay what saist thou byhalfe a crowne, and ten groats.
Marie I say, three daies hire is worth foure such horses, saddles, and all. For a buyes them for ten pence a saddle at S. Giles one with another, and those accoutrements are sutable to his steeds.
Me thinkes such steedes should stand a man in small stead, by that he had ridde some fiue miles out of towne.
Yea bee sure, or halfe fiue miles either. And commonly the saddle fals asunder and splits in two peeces at the towns end, and one side takes his iourney towards Vxbridge, and the other towards Stanes, to stop mine Hosts cushions of the George.
Why thatsboye, for the waine-men of the West countrie, and the Carryers of Gloucester shire commonlye barter awaye their broken ware with the hostlers for pease and horsebread, and they returne them a horsebacke to Peter Pympe the patchpannell. Marocco thou knowest where I am now.
Not I truely master, vnlesse you meane that shrewde Sadler that serued you so ill the last Tearme, and as I trowe his name was not Peter, his name was Iohn Indifferent, for a wrought me thought as if a had not cared whether a had earned your money or no.
Beshrew him Marocco, a deceiued my hope, in a good part of purple veluet hose, that I purposde should haue made mee a seemely saddle.
O Maister you are to purpose, and he to dispose, of those hose then were your breeches in his hands, and sweetely he handled them as you know: here mee thinkes had you supde vp but a quarter of sack, a quart of sacke, I should haue said. See how my minde was Master Patinis vpon the bagge of Otes &c. Or had you come in but reasonably loded from the Tauerne, or taken some of the excellent Muscadine at the Horne: why, what an occupation might you apprehend to rayle horribly against these mechanicall fellowes of the Towne, that so they haue it, care not howe they come by it. Twas but a veneriall sinne in this Sadler, to nycoll you, or nicke you rather of an old peece of Veluet hose. But what thinke you by him that had the conscience to aske fourteene yeardes of Satten for a sute of Apparell, and not to put in nine of them.
Yea Marocco, as well as of him that sold it for eighteene shillings a yearde, being not worth ten.
O he gaue time Master: And then take heed of that while you liue, In space, growes grace And in prosperitie of the Satten, will swell wonderfully.
I am fall as fast in a cunning stealers hand.
A hard harte hath hee that hath such a hande to cut such large thonges of another mans lether, and lappe him selfe in a gentle mansliuery.
Tush, this is but a pettye matter to stande vpon: And yet Marocco I dare saie it and sweare it to thee, because thou art no talker: this petty matter hath pyncht neerer than euery man weenes for. I am vndone, nowe young gentleman. Well,.
Why maister of whome should you bee afraide, I am able to iustifye as much as you say. Indeed those be the young men that neuer sawe the Lyons. Young maisters and gentlemen of the carelesse cut, such as care not howe they bee cut, or of what cut they bee like, so they may haue, to follow al fashions, and then they are cut indeed, no force, so they fall into a fashion, and walke but twentie foure turnes in Paules, let it packe the next daye for the third peny. Maister M.. Byrch and greene holly, and thou be beaten boy, thank thine owne follie: He that will thrust his necke into the yoke, is worthy to be vsed like a iade. He that hath been a gentleman of faire demeanes, and will so demeane him selfe to let landes and lordeshippes flie for a little brauery, let him crye and let him lye, yea and dye to, for any pittie hee is like to haue at my handes.
Why how now Marocco. O ye are too sowre. Dareyou tell mee of my splene agaynst the Sadler, and bee so bitter against the young gallantes of our age. What man, nay horse rather, nay asse as thou art, to become odious to the flower of Englande with thy foule manners. It is as naturall for young men to be braue and amorous, as for olde men to be graue and serious. Why colte then, youle take vppon you I see? Doo you not heare what they saie that scarse vouchsafe you an answere?
Maister you mistake me, I am no such seuere horse nor sullen asse, but I can allowe a yong Gentleman his madde trickes, yea, and his merrie trickes too for a need. But master, this Latine I learned when I gambolde at Oxforde,. This is it vrgeth me thus farre, and I speake it in passion too, and wyth the action of my head and heeles, that a Mercadore, naye, a mechanicall fellowe shall go so farre into a Gentleman, and a Gentleman so farre out of himselfe & all a has, that for one or two tearmes arraie, a shall for his liues tearme, and tearme of life become beggeries bondman, and vsuries vassall,. You shall finde in an olde Tracte printed by Winkin de Woorde, this olde sayde sawe, Whats a Gentleman but his pleasure, O pleasure, what a treasure is it to take pleasure with measure.
Measure Marocco, nay, nay, they thattake vp commodities make no differencefor measure betweene a Flemishe ell and an Englishe yard.
I knowe an ell Flemish cost English Anthonie halfe a yard of the best ware he had.
That ware will neuer see ware againe, in so good sorte as it hath done, nor sit in a shower of raine on the top of Amwell hill.
Go to master, hum drum is sauce for a cunnie, you and I should doo verie ill to speake in priuate, we are so plaine.
Plaine Marocco, nay and I were as plaine as I will bee, I should crie out-right, for in this I agree with thee, and with thee the world agrees, and besides teares and commiseration on the state of Gentlemen that haue vngentlefied, why I might saie, dishonored themselues by buying and selling.
Haue they so master? Why woulde hee bee a buyer then? Why woulde hee bee a seller? This buying and selling, By all mens telling, Is gaine without swelling, To him that sels his dwelling, For his bonds cancelling.
Ho, ho, good Marocco, I see now a dozen of bread dooes as much with you, as three pipes of Tobacco taken in an odde alehouse, to a weake braine.
I am not dronke master, after my watering, that you need to challenge mee thus: I knowwhat I saie, and I saie what I knowe: To buy this measure, And this momentanie pleasure, With so much treasure, To sell seate and seizure, And repent at leasure. Go to master, he is a bad waster, that consumes his daies and houres, and reapes. Cambridge and Oxford can record: and the foule dolorous fortune of many a faire boorde, What it is? What it is to come into the clouches, For Aglets or brouches, Of these pure appearing asses, That like simple glasses Seeme that they are not, Let them storme I care not: Vnpittied might he bee, That imbases his degree, With this indignitie. I tell you master, for a truth I tell you too, I knowe a man that in this towne, had a Bible lying on his shoppe boorde, and solde but three yardes of satten vnto a Gentleman, and forswore himselfe at least three times in the coping, and yet the booke laie open before him, and hee came newe from reading of Salomons Prouerbes.
That had beene somwhat grosse in him if he had beene reading the twentith of Exodus.
No, no, his minde was on the twentith daie of the moneth following, when his moneywas due.
Tis good to haue an eie to the maine: house keeping is chargeable, and rent must bee paide, the Landlord will haue his due,, let the Tenant looke to it.
The Landlord will leade to the deuill, & the Tenant will follow after.
What else? they be relatiues: Landlord and Tenant are asand.
O master, I could relate to you of these relatiues, if it became me to speake like a commonwealths man, what an abuse is ingendered twixte the Landlord and Tenant.
Occasion of what Marocco.
Of more amisse by gis, than easily amended is, of bauderie, and beggerie, and such lyke matters, master.Crie out and complaine for the loffe of this good landlordes worship, God rest his soule, sayes T. B. wee could haue had no wrong while hee liued: so hee had had his rent at the daie, the deuill and Iohn of Comber shoulde not haue fetcht Kate L. to Bridewell, no nor all the Court whipt C. F. at the cart, Ile tell you master, come what complaint coulde haue come against Peticoate lane, Smocke Alley, Shordich, or Rotten rowe, there were champions and spokes men for this crue, other manner of felowes I wis, than you thinke for, such as sit in their sattens and riche furres, and wyth adash of a penne in a counting house, coulde doo more than the proudest plaintiefe that commenceth anie matter or sute against this sisterhoode, yea, and seale vp his letter and theyr lyps both at once, that murmure anie thing against the inhabitantes of this holy corner. Master I coulde haue shewed you the coppie of a Letter that was lost in this yarde by chaunce, written by a man of some account, so fauourably to the Treasurer of Bridewell, in the behalfe of an honest Tenaunt of his, such a Tenant, master, as had her name, and would holde so fast betweene the thighs, that shame it was for him that had anie shame, to be so shamelesse to vse anie meanes to keep her from open shame.
Thou speakest of mallice against some or other Marocco, and perhappes thou meanest that drabbe that the last daie when shee sawe thee heere doo thy trickes, sayd thou wert a deuill & I a coniurer.
Against her Master, no of mine honestie, she is but a poore whoore, to her I meane. Tush, she that I talke of can entertaine you with a duzen of tiffite taffetie girles in a morning, I, and the worst of them, when she is at the worst, shall haue a wrought wastcoate on her backe, and a lockram smocke worth three pence, as well rent behind as before, I warrant you.
Those rents by your leaue Marocco, helpe to paie the Landlords rent at the quarters end.
I master, and the Landlorde by your leaue helpes to rent some of them betweene the quarters.
Thats but a tricke of youth lad,, Euerie man may amend.
True master,, A loues a whoore as his lyfe. For hee will forbeare as long as shee will beare, and thats ka mee, and ka thee, knaue he, and queane she.
Had neede bee of exceeding patience Marocco, to forbeare as long as sheele beare, for a better bearing beast is not in all Shordich, nor Hounds-dich neither, than this beastly beast that I thinke thou meanest. But speake not so loude, for and if her landlord heard you, hee would aunswere for her.
I thinke so, has answered so long for her, that a can scarce answere for himselfe, and I speake not so loude that I feare him,, master, a heares verie badlye euerie where: and worse a will heare, and a holde on, yea master, and loose hearing and seeing to, and a vie it and see it, as a has done these duzen yeres.
Well, whats that to the purpose, these wrongs are priuate, and touch himself, and wrack not the common wealth, as thou exclaymest.
O master, then you know nothing: for vnderstand you as of Nownes, some be substantiues, some be adiectiues: so of Landlords, some of them bee couetous, and some bee lecherous, and heeis both.
Sayest mee so. Well then Marocco, whether does more harme in the commonwelth, the couetous or the lecherous Landlord.
Tush master, that question is no question. For though it bee a question betweene the couetous and the prodigall, yet is it no question betwixt the couetous and the lecherous. The lecherous Landlord hath his wench at his commandement, and is content to take ware for his money, his priuate scutcherie wounds not the commonwealth farther than that his whoore shall haue a house rent free, when his honest neighbours wife and children shall neither haue a peece of a house or a householde loafe for him. Let him passe for a farting churle, and weare his mistres fauors,rubies and precious stones on his nose, &c. And thisshall, if you will, bee the perfectest poxe that euer grewe in Shordich or Southwarke.
And there haue beene bigge inflamations, and more vnquenchable than the great fire that burnt so much blew threed on the toppe of Fishstreet hill.
But the couetous Landlord is the caterpiller of the common-wealth, hee neither feares God nor the deuill, nor so hee maye racke it out, cares not what Tenant he receiues: he is no wencher (praie God he be no bencher) hee sits warme at home, and sets downe his accounts, and saies tohimselfe, my houses goe nowe but for twentie poundes by the yeere, Ile make them all baudie houses, and they will yeeld mee twice as much. Vppon the Exchange comes to him one or two honest men to take the~ at his hands, the poore artificer or his lyke, of what trade so euer, offers him the rent it hath gone for, & sureties perhaps. Yea, saie so, good securitie, and foure pounds a yere for a house, comes Pierce Pandor, and baudie Bettrice his wife, two that I warrant you were knowen well inough what they were, I two that had beene as well carted and whipt, and couerd with durt ouer head and eares, and they forsooth will begin the world anue again, hauing a fresh wench or two that came but from the carryers that morning, though shee had tapt many a canne in long lane at Barthelmew tide. With this stocke of wenches will this Trustie Roger and his Bettrice set vp forsooth with their pamphlet pots, and stewed prunes, nine for a tester, in a sinfull saucer, and they will offer this couetous and wretched landlorde fiue poundes by the yeere, yea sixe pounds to haue his house and his countenaunce wythall. But hee that will go to the deuill for money, will admit them with fauour, and so let them haue his house, with promise of anie thing whatsoeuer in his power, yea, and if occasion serue, will write, and speak, and take paines and plaie the sutor, and beare wyth them in anie thing, so there bee anie meane to doo it, and hee to bee sure of his rent.God is his iudge hee does it for no fleshly respect, but euen of a mere worldly motion, to beare sinne out with sinne, and lecherie with couetousnesse. Let the Parish complaine, why (sayes hee) what should I doo, I haue my rent paid mee at my day. I must make money of my lande, and so let them doo their heartes out, thinkes hee, I shall haue my rent the readier. This cormorant is hee that cares not how he get it so hee haue it. This Stymphalist is he that with fiue or sixe Tenements, and the retinue thereunto belonging, infectes the aire with stench, and poisons that parish, yea and twentie parishes off with the contagion of such carrion as lies there in their bumble baths, and stinke at both ends like filthie greene elder pipes. For him and them master, such Landlordes and such Tenants. Good master wish as I wish.
Whats thy wish Marocco?
That at the quarter daie the parish would of their owne deuotion to the common wealth, bestow a banket vpon them of ale and cakes in the cage, & a hundred or two of good faggots, to consume the bodies and bones of them all and euerie mothers child, such Landlords and such Tenants as so much against conscience, receiue & deceiue, and daie by daie, and houre by houre cheat, coosen, catch, and deuour in pillage from gentlemen, prentises, and good fellowes,, euen from the outside to the inside, from the cloak to the shirt, leauing Nicol Neuerthriue neuer awench in the chamber or penie in the purse.
Marocco, Praie thy wish take effect, I wish for euerie parish so pestered with such tenants and tenements, God put into their mindes to be but at cost and charges for the faggots, for ale and cakes I were mearst, if it cost fiue markes. But how does this landlord fall into this? Why is thy mallice so great against them, when tis the baude and the whoore that make all this stirre?
O master, miserable landlords are cause of all this mischiefe. Tis he that because he will haue an vnreasonable rent, will vpholde anie villanie in his tenant: a slaue to monie, a pandor to the baud, a piller, nay a pillow & a bolster to all the roguerie committed in his houses. And yet will this filthie felow sit at his doore on a sonday in the high street and my mistres his wife by him, & there forsooth talke so saint-like of the sermon that day, and what a good peece of worke the young man made, and what a goodly gift of vtterance he had, but not the value of a pound of beefe wil a giue him, were his gift of vtterance comparable to S. Augustines, or Chrisostomes eloquence. Sweare a will and forsweare vpon the workeday, as well as anie. And if percase a sit in place of authoritie, O howe seuere will he be in all his proceedings against a yong or good fellow in anie trifling matter. Then a takes vpon him not a little: Sir (sayes hee) what did you in such an house? Wherefore came you thether? And laie the lawe and the Prophetes too,and so rate a Gentleman well descended, meerely priuiledged with a furd gowne and a nightcap: when in deede his bringing vp hath beene in beggerie and slauerie illiberally, hauing spent his time in conference with the water tankard at the Conduit, lying miserably, and for sparing of wood, loding his gowne sleeue with fuell from the haberdashers, and wearing his handes in a frostie morning by the fugitiue flames of a few wast papers, a naturall enemie to all learning and liberalitie. O master, such a churle as you and I sawe heere last daie talke with two souldiers in the yard, and put his hand in his pouch, & gaue them nere a penny.
Didst thou see that Marocco? Well, there be too many such as he, yet there is a choice number of sober citizens that haue golden mindes, and golden purses withall.
That I know well master, and to them that haue such golden mindes, I wish golden mines: master, I protest to you I speake it not to flatter, but in reproach of those money-mongers, those lease-mongers, those caniballs, that dishonour the citie wherein they dwell, but vprightly I speake it, that you may not think I raile vpon mallice against any priuate man for anie priuate quarrell: There are many that beautifie London for their good parts, who being ciuily and well brought vp, are affable to straungers, charitable to the poore, liberall to schollers, and such as Citizens should be, dutifull to their prince, and deuout to their citie.But as cockle is euer among corne, and drosse among gold, so will those foule churles cumber the best corners, and march cheek by ioul among the better many, with as great shew of deuotion and charitie as the best. From such dissembling holynesse, such double wickednesse, good Lord delyuer vs.
Tis almost supper time Marocco, I heare mine host call, you haue done pretily well for two pointes, referre the rest till another time.
As you please master, and let this be our
first lecture of the Anatomie of the world. If the
Trance holde me but till the next Tearme, where
now I haue but with a drie foote ouerleapt these
matters, I may chance of these and more leaue a
deeper print, and hauing handled a case of 
commodities, will saie somewhat further of their 
discommodities and differences, euen as the bit of
reason shall leade mee. And so I commit you to
your supper, and my selfe to my litter, for I
promise you I am not a little weary
with gambolling this
afternoone.