, hold vp thy hand,
Thou art here indicted by the othes of xii. good and lawful men of the Countie of Middlesex, beforeKnight, and others which tooke the Indictment by the name oflate of London Gentleman, otherwise called, late of London Doctor of the lawe, for y=t= thou as a false traitor against the most noble and Christian Prince, Queene Elizabeth thy most gracious Soueraigne and liege Ladie, not hauing the feare of God before thine eyes, nor regarding thy due allegiance, but being seduced by theinstigation of the deuill, and intending to withdrawe and extinguish the heartie loue and due obedience, which true and faithfull Subiectes shoulde heare vnto the same our Soueraigne Ladie, diddest at Westminster in the Countie of Middlesex on the first day of Februarie, in the xxvi. yeere of her Highnesse raigne, and at diuers other times and places in the same Countie, maliciously, and trayterously conspire and compasse, not onely to depriue and depose the same our Soueraigne Ladie of her Royall estate, title and dignitie, but also to bring her highnesse to death and finall destruction, and sedition in the Realme to make, and the gouernement thereof to subuert, and the sincere religion of God established in her highnesse dominions to alter & subuert. And that, whereas thou, by thy letters sent vntoBishoppe of Rome, diddest signifie vnto the the same Bishoppe thy purposes and intentions aforesayde, and thereby diddest pray and require the same Bishoppe to giue thee absolution, that thou afterwards, that is to say, the last day of March in the xxvi. yeere aforesayde, diddest trayterously receiue letters fro~ one called, directed vnto thee, whereby the same Cardinall did signifie vnto thee, that the Bishoppe of Rome had perused thy letters, and allowed of thine intent, and that to that ende hee had absolued thee of all thy sinnes, and by the same letter did animate and stirre thee to proceede with thine enterprise, and that thereupon, thou, the last day of August in the xxvi. yeere aforesaide, at Saint Giles in the fieldes, in y=e= same Countie of Middlesex, diddest trayterously conferre with oneEsquire, vttering to him all thy wicked and trayterous deuises, and then and there diddest moue him to assist thee therin, & to ioyne with thee in those wicked treasons aforesayd, against y=e= peace of our sayd Soueraigne Ladie the Queene, her Crowne & dignity: What sayest thou, art thou guilty of these treasons whereof thou standest here indicted, or notguiltie?
Before I pleade not guiltie, or confesse my selfe guiltie, I pray you giue me leaue to speake a fewe words:
God saue the Queene Elizabeth, and God sende mee grace to discharge my duetie to her, and send you home in charitie. But touching the matters that I am indicted of, some were in one place, and some in another, and done so secretely, as none can see into them, except y=t= they had eyes like vnto God, wherefore I will not lay my blood vpon the Jurie, but doe minde to confesse the indictment. It containeth but the parts that haue bene openly redde, I pray you tel me?
, thou must answere directly to the indictment, whether thou be guiltie or not.
I doe confesse that I am guiltie of al that is therein co~tained: And further too, I desire not life, but desire to die.
If you confesse it, you must confesse it in maner and fourme as it is comprised in the Indictment.
I doe confesse it in maner and fourme as the same is set downe, and all the circumstances thereof.
These matters contained in this indictment, and confessed by this man, are of great importance: they touch the person of the Queenes most excellent Maiestie in the highest degree, the very state and weldoing of the whole common wealth, and the trueth of Gods worde established in these her Maiesties dominions, and the open demonstration of that capitall enuie of the man of Rome, that hath set him selfe against God and all godlinesse, all good Princes and good gouernment, and against good men. Wherefore, I prayyou, for the satisfaction of this great multitude, let the whole matter appeare, that euery one may see that the matter of it selfe is as bad as y=e= indictment purposeth, & as he hath confessed. Wherto in respect y=t= the Justice of y=e= Realme hath bin of late very impude~tly slau~dered, al yeelded as a thing necessarie to satisfie the world in particular, of y=t= which was but summarily comprised in y=e= indictme~t, though in the lawe, his confession serued sufficiently to haue proceeded thereupon vnto iudgement.
Before we proceede to shewe what he hath confessed, what say you,
is that which you haue confessed here true, and did you confesse it freely and willingly of your selfe, or was then any extort meanes vsed to drawe it from you? Surely
I made that confession freely without any constraint, and that is all true, and more too: for there is no treason that hath bene sithens the first yeere of the Queene any way touching religion, sauing receipt of, and perswading of others, wherein I hauenot much dealt, but I haue offended in it. And I haue also deliuered mine opinion in writing, who ought to bee successor to the crowne,
No:
If you will say any thing for the better opening to the worlde of those your foule & horrible facts, speake on: but if you meane to make any excuse of that which you haue confessed, which els would haue bene and do stand proued against you, for my part, I will not sit to heare you.
It appeareth before you my Lords, y=t= this man hath bene indicted & arraigned of seuerall most haynous and horrible treasons, and hath confessed them, which is before you of recorde: wherefore there resteth no more to be done, but for the Court to giue iudgement accordingly, which here I require in the behalfe of the Queenes Maiestie.
I pray you heare me for discharging of my conscience. I will not goe about to excuse my selfe, not to seeke to saue my life, I care not for it, you haue my confession of recorde, that is enough for my life: And I meane to vtter more, for which I were worthie to die.
I pray you heere mee, in that I am to speake to discharge my conscience.
, then doe thy duetie according to conscience, and vtter all that thou canst say concerning those thy most wicked facts.
My cause is rare, singular & vnnaturall, conceyued at, presented in generall wordes to the Pope, vndertaken at, commended & allowed of by his Holines, and was to haue bene executed in England, if it had not bene preuented. Yea, I haue committed many treasons, for I haue committed treason in being reconciled, and treason in taking absolution. There hath bene no Treason sithens the first yeere of the Queenes reigne touching religion, but that I am guiltie of (except for receiuing of, and perswading as I haue said:) And yet neuer intended to kil Queene. I appeale to her owne knowledge and to my Lorde Treasorers and Master Secretaries.
Hast thou acknowledged it so often, and so plainly in writing vnder thy hande, and heere of recorde: and nowe, when thou shouldest haue thy iudgement according to that which thou hast confessed thy selfe guiltie of, doest thou goe backe againe, and deny the effect of all? Howe can wee beleeue that thou nowe sayest?
This is absurd. Thou hast not onely confessed generally, that thou wert guilty according to the inditeme~t, which summarily, and yet in expresse woordes doeth conteyne that thou haddest trayterously compassed & intended the death and destruction of her Maiestie: but thou also saydest particularly that thou wert guilty of euery of the Treasons conteined therein, whereof the same was one in playne and expresse letter set downe, and red vnto thee. Yea, thou saydest that thou wert guilty of moe Treasons too besides these. And diddest thou not vpon thy examination voluntaryly confesse, howe thou wast moued first thereunto by mislike of thy state after thy departure out of the Realme, And that thou diddest mislike her Maiestie for that shee had done nothing for thee, Howe by wicked Papistes and Popish bookes, thou wert perswaded that it was lawfull to kill her Maiestie, Howe thou wert by reconciliation become one of that wicked sort, that helde her Maiestie for neyther lawfull Queene, nor Christian, And y=t= it was meritorious to kill her? And diddest thou not signifie that thy purpose to the Pope by letters, and receiuedst letters fro~ the Cardinall, howe he allowed of thyne intent, & excited thee to perfourme it, and thereupon diddest receiue absolution? And diddest thou not conceyue it, promise it, vow it, sweare it, and receyue the Sacrament that thou wouldest doe it? And diddest not thou thereupon affirme, that thy vowes were in heauen, and thy letters and promyses on earth to bynde thee to doe it? And that whatsoeuer her Maiestie would haue done for thee, coulde not haue remoued thee from that intention or purpose, vnlesse she would haue desisted from dealing as shee hath done with the Catholiques, as thou callest them? All this thou hast plainely confessed: and I protest before this great assembly, thou hast confessed it more playnely and in better sort, then my memory will serue me to vtter: And sayest thou now, that thou neuer mentest it?Ah
your honours knowe, howe my Confession vpon myne examination was extorted.
You sayde,
that you would proceede with rigour against me, if I would not confesse it of my selfe.
But I will tell thee,
what we saide. I spake these words, If you will willingly vtter the truth of your selfe, it may do you good, and I wish you to doe so: If you will not, wee must then proceede in ordinary course to take your examination. Whereunto you answered, that you would tell the trueth of your selfe. Was not this true?
it was wonder to see the magnanymitie of her Maiestie, which after that thou haddest opened those trayterous practises in sort as thou hast layd it downe in thy confession, was neuerthelesse such, and so farre from all feare, as that shee woulde not so much as acquaint any one of her highnespriuie Counsel with it, to his knowledge, no not vntil after this thine enterprise discouered & made manifest. And besides that which thou hast set downe vnder thine owne hande, thou diddest confesse, that thou haddest prepared two Scottish Daggers, fit for such a purpose: and those being disposed away by thee, thou diddest say that an other would serue thy turne. And with all,, diddest thou not also confesse before vs howe wonderfully thou wert appauled and perplexed vpon a suddaine at the presence of her Maiestie at Hampton Court this last Sommer, saying that thou diddest thinke thou then sawest in her, the very likenes & image of king Henry the seuenth? And that therewith, and vpon some speeches vsed by her Maiestie, thou diddest turne about and weepe bitterly to thy selfe? And yet diddest call to mynde that thy vowes were in heauen, thy letters and promises on earth, and that therefore thou diddest say with thy selfe, that there was no remedy but to do it? diddest thou not confesse this?
Sayest thou nowe, that thou diddest neuer meane to kill the Queene? diddest thou not confesse, that when thou diddest vtter this practise of trecherie to her Maiestie, that thou diddest couer it with al the skill thou haddest, and that it was done by thee, rather to get credite and accesse thereby, then for any regard thou haddest of her person? but in trueth thou diddest it, that thereby thou mightest haue better oportunitie to performe thy wicked enterprise. And wouldest thou haue runne into such feare as thou diddest confesse that thou wert in, when thou diddest vtter it, if thou haddest neuer meant it? what reason canst thou shewe for my thy selfe?
I neuer meant to kill her: I will lay my blood vpon Queeneand you, before God and the worlde:
This is but thy popish prideand ostentation, which thou wouldest haue to be told to thy fellowes of that faction, to make them belieue that thou diest for poperie, when thou diest for most horrible and dangerous treasons against her Maiestie, and thy whole countrey. For thy laying of thy blood, it must lye on thine owne head, as a iust reward of thy wickednesse. The lawes of the Realme most iustly condemne thee to die out of thine owne mouth, for the conspiring the destruction both of her Maiestie, and of vs all: therefore thy blood be vpon thee, neither her Maiestie, nor we at any time sought it, thy selfe hast spilt it.
What meanest thou by that,
looke into your studie, and into your newe bookes, and you shall finde what I meane. I protest
I knowe not what thou meanest: thou doest not well to vse such darke speaches, vnlesse thou wouldest plainely vtter what thou meanest thereby.
, you haue bene much heard, and what you meane by being setled, I knowe not, but I see you are so setled in poperie, that you cannot settle your selfe to be a good subiect. But touching that you should say to stay iudgement from being giuen against you, your speaches must be of one of these kindes, either to proue the Inditement (which you haue confessed to be true) to be insufficient in lawe, or els to pleade somewhat touching her Maiesties mercie, why Justice should not be done of you. All other speaches wherein you haue vsed great libertie, is more then by lawe you can aske. These be the matters you must looke to, what say you tothem?