In this disguise, ere scarce my mourning robes, Could haue a generall note, I haue forsooke My shape, my mother, and those rich demeanes, Of which I am sole heyre: and now resolue, In this disguise of Page to follow him, Whose loue first caus'd me to assume this shape. Lord how my feminine bloud stirs at the sight Of these same breeches, me thinkes this cod-peece Should betray mee: well, I will trye the worst, Hether they say hee vsually doth come, Whom I so much affect, what makes he heere, In the skirts of, so neere the field, And at a garden house, a has some punke Vpon my life: no more heere he comes.
God saue you sir: your name vnlesse I erre, Is maister.
'Tis sweet boy.
I haue a letter for you.
From whom ist,
The inside sir will tell you; I shall see What loue he beares me now.
Th'art welcome boy. How does the faire, My noble mistresse.
I left her in health.
Shee giues thee heere good words, and for her sake, Thou shalt not want a maister, be mine for euer.
I thanke you sir: now shall I see the Punke.
Who knocks so fast? I thought 'twas you, what news,
You know my businesse well, I sing one song.
Foot, what would you haue me do, my land is gon, My credit of lesse trust then Courtiers words, To men of iudgment, and for my debts I might deserue a Knight-hood; what's to be done? The Knight my father will not once vouchsafe To call me sonne; That little land a gaue,the Lawyer swallowed at one gob For lesse then halfe the worth: and for the Citty There be so many rascals, and tall yeomen VVould hang vpon me for their maintenance, Should I but peepe or step within the gates, That I am forst onely to ease my charge, To liue here in the suburbes: or in the towne To walke in. I tell you sir, Your best retired life is an honest Punke In a thatcht house with Garlike: tell not mee, My Punk's my Punke, and noble Letchery Sticks by a man, when all his friends forsake him.
The Poxe it will, art thou so sencelesse growne, So much indeared to thy bestiall lust, That thy originall worth should lye extinct And buried in thy shame? farre be such thoughts From spirits free and noble: begin to liue. Know thy selfe, and whence thou art deriu'd, I know that competent state thy father gaue, Cannot be yet consum'd.
'Tis gon by heauen, Not a denier is left.
'Tis impossible.
Impossible zart, I haue had two suckers, Able to spend the wealthystore.
VVhat are they?
VVhy a Lawyer & a VVhore, See heere comes one, doost thinke this petti-coate, A perfu'md smock, and twice a weeke a bathe, Can be maintain'd with halfe a yeares reuenews No by heauen, wee Annuall yonger brothers, Must go to't by hole-sale, by hole-sale man These creatures are maintain'd: her very face Has cost a hundred pound.
Sir, thanke your selfe.
They keepe this whore betwixt them.
You know sir, I did inioy a quiet country life, Spotlesse and free, till you corrupted mee, And brought me to the Court, I neuer knew, VVhat sleeking, glazing, or what pressing meant, Till you preferd me to your Aunt the Lady, I knew no Iuorie teeth, no caps of heire,Nowater,, or perfumes, To helpe a Ladies breath, vntill your Aunt Learnt me the common trick.
The common trick Say you, a poxe vpon such common tricks, They will vndoe vs all.
And knowing this Art thou so wilfull blind, still to persist In ruine and defame?
VVhat should I doe? I'aue past my word to keepe this Gentlewoman, Till I can place her to her owne content. And what is a Gentleman but his word.
Why let her goe to seruice.
To seruice, Why so shee does, she is my Landeresse, And by this light, no punie Inne a Court But keepes a Landresse at his command To doe him seruice, and shall not I, ha!
Sir, you are his friend (I loue him to) Propound a course which may aduantage him, And you shall finde such reall worth in me, That rather then Ile liue his hindrance, I will assume the most penurious state The Citty yeelds, to giue me meanes of life.
Why ther's it, you heare her what she sayes, VVould not he be damnd that should forsake her, Sayes she not well, can you propound a course, To get my forfit land, from yonder roague, Parcell Lawyer, parcell Deuill, all Knaue,.
Not I.
Why so, I thought as much, You are like our Cittizens to men in need, VVhich cry 'tis pitty, a propper Gentleman Should want mony, yet not an vsuring slaue, VVill lend him a denier, to helpe his wants, VVill you lend me forty shillings.
I will.
VVhy God-amercy, there's some goodnesse in thee, Youle not repent.
I will not.
With that money I will redeeme my forfit land, and wed My Coccatrice to a man of worship, To a man of worship by this light.
But how?
Thus: in Ramme-alley lies a fellow, by name: one that professeth law, but indeedHas neither law nor conscience, a fellow That neuer saw the barre, but when his life Was cald in question for a coosenage, The Rogue is riche, to him go you, tell him That rich Sir.
How's that?
Is lately dead, and that my hopes stand faire To get his onely daughter. If I speed, And haue but meanes to steale away the wench, Tell him I reckon him my chiefest friend, To entertaine vs till our nuptiall rites May be accomplisht, and could you but procure My elder brother meete me on the way, And but associateme vnto his house, 'Tweare hit ifaith, I'de giue my cunningAn honest slit for all his tricks in lawe.
Why this shall be perform'd, take ther's my store, To friends all things are common.
Then at the court There are none foes, for all things there are common.
I will as carefully performe thy wish, As if my fortunes lay vpon th'attempt.
When shall I heere from you.
Within this houre
Let me alone for the rest, if I gull not And go beyond my open throted lawyer, For all his booke cases ofAnd; let mee Like waiting Gentlewomen be euer bound, To sit vpon my heeles, and pick rushes, Will you about this geere.
With my best speed.
Then fare you well, yole meete me.
Without faile.
Adue: now you pernicious Coccatrice, You see how I must skelder for your good, Ile bring you where you shall haue meanes to cheate, If you haue grace enough to apprehend it.
Beleeue me loue, how ere some stricter wits, Condemne all women which are prone to loue, And thinke that if their fauour fall on any, By consequence they must be naught with many, And hold a false position, that a womanFalse to her selfe, can trusty be to no man, Yet know I say, how ere my life hath lost The same which my Virginity aspyr'd, I will be true to thee, my deed shall mooue, To win from all men pitty, if not loue.
Tut, I know thee a good rascall, lets in, And on with all your neate and finest ragges. On with your cloake and saue-guard, you arrant drab, You must cheate without all conscience, filtch for thee & me. Do but thou act what I shall well contriue, Weele teach my Lawyer a new way to thriue.
Come lou'dheere let vs sit, And marke who passes; now for a wager, What colourd bear'd comes next by the window?
A black mans I thinke.
I thinke not so, I thinke a redde, for that is most in fashion, Lord how scarce is the world of propper men And gallants; sure wee neuer more shall see A good legge worne in a long silke stocking, With a long cod-peece, of all fashions That carried it ifaith, what's he goes by?
A sniueling Cittizen, he is carrying ware,
Vnto some Ladies chamber: but who's this?
I know him not, a lookes iust like a foole.
He's very braue a may be a Courtier, Whats that a reads.
Ah how light a treads For durting his silke stockings, Ile tell thee what, A witty woman may with ease distinguish, All men by their noses, as thus: your noseis louely, large and brawde, Much like a Goose, your valiant generous nose, A crooked, smooth, and a great puffing nose, Your schollers nose is very fresh and raw For want of fire in winter, and quickly smels, His choppes of mutton, in his dish of porrage. Your Puritan nose is very sharpe and long,And much like your widdows, and with ease can smell, An edefying capon some fiue streets off,
O mistris a very proper Gentleman,
And trust me so it is, I neuer saw A man that sooner could captiue my thoughts (Since I writ widdow) then this gentleman, I would a would looke vp.
Ile laugh so lowd That he may heere me.
Thats not so good.
And spake you with Maister.
I did.
Will a meete his brother.
A said a would, And I beleeued him, I tell you maister I haue done that for many of these gallants That no man in this towne would do but I.
What is that boy.
Why trust them on their words, But will you heare the newes which now supplies, The citty with discourse.
What is it wag.
This sir, they say some of our citty dames Were much desirous to see the Baboones Doe their newest tricks, went, saw them, came home, Went to bed, slept, next morning one of them, Being to shift a smock, sends downe her maide, To warme her one, meane while she gins to thinke On the Baboones tricks, and naked in her bed Begins to practise some, at last she stroue, To get her right leg ouer her head; thus: And by her actiuity she got it Crosse her shoulder: but not withall her power, Could she reduce it, at last much strugling Tumbles quite from the bed vpon the flower, The maide by this return'd with the warme smock, And seeing her mistris throwne on the ground, Trust vp like a foote-ball, exclaimes, calls helpe, Runnes downe amazd, sweares that her mistris neck Is broke; vp comes her husband and neighbours, And finding her thus trus'd, some flatly said She was bewitch, others she was possest, A third said for her pride, the Diuell had set Her face where her rumpe should stand, but at lastHer valiant husband steps me boldly to her, Helpes her; she ashamed; her husband amazed, The neighbours laughing, as none forbeare, She tells them of the fatall accident. To which one answers, that if her husband Would leaue his trade, and carry his wife about To doe this tricke in publike, she'd get more gold Then all the Baboones, Calues with two tailes, Or motions whatsoeuer.
You are a wag.
He will be gone if we neglect to stay him.
Shall I cough or sneeze.
No I ha't stand a side, Aye me my handkercher.
Mistris,
Runne, runne, I haue let my handkercher fall, Gentleman shall I intreate a curtesie?
Within my power your beauty shall command. What curtesie ist.
To stoope and take vp, My handkercher.
Your desire is performd.
Sir most hearty thankes: please you come in Your welcome shall transcend your expectation.
I accept your curtesie, ha! whats this? Assaild by feare and hope in a moment., this womanish passion fits not men, Who know the worth of freedome: shall smiles and eyes With their lasciuious glances conquer him Hath still beene Lord of his affections? Shall simpring nisenesse load-stones but to fooles, Attract a knowing spirit? it shall, it dooes, Notrising fromlap, Spreds his bright raies with more maiestique grace, Then came the glances from her quickning eye, And what of this.
By my troth I know not.
I will not enter: continued flames burne strong. I yet am free, and reason keepes her seate, Aboue all fond affections, yet is she faire.
Sir I bring you thankes for this great curtesie, And if you please to enter I dare presume, My mistrisse will affoord you gratious welcome,
How do men call your mistris.
The mans in loue.
Her name sir is Mistris, late wife To maisterMercer deceast.
I haue heard she is both rich and beautifull,
In th'eyes of such as loue her, iudge your selfe, Please you but prick forward and enter.
Now will I fall a boord the waiting maide,
Fall a boord of me doost take me for a ship?
I, and will shoote you betwixt wind and water.
Blurt maister gunner, your linstocks too short.
Foote how did she know that, dost here sweet heart, Should not the page be doing with the maid, Whilst the maister is busie with the mistris, Please you prick forwards, thou art a wench Likely to goe the way of all flesh shortly.
Whose witty knaue art thou.
At your seruice.
At mine faith, I should breetch thee.
How breetch me.
I breech thee, I haue breech'd a taler man, Then you in my time, come in and welcome.
Well I see now a ritch well-practis'd baud, May pursse more fees in a summers progresse, Then a well traded lawyer in a whole terme, Pandarisme! why't is growne a liberall science Or a new sect, and the good professors Will like the Brownist frequent grauell pits shortly, For they vse woods and obscure holes already.
Not marry a widdow.
No.
And why? Belike you thinke it base and seruant-like, To feed vpon reuersion, you hold vs widdowes, But as a pie thrust to the lower end That hath had many fingers int before, And is reseru'd for grose and hungry stomacks.
You much mistake me.
Come in faith you do: And let me tell you thats but ceremony, For though the Pye bee broken vp before, Yet sayes the prouerbe, the deeper is the sweeter. And though a capons wings and legges be caru'd, The flesh left with the rumpe I hope is sweet. I tell you sir, I haue beene woed, and sued to,By worthy Knights of faire demeanes: nay more, They haue bin out of debt, yet till this houre, I neither could endure, to be in loue Or be beloued, but proferd ware is cheape. Whats lawfull thats loathd, and things denied, Are with more stronger appetite persude: I am too yeelding.
You mistake my thoughts: But know thou wonder of this continent, By one more skild in vnknowne fate, then was, The blindProphet, It was foretold, A widdow should indanger both my life, My soule, my lands, and reputation. This checks my thoughts, and cooles th'ssentiall fire, Of sacred loue; more ardent in my brest Then speech can vtter.
A triuiall Idle ieast, Tis for a man, of your repute and note, To credit fortune-tellers, a petty rogue, That neuer saw fiue shillings in a heape, Will take vpon him to diuine mens fate, Yet neuer knowes himselfe shall dye a begger, Or be hanged vp for pilfering table-cloaths, Shirts and smocks, hanged out to dry on hedges, Tis meerely base, to trust them, or if there be, A man in whom theGod hath breath'd His true diuining fire; that can foretell, The fixt decree of fate, he likewise knowes, What is within the euerlasting booke Of Desteny decreed, cannot by wit, Or mans Inuention be disolued, or shund, Then giue thy loue free scope, imbrace and kisse, And to the distafe sisters leaue th'euent.
How powerfull are their words whom we affect, Small force shall need, to win the strongest fort, If to his state the Captaine be perfidious, I must intreate you licence my depart For some few houres.
Choose what you will of time, There lyes your way.
I will intreate her, stay,
Did you call sir.
No.
Then fare you well.
Who gins to loue, needs not a second Hell.
, makes a no stay.
Mistris.
I prythee see if hee haue left the house, Peepe close, see, but be not seene: is a gon.
No, has made a stand.
I prethee keep close.
Nay, keep you close, y'ad best
What does he now?
Now a retires.
O you much partiall gods! Why gaue you men affections, and not a power To gouerne them? what I by fate should shun, I most affect, a widdow, a widdow.
Blowes the wind there.
A ha, h'is in ifaith, Yo'aue drawne him now within your purlews mistresse.
Tut I will not loue, my rationall And better parts shall conquer blind affections, Let passion children, or weake women sway, My loue shall to my iudgment still obay.
What does he now?
H'is gon.
Gon.
A went his way, and neuer lookt behind him.
Sure he's taken.
A little sing'd or so, Each thing must haue beginning, men must prepare Before they can come on, and show their loues In pleasing sort: the man will doe in time, For loue good Mistresse is much like to waxe, The more 'tisrub'd, it sticks the faster too, Or like a bird in bird-lime, or a pit-fall, The moore a labours, still the deeper in.
Come, thou must helpe me now, I haue a trick To second this beginning, and in the nick, To strike it dead ifaith, women must woe, When men forget what Nature leads them too.
Chast,; there's that left yet, Next to my booke,, I that's the soule of lawe: that's it, that's it, For which the Buckrome bag must trudge all weathers: Though scarcely fild with one poore replication, How happy are we that we ioy the law, So freely as we doe; not bought and sold, But clearly giuen, without all base extorting,Taking but bare ten Angels for a fee, Or vpward: to this renown'd estate, Haue I by indirect and cunning meanes, In-wouen my selfe, and now can scratch it out, Thrust at a barre, and cry my Lord as lowd, As ere a lifted gowne man of them all. I neuer plead before the honor'd bench, But bench right-worshipfull of peacefull Iustices And Country-Gentlemen, and yet I'aue found Good gettings by the Masse, besides od cheates,lands, and many garboyles more, Dash.
Sir.
Is that reioynder done.
Done sir.
Haue you drawn't at length, haue you dasht it out, According to your name.
Some seauen-score sheetes.
Is the demurror drawne twixtand, And what do you say topittifull bill,
I haue drawne his answer negatiue to all.
Negatiue to all. The plaintiue sayes, That, was sonne to, And will a sweare the generall bill is false.
A will.
Then he forsweares his father, tis well, Some of our clients will go prig to hell Before our selues; has a paide all his fees.
A left them all with me.
Then trusse my points, And how thinkst thou of law?
Most reuerently, Law is the worlds great light, a second sunne, To this terrestriall Globe, by which all things Haue life and being, and without which Confusion and disorder soone would seaze The generall state of men, warres, outrages, The vlcerous deeds of peace, it curbes and cures, It is the kingdomes eye, by which shee sees The acts and thoughts of men.
The kingdomes eye, I tell thee foole, it is the kingdomes nose, By which she smels out all these rich transgressors, Nor ist of flesh, but meerely made of wax, And 'tis, within the power of vs Lawyers, To wrest this nose of waxe which way we please: Or it may be as thou saist an eye indeed.But if it be, tis sure a womans eye
Thats euer rowling.
one knocks.
Go see who tis, Stay, my chaire, and gowne, and then go see who knocks, Thus must I seeme a Lawyer which am indeed, But meerly dregs and offscum of the Law,, Tis very cleere.
God saue you sir.
The place is very pregnant, Maister; Most harty welcome sir,
You ply this geere, You are no trewant in the law, I see.
Faith some hundred bookes in folio I haue Turnd ouer to better my owne knowledge, But that is nothing for a studient.
Or a Stationer they turne them ouer too, But not as you doe gentill Maister, And what? the Law speakes profit does it not?
Faith some bad angels haunt vs now and then, But what brought you hether.
Why these small legs,
You are conceited sir.
I am in Law, But let that goe, and tell me how you doe, How doesand his louely bride.
Introth you make me blush, I should haue askt, His health of you, but tis not yet too late.
Nay good sirforbeare your quillets now.
By Heauen I deale most plaine, I saw him not, Since last I tooke his Morgage.
Sir be not nice, (Yet I must needs herein commend your loue) To let me see him; for know I know him wed, And that a stole awayheire, Therefore suspect me not I am his friend.
How, wed to ritchonely heyre, Is olddead?
Do you make it strange?
By heauen I know it not.
Then am I greeued I spake so much (but that I know you loue him) I should intreat your secresie sir, fare you well.
Nay good sir stay, if ought you can disclose Of Maistergood, let me pertake, And make me glad in knowing his good hap.
You much indeere him sir, and from your loue,I dare presume you make your selfe a fortune If his faire hopes proceed.
Say on good sir.
You will be secret.
Or be my tongue torneout.
Measure for a Lawyer, but to the point, Has stoleheyre hether a brings her As to a man on whom a may relye His life and fortunes: you hath a named Already for the Steward of his lands, To keepe his Courts, and to collect his rent, To let out Leases and to raise his fines, Nothing that may, or loue, of profit bring, But you are named the man.
I am his slaue, And bound vnto his noble curtesie, Euen with my life, I euer said a would thriue, And I protest I kept his forfeit morgage, To let him know what tis to liue in want.
I thinke no lesse, one word more in priuate.
Good Maister, shall I put you now a case.
Speake on good Maister.
Then thus it is, Suppose I am a Page, he is my Maister, My Maister goes to bed and cannot tell What money's in his hose, I ere next day Haue filcht out some, what action lyes for this.
An action boy, cald firking the Posteriors, With vs your action sildome comes in question: For that tis knowne that most of your Gallants Are sildome so well stor'd, that they forget What money's in their hose, but if they haue, There is no other helpethen sweare the page And put him to his oath.
Then fecks-law, Dost thinke that he has conscience to steale, Has not a conscience likewise to deny. Then hang him vp ifaith.
I must meet him,
Commend me to them, come when they will, My doores stand open and all within is theirs, And though Ramme-alley stinks with Cookes and Ale, Yet say ther's many a worthy lawyers chamber, Buts vpon Ram-alley, I haue still an open throte, If ought I haue which may procure his good,Bid him command, I, though it be my blood.
Is this the place you were appointed to meete him.
Sosent me word.
I find it true, That wine, good newes, and a yong holsome wench Cheere vp an old mans blood, I tell thee boy, I am right harty glad, to heare thy brother Hath got so great an heire; now were my selfe, So well bestowed I should reioyce ifaith.
I hope you shall do well.
No doubt, no doubt, A sirra has a borne the wench away. My sonne ifaith, my very sonne ifaith, When I was yong and had an able back, And wore the brissell on my vpper lippe, In goodI had as good conuayance, And could haue ferd, and ferkt y'away a wench, As soone as eare a man aliue; tut boy, I had my winks, my becks, treads on the toe, Wrings by the fingers, smyles and other quirkes, Noe Courtier like me, your Courtiers all are fooles, To that which I could doe, I could haue done it boy. Euen to a hare, and that some Ladies know,
Sir I am glad this match may reconcile, Your loue vnto my brother.
Tis more then so. Ile seeme offended still though I am glad.
Has got richheyre.
Come wench of gold, For thou shalt get me gold, besides odde ends Of siluer: weele purchase house and land, By thy bare gettings, wentch, by thy bare gettings, How saiest Lieftenant, does she not looke Like a wench newly stole from a window?
Exceeding well she carries it by, And if she can forbeare her Rampant trick, And but hold close a while twill take by.
How now you slaue? my rampant tricks you rogue, Nay feare not me my onely feare is still,Thy filthy face betrayes vs, for all men know, Thy nose stands compasse like a bow, VVhich is three quarters drawne, thy head Which is with greasy haire ore-spred, And being vncurld and black as cole, Doth show some scullion in a hole Begot thee on a Gipsie, or Thy mother was some Colliers whore: My rampant tricks you rogue, thou't be descride Before our plot be ended.
What should descry him, Vnlesse it be his nose? and as for that; Thou maist protest a was thy fathers butler, And for thy loue is likewise runne away, Nay sweet Lieftenant now forbeare to puffe, And let the brissels of thy beard grow down-ward, Reuerence my Punke and Pandarize a little, Ther's many of thy ranke that doe professe it, Yet hold it no disparagment.
I shall doe, VVhat fits an honest man.
VVhy thats enough, Foote my Father, and the goose my brother, Back you two.
Back.
Retire sweet Leiutenant, And come not on, till I shall waue you on.
Is not that he.
Tis he.
But wheres the wench.
It shalbe so, Ile cheate him thats flat.
You are well met, know yee me good sir, Belike you thinke I haue no eyes, no eares, No nose to smell, and winde out all your tricks, Y'haue stole sirheire, nay we can finde, Your wildest paths, your turnings and returnes, Your traces, squats, the mussers, formes and holes, You yongmen vse, if once our sagest wits Be set a hunting, are you now crept forth, Haue you hid your head within a suburbe hole All this while, and are you now crept forth?
'Tis a starke lye.
How?
who told you so did lye, Foote, a Gentleman cannot leaue the Citty And keepe the suburbs to take a little Phisick, But straite some slaue will say he hides his head; I hide my head within a suburbe hole,I could haue holes at Court to hide my head, Were I but so disposd.
Thou varlet knaue, T'hast stolne away Sirheire, But neuer looke for countenance from me, Carry her whether thou wilt.
Father, father, Zart will you vndoe your posterity. Will you sir vndoe your posterity? I can but kill my brother, then hang my selfe, And where is then your house, make me not dispare, Foote now I haue got a wench, worth by the yeare Two thousand pound and vpwards, to crosse my hopes: Would ere a clowne in Christendom doo't but you.
Good Father, let him leaue this thundring, And giue him grace.
Why law, my brother knowes Reason, and what an honest man should doe.
Well, where's your wife.
Shees comming here behind,
Ile giue her some-what, though I loue not thee.
My father right, I knew you could not hold Out long with a woman, but giue some-thing Worthy your gift and her acceptance father, This chaine were excellent by this good light, Shee shall giue you as good, if once her lands
Come to my fingring.
Peace knaue, whats she your wife?
That shall be sir.
And whats he.
My man.
A Ruffian knaue a is.
A Ruffian sir, By heauen, as tall a man as ere drew sword, Not being counted of the damned crew, A was her fathers Butler, his name is, Of with your Maske, now shall you finde me true. And that I am a sonne vnto a Knight, This is my father.
I am indeed faire maide, My stile is Knight: come let me kisse your lips.
That kisse shall cost your chaine.
It smacks ifaith, I must commend your choise.
Sir I haue giuen A larger venture then true modesty Will well allow, or your more grauer wit Commend.
I dare be sworne she has.
Not so. The foolish knaue ha's beene accounted wilde,And so haue I, but I am now come home, And so will he.
I must beleeue it now.
Beg his chaine wench.
Wil you cheat your father?
I by this light will I.
Nay sigh not, For you shall finde him louing and me thankfull: And were it not a scandall to my honour, To be consenting to my sonnes attempt, You should vnto my house, meane while take this, As pledge and token of my after loue: How long since dyed your father.
Some six weeks since. We cannot stay to talke, for slaues pursue, I haue a house shall lodge vs till the Priest May make vs sure.
Well sirra, loue this woman, And when you are man and wife, bring her to me, Shee shall be welcome.
I humbly thanke you sir.
I must be gone, I must a wooing too.
andspeed you, youle returne.
Instantly
Why this came cleanly off, Giue me the chaine, you little Cockatrice, Why this was luck, foote foure hundred crownes, Got at a clap, hold still your owne you whore, And we shall thriue,
Twas brauely fetcht about.
I, when will your nose and beard performe as much.
I am glad he is gon, a put me to the blush, When a did aske me of ritchdeath.
And tooke not I my q: wast not good, Did I not bring you off, you arrant drab, Without a counterbuffe? looke who comes heere, And three merry men, and three merry men, And three merry men bee wee a.
Still in this vaine, I haue done you seruice, The Lawyers house will giue you entertainment, Bountifull and free.
O my second selfe, Come let me busse thy beard, we are all made, Why actso melancholly, doost want money? Looke heer's gold, and as we passe along, Ile tell thee how I got it, not a wordBut that shee'sheyre, my brother Swallowes it with more ease, then a Dutchman Does slap-Dragons: a comes, now to my Lawyers:
Kisse my wife, good brother; shee is a wench Was borne to make vs all.
I hope no lesse, Yo'are welcome sister into these our parts, As I may say.
Thankes gentle brother.
Come now to Ram-alley. There shalt thou lye, Till I prouide a Priest,
O villany! I thinke a will gull his whole generation, I must make one, since 'tis so well begun, Ile not forsake him, till his hopes be wonne.
Then y'are friends.
We are, so please your worship.
'Tis well, I am glad, keepe your mony, for law Is like a Butlers box: while you two striue, That picks vp all your mony, you are friends,
We are so please you, both perfit friends.
Why so, Now to the next Tap-house, there drinke downe this, And by the opperation of the third pot, Quarrell againe, and come to me for law: Fare you well.
The Gods conserue your wisdom.
Why so, these are tricks of the long fifteenes, To giue counsell, and to take fees on both sides, To make 'em friends, and then to laugh at them, Why this thriues well, this is a common trick: When men haue spent a deale of mony in law, Then Lawyers make them friends: I haue a trick To go beyond all these, ifcome And bring richheyre, I say no more, But 'tis within this skonse to goe beyond them.
Here are Gentlemen in hast would speake with you.
VVhat are they?
I cannot know them sir, They are so wrapt in Cloakes.
Haue they a woman?
Yes sir, but shee's Maskt, and in her riding sute.
Goe, make hast, bring them vp with reuerence, Oh are they ifaith, has brought the wealthy heire:These stooles and cushions stand not handsomly.
Blesse thee.
Maisterwelcome.
Welcome loue, kisse this Gentlewoman,,
Your worship shall command me.
Art not weary.
Can you blame her since she has rid so hard?
You are welcome Gentlemen, -- Dash.
Sir.
A fire in the great chamber, quickly.
I that's well said, we are almost weary, But Maister, if any come to inquire For me, my brother, or this Gentlewoman, VVe are not here, nor haue you heard of vs.
Not a word sir, heere you are as safe As in your fathers house.
And he shall thanke you.
Th'art not merry loue, good maisterBid this Gentlewoman welcome: she is one Of whom you may receiue some courtesie In time.
She is most harty welcome, VVilt please you walke into another roome. VVhere is both bed and fire,
I, I, that that Good brother lead her in, Maisterand I VVill follow instantly, now Maister
It rests within your power to pleasure me, Know that this same is sirHeire, Now if she chance to question what I am, Say sonne vnto a Lord, I pray thee tell her I haue a world of land, and stand in hope To bee created Barron, for I protest I was constrain'd to sweare it forty times, And yet shee'le scarce beleeue me.
, Let me alone to set you out in length And breadth:
I prethee doo't effectually: Shat haue a quarter share by this good light, In all she has, I prethee forget not To tell her thehaue beene dancers, Tilters, and very antient Courtiers, And in request at Courtsince sir. VVith his long silke stockings was beheaded,Wilt thou do this?
Referre it to my care.
Excellent, Ile but shift my bootes, and then Goe seeke a Priest, this night I will be sure. If we be sure, it cannot be vndone, Can it Maister?
O sir not possible: You haue many Presidents and booke Cases for't, Bee you but sure and then let me alone., and Ile defend you.
Nay then hang care, come lets in.
A ha, Haue you stole her,.
It shall goe hard but I will strip you boy. You stole the wench, but I must her insoy.
Come, tell me what thou think'st, I am tickled with conceit of marriage, And whom thinkst thou (for me) the fittest husband, What saist thou to yong.
A pretty fellow. But that his back is weake.
VVhat doost thou say Tothe Lawyer?
I like that well, VVere the Rogue a Lawyer, but he is none, Hee neuer was of any Inne-of-court; But Inne of Chancery, where a was knowne, But onely for a swaggering whyfler, To keepe out rogues, and prentises, I saw him, VVhen a was stockt for stealing the cookes fees. A Lawyer I could like, for tis a thing, Vsed by you Cittizens wiues, your husbands dead; To get french hoods you straight must Lawyers wed.
What saist thou then to Nimble Sir
Faith he must hit the haire: a fellow fit, To make a pritty Cuckold. take an old man, Tis now the newest fashion, better be An old mans darling then a young mans warling, Take me the old briske knight, the foole is ritch, And will be strong enough to father children, Though not to get them.
Tis true he is the man, Yet will I beare some dozen more in hand, And make them all my gulls,
Mistris stand aside.
Youngcomes, let me alone to touch him,
This is the house.
And thats the chamber-maide.
VVhers the widdow gentle.
The VViddow sir is not to be spoken to,
Not spoke to, I must speake with her.
must you? Come you with authority, or do you come To sue her with a warrant that you must speake with her.
I would intreat it.
O you would intreat it, May not I serue your turne, may not I vnfold, Your secrets to my Mistris, loue is your sute,
It is faire creature.
And why did you fall off VVhen you perceiued my mistris was so cunning, D'you thinke she is still the same.
I doe.
VVhy so, I tooke you for a nouice: and I must thinke, You know not yet the inwardes of a woman, Doe you not know that womenare like fish, VVhich must be strooke when they are prone to bite, Or all your labours lost, but sir walke here. And Ile informe my Mistris your desires,
Maister
boy.
come not you for loue,
I do boy
And you would haue the widdow.
I would
by, I neuer saw one goe about his busines More vntowardly: why sir, do not you know, That he which would be inward with the Mistris Must make a way first through the waiting mayde? If youle know the widdowes affections Feele first the waiting Gentle-woman, do it Maister, Some halfe a dozen kisses were not lost, Vppon this Gentle-woman, for you must know, These waiting maides are to their mistresses Like Porches vnto doores, you passe the one Before you can haue entrance at the other. Or like your musterd to your peece of brawne, If youle haue one tast well you must not skorne To be dipping in the other, I tell you Maister Tis not a few mens tales which they preferre, Vnto their Mistresses in compasse of a yeare, Be ruld by me, vntrusse your selfe to her, Out with all your loue-sicke thoughtes to her,Kisse her and giue her an angell to buy pinnes, And this shall sooner winne her Mistris loue, Then all your protestations, sighes and teares,
Here they come: to her bouldly Maister, Doe, but dally not, thats the widdowes phrase,
Most worthy faire such is the power of loue, That now I come t'accept your profered grace: And with submissiue thoughtes t'entreat a pardon, For my so grosse neglect.
Thers no offence, My mind is changed.
I told you as much before,
With a hey passe with a repasse.
Deerest of women, The constant vertue of your nobler mind, Speakes in your lookes: Nor can you entertaine Both loue and hate at once.
Tis all in vaine,
You striue against the streame.
Fee the waiting maid Maister
Stand thou propitious, indeere me to my loue
Deere Mistresse turne to this Gentleman. I protest, I haue some feeling of his constant loue, Cast him not away; try his loue.
Why sir, With what audatious front can you intreat To inioy my loue, which yet not two howers since, You scornefully refus'd.
Wel fare the waiting maide.
My fate compeld me but now farewell fond feare, My soule, my life, my lands, and reputation, Ile hazard all and prize them all beneath thee.
which I shall put to triall, lend me thy eare,
Can you loue boy.
Yes.
what or whom.
My victuals
A pretty knaue, ifaith come home to night, Shalt haue a posset and candi'd Eringoes, A bed if need be to, I loue alife, To play with such Babounes as thou.
indeed? But doost thou thinke the widdow will haue my maister.
Ile tel thee then, wo't come,
I wil.
Remember
Wil you performe so much.
Or loose my bloud.
Make him subscribe it, and then I vow, By sacredeuer hallowed fire, To take thee to my bed,
Til then farewell.
Hees worthy loue whose vertues most excell.
Remember, what ist a match betwixt you Mistresse?
I haue set the foole in hope, h'as vndertooke To rid me of that fleshly Captaine. Which sweares in tauernes and all ordinaries, I am his lawfull wife: he shall allay, The fury of the Captaine, and I secure, Will laugh at the disgrace they both indure.
Open your case and I shall soone resolue you.
But will you doe it truely,
As I am honest.
This Gentleman whom I so much affect, I scarsly yet doe know, so blind is loue In thinges which most concernes it. As y'are honest, Tell me his birth, his state, and farthest hopes
He is my friend and I will speake him truely. He is by birth, sonne to a foolish Knight, His present state I thinke wil be the prison, And farthest hope to be baild out againe, By sale of al your land,
O me accurst, Has a no credit Lands and Mannors.
That lands he has lies in a faire Churchyard, And for his manners they are so rude and vile, That scarse an honest man wil keepe him company,
I am abused coosned and deceiued.
Why thats his occupation: hee will cheate, In a cloake lin'd with Veluet, a wil prate Faster then fiue Barbers, and a Taylor. Ly faster then ten Citty occupiers, Or cunning tradsmen: goes a trust In euery Tauerne, where has spent a fagot, Sweares loue to euery whoore, squires baudes, And takes vp houses for them as their husband A is a man I loue and haue done much To bring him to preferment.
Is there no trust. No honnesty in men
Faith some there is, And tis all in the hands of vs Lawyers And women: and those women which haue it. Keepe their honesty so close, that not one,Amongsta hundred is perceiued to haue it.
Good sir, may I not by law forsake him And wed another, though my word be past To be his wife.
O questionlesse you may, You haue many Presidents and booke-cases for't, Nay though you were married by a booke-case, OfYou may forsake your husband, and wed another, Prouided that some fault be in the husband: As none of them are cleare.
I am resolu'd, I will not wed him, though I beg my bread.
All that I haue is yours, and were I worthy To be your husband.
I thanke you sir, I will rather wed a most perfidious Redshanke, A noted Iewe, or some Mechanick slaue, Then let him ioy my sheets.
A comes, a comes.
Now my Virago, 'tis done, all's cock-sure, I haue a Priest will mumble vp a marriage, Without bell, booke, or candle, a nimble slaue, An honest VVelsh-man that was a Taylor, But now is made a Curate.
Nay y'are fitted.
Now maister.
VVhere's your spirit sister?
VVhat all? whats the matter? do you heere?
VVhat's the reason of this melancholly?
By heauen I know not.
Has the gudgin bit.
He has beene nibling.
Hold him to it wench, And it 'twill hit by heauen: why art so sad? Foote wench we will be married to night, VVeele sup at th'Myter, and from thence My brother and we three will to the Sauoy, VVhich done, I tell thee girle, weele hand ore head, Goe to't pell mell for a Maiden-head, Come yo'are lusty, you wenches are like bells, You giue no musick, till you feele the clapper, Comea torch, we must be gon.
Seruant.
Mistris.
VVe are vndone.
Nowforfend.
This fellow has no land; and which is worse, Hee has no credit.
How are we out-stript,Blowne vp by wit of man: Let vs be gone Home againe, home againe, our market now is done.
That were too great a scandall.
Most true, Better to wed another then to returne With scandall and defame: wed me a man Whose wealth may reconcile your mothers loue, And make the action lawfull.
But where's the man? I like your councell, could you show the man.
My selfe am he, might I but dare aspire Vnto so high a Fortune.
Mistrisse, take the man, Shall we be baffled with faire promises, Or shall we trudge, like beggers back againe, No, take this wise and vertuous man, Who should a lose his legges, his armes, his eares, His nose, and all his other members, Yet if his tongue be left 'twill get his liuing, Take me this man.
Thankes gentle maister.
'Tis impossible, this night he meanes to wed mee.
If not by law, we will with power preuent it, So you but giue consent.
Lets heere the meanes.
Ile muster vp my friends, and thus I cast it, Whilst they are busie, you and I will hence Directly to a Chappell, where a Priest Shall knit the nuptiall knot ere they persue vs.
O rare inuention, Ile act my part, A owes me thirteene pound, I say no more, But there be catch-poles: speake ist a match.
I giue my liking.
Dash.
Sir.
Get your sword And me my buckler, nay you shall know We are, Bring my cloake, you shall thether, Ile for friends, VVorship and wealth the Lawyers state attends., we must beare some braine, to, Goe runne, flye: and a farre off enquire, If that the Ladybe there, If there, know what newes, and meete me straite At the Myter doore in Fleet-streete, away, "To get rich wiues, men must not vse delay.
A hunting Sirand drye-foote to,
We old men haue our crotchets, our conundrums, Our fegares, quirks and quibibles, As wel as youth.I goe, To hunt no Buck, but prick a lusty Doe, I goe in truth a wooing.
Then ride with me, Ile bring you to my sister.
Iustice not so by her there hangs a Tale.
Tha'ts true indeed.
She has a daughter.
And what of that
I likewise haue a sonne, A villanous Boy, his father vp and downe, What should I say, these Veluet bearded boyes will still be doing, say what we old men can.
And what of this Sir, be plaine,
A nimble spirited knaue, the villaine boy, Has one tricke of his sier, has got the wench. Stolne your rich Sisters heire.
heire,
Has done the deed, has peirst the vessells head, And knowes by this the vintage,
when should this be,
As I am by my counsell well informed, This very day,
Tut it cannot be, Some ten miles hence I saw the maide last night.
Maides may be maides to night and not to morrow. Women are free and sell their maiden-heads, As men sell cloath by yard and handfull, But if you chance to see your Sister widdow, Comfort her teares and say her daughters matcht. With one that has a knocker to his father, An honest Noble Knight.
Stand close Knight, close, And marke this Captaines humor, his name is. A dreames as a walkes, and thinkes no woman
Sees him but is in loue with him.
Twere braue, If some great Lady through a window spied me, And straight should loue me, say she should send, 5000. pound vnto my Lodging,And craue my company: with that mony, I would make three seuerall cloakes, and line them With black, Crimson, and Tawny three pyl'd veluet, I would eate atOrdinary, and dice At: then would I keepe my whore, In beaten veluet, and haue two slaues to tend her.
Ha, ha, ha.
What my case of Iustices, What are you eaues-dropping, or doe you thinke, Your tawny coates with gresie facings here, Shall carry it? Sir, Know my name is, knight, thee haue I sought, To fright thee from thy wits.
Nay good Sir, Wee haue too many mad men already.
How? I tell thee Iustice, not all Thy Baylifes, Sergants, busie Constables, Defesants, warrants, or thy Mittimusses, Shall saue his throte from cutting, if he presume, To woe the widdow eclipped, Shee is my wife by oth. Therefore take heed, Let me not catch thee in the widdowes house, If I doe, Ile pick thy head vpon my sword, And pisse in thy very visnomy, beware, beware. Come there no more, a Captains word, Flies not so fierce as doth his fatall sword,
How like you this, shall we indure this thunder, Or goe no further.
We will on Sir, We will on, let me alone to touchim, I wonder how my spirit did forbeare, To strike him on the face: had this beene spoke, Within my Liberties, had dyed for it.
I was about to draw.
If you come there, Thy beard shall serue to stuffe, those balls by which I get me heat at Tenice,
Is he gon.
I would a durst a stood to this awhile, Well I shall catch him in a narrow roome, Where neither of vs can flinch; If I do, Ile make him dance a trenchmoore to my sword. Come Ile along with you to the widdow.We will not be out-braued, take my word, Weele not be wrongd while I can draw a sword.
Let the Coach stay at showlane end: be ready, Let the boote stand openand when she's in: Hurry towards Saintin the field, As if the Diuell himselfe were waggoner, Now for an arme of oake, and heart of steele, To beare away the wench, to get a wife, A gentlewoman, a maide, nay which is more, An honest maide, and which is most of all, A ritch and honest maide:, For a man to wed such a wife as this, Is to dwell in the suburbsof Heauen,
Is she so exquesite.
Sir she is ritch, And a great heire
Tis the more dangerous,
Dangerous! Lord where be those gallant sprites! The time has beene when scarse an honnest woman, Much lesse a wench could passe an Inne of court, But some of the fry would haue beene dooing, With her: I knew the day when Shreds a Taylor, Comming once late by an Inne of Chancerie; Was laid along, and mufled in his cloake, His wife tooke in, Stycht vp, turnd out againe, And he perswaded all was but in iest, Tut those braue boyes are, gone, these which are left, Are wary lads, liue poring on their bookes, And giue their lynnen to their landresses, By tayle, they now can saue their purses, I knew when euery gallant had his man, But now a tweluepeny weekely Landresse, Will serue the turne to halfe a dozen of them,
Here comes my man, what newes?
As you would wish, The Ladyis come to towne. Her horses yet are walking, and her men say, Her onely daughter, is conuayd away. Noe man knowes how: now to it master, You and your seruantare made for euer,If you but stick to it now.
Gentlemen, Now show your selues at full, and not a man, But shares a fortune with me if I speed.
Tut feare not vs, be sure you runne away, And weele performe the quarrell.
Stand close, they come,
Art sure he will be here.
Most sure.
Sir.
Beare vp the torch, and keepe your way apace Directly to the Sauoy.
Haue you a Licence, Looke to that brother before you marry, For feare the Parson loose his benifice.
Tut our Curat craues no licence, a sweares His liuing came to him by a miracle,
How by miracle?
Why a paid nothing fort, A swares that few be free from symony, But onely Welchmen, and those a sayes to, Are but mountaine Priests.
But hang him foole he lyes. Whats his reason?
His reason is this, That all their liuings are so rude and bare, That not a man, will venter his damnation By giuing mony for them: a does protest, There is but two paire of hose and shooes, In all his Parish.
Hold vp your light Sir.
Shall I be taught how to aduance my torch,
Whats the matter Leiftenant.
Your Lieftenants an asse.
How an asse; die men like dogs.
hold gentlemen.
An asse, an asse.
Hold brother hold, Lieftenant. Put vp as you are men, your wife is gone.
Gone,
Gone.
How, which way? this is some plot
Downe toward Fleete bridge.
Follow, follow, follow.
So has the wench, let vs persue a loofe, And see the euent, this will prooue good mirth, When things vnshapde shall haue a perfit birth.