prethee tell me, what Planet thinkst thou gouernd at my conception, that I liue thus openly to the world?
Two Planets raind at once,thats you, Andthats, were in coniunction.
Prethee, prethee, in faith that coniunction copulatiue, is that part of speech that I liue by.
Ha, ha, to see the world, we swaggerers That liue by oathes and big-mouth'd menaces, Are now reputed for the tallest men: He that hath now a black muchato Reaching from eare to eare, or turning vp, bristling towards the eye: He that can hang two hansom tooles at his side, Go in disguisde attire, weare Iron enough, Is held a tall man and a souldier. He that with greatest grace can sweare gogs zounds, Or in a Tauerne make a drunken fray, Can cheat at Dice, swagger in bawdie houses, Weare veluet on his face, and with a grace Can face it out with asam a souldier. He that can clap his sword vpon the boord Hee's a braue man, and such a man am I.
She that with kisses can both kil & cure, That liues by loue, that sweares by nothing else But by a kisse, which is no common oath: That liues by lying, and yet oft tels truth; That takes most pleasure when she takes most paines: Shee's a good wench my boy, and such am I.
She that is past it, and praies for them that may.
Is an old Bawd as you are Mistris.
O do not name that name, do you not know Thatcould neuer endure to heare that name. But if your man would leaue vs,would read The lesson that last nightpromist you.
prethee leaue vs, we would be alone.
And will and must: if you bid me be gone,will withdraw, and draw on any he That in the worlds wide round dare cope with me. Mistris farewell, to noneneuer speake So kind a word. My salutations are, Farewell and be hangd, or in the diuels name. What they haue bene my many fraies can tell, You cannot fight, therefore to you farwell.
O this same swaggerer is the bulwark of my reputation, But Mistris, now to your lecture that you promist me.
Daughter attend, forwill tell thee now What in my yong daies I my selfe haue tried: Be rul'd by me andwill make thee rich. You God be praisde are faire, and as they say Full of good parts, you haue bene often tried To be a woman of good carriage, VVhich in my mind is very commendable.
It is indeed. Forward good mother.
And astold you, being faire,wish Sweet daughter you were as fortunate. VVhen any sutor comes to aske thy loue, Looke not into his words, but into his sleeue, If thou canst learne what language his purse speakes, Be rul'd by that, thats golden eloquence. Mony can make a slauering tongue speake plaine: If he that loues thee be deform'd and rich, Accept his loue, gold hides deformitie. Gold can make limpingwalke vpright, Make squint eyes looke strait, a crabd face looke smooth,Guilds Copernoses, makes them looke like gold: Fils ages wrinkles vp, and makes a face As old as, looke as yong as. If thou wilt arme thy selfe against all shifts, Regard all men according to their gifts. This if thou practise, thou when I am dead Wilt say old mothersoft laid thy head.
Soft who comes here? begone good Mistris, Of thy rules practise this is my first day.
God for thy passion what a beast am, To scar the bird that to the net would flie.
By your leaue Mistresse.
VVhat to do Maister?
To giue me leaue to loue you.
I had rather afford you some loue to leaue me.
would you would assoone loue me, ascould leaue you.
pray you what are you sir?
A man Ile assure you.
How shouldknow that?
Trie me by my word, forsayam a man, Or by my deed, Ile proue my selfe a man.
Are you not Maister?
Not M., but, and your seruant sweete Mistris.
Not Mistris, butand your handmaid, sweet Maister.
Thatloue you, let my face tell you: that I loue you more then ordinarily, let this kisse testifie: and that I loue you feruently and entierly, aske this gift, and see what it will answere you. My selfe, my purse, and all being wholy at your seruice.
Thattake your loue in good part, my thankes shall speak for me: thatam pleasde with your kisse, thisinterest of an other shall certifie you: and that I accept your gift, my prostrate seruice and selfe shall witnes with me. My loue, my lips, and sweet selfe, are at your seruice: wilt please you to come neare sir?
O that my wife were dead, here would I make My second choise, would she were buried, From out her graue this Marigold should grow, Which in my nuptialswold weare with pride. Die shall shee, I haue doom'd her destenie.
Tis newes M.to see you in such a place, How doth your wife?
Faith Mistrisat the point of death, And long she cannot liue, she shall not liue To trouble me in this my second choice.
I pray forbeare sir, for here comes my Loue, Good sir for this time leaue me: by this kisse You cannot aske the question at my hands I will denie you: pray you get you gone.
Farwell sweet Mistris.
Sweet adieu:
Stand to me bill, and head-peece sit thou close, I heare my Loue, my wench, my duck, my deare, Is sought by many sutors, but with this Ile keep the doore, and enter he that dare.be gone, thy twigs Ile turne to steele, These fingers that were expert in the Ierke, In steed of lashing of the trembling, Must learne pash and knock, and beate and mall, Cleaue pates, andhe that enters here Comes on his death,, is he shall taste.
Alas poore foole, the Pedants mad for loue, Thinkes me more mad that I would marry him: Hee's come to watch me with a rustie bill,To keep my friends away by force of armes, I will not see him but stand still aside, And here obserue him what he meanes to doo.
, that he that loues her best Durst offer but to tuch her in this place., Shall pash his Coxcombe such a knock, As that his soule his course shall take To, andlake. In vaine I watch in this darke hole, Would any liuing durst my manhood trie, And offer to come vp the staires this way.
O we should see you make a goodly fray.
The wench I here watch with my bill,still.let him come that dare, Death, hell, and Limbo be his share.
Wheres mistris, neuer a post here, A bar of Iron gainst which to trie my sword? Now by my beard a daintie peece of steele.
Owhat a qualme is this I feele?
Come hither, is none here but we two? When didst thou see the starueling Schoole-maister? That Rat, that shrimp, that spindleshanck, that Wren, that sheep-biter, that leane chittiface, that famine, that leane Enuy, that all bones, that bare Anatomy, that Iack a Lent, that ghost, that shadow, that Moone in the waine.
I waile in woe, I plunge in paine.
When next I finde him here Ile hang him vp Like a dried Sawsedge, in the Chimnies top: That Stock-fish, that poore Iohn, that gut of men.
O that I were at home againe.
When he comes next turne him into the streets,Now come lets dance the shaking of the sheets.
, hence boystrous bill, come gentle Rod. Had not grimstampt and star'd,had little car'd: Or if in stead of this browne bill, I had kept my mistrisstill, And he vpon an others back, His points vntrust, his breeches slack: My countenance he should not dash, For I am expert in the lash. But my sweet Lasse my loue doth flie, Which shall make me by poyson die., I will rid my life, Either by poyson, sword, or knife.
Sirra when saw you your Maister?
Faith Mistris when I last lookt vpon him.
And when was that?
When I beheld him.
And when was that?
Mary when he was in my sight, and that was yesterday, since when I saw not my maister, nor lookt on my M. nor beheld my maister, nor had any sight of my M.
Was he not at my father in lawes?
Yes mary was he.
Didst thou not intreat him to come home?
How should I mistris, he came not there to day.
Didst not thou say he was there?
True mistris he was there, but I did not tel ye whe~, He hath bin there diuers times, but not of late.
About your busines, here Ile sit and wait His comming home, though it be nere so late. Now once againe goe looke him at the Change, Or at the Church with Sir,Tis told me they vse often conference: When that is done, get you to schoole againe.
I had rather plaie the trewant at home, then goe seeke my M. at schoole: let me see what age am, some foure & twentie, and how haueprofited,was fiue yeare learning to crish Crosse from great A. and fiue yeare longer comming to F.there I stucke some three yeare before I could come to q. and so in processe of timecame to e perce e, and comperce, and tittle, thengot to a. e. i. o. u. after to our Father, and in the sixteenth yeare of my age, and the fifteenth of my going to schoole,am in good time gotten to a Nowne, by the same token there my hose went downe: thengot to a Verbe, there I began first to haue a beard: the~came to, there my M. whipt me till he fetcht the blood, and so foorth: so that now I am come the greatest scholler in the schoole: for I am bigger then two or three of them. But I am gone, farewell mistresse.
Loue none at all, they will forsweare themselues, And when you vrge them with it, their replies Are, thatlaughes at Louers periuries.
You told me of a Iest concerning that,prethee let me heare it.
That thou shalt. My mistris in an humor had protested, That aboue all the world she lou'd me best, Saying with sutors she was oft molested, And she had lodg'd her hart within my brest: And sware (but me) both by her maske & fan, She neuer would so much as name a man. Not name a man quoth I, yet be aduisde, Not loue a man but me, let it be so: You shall not think quoth she my thoughts disguisde,In flattring language, or dissembling show:say againe, andknow whatdo,will not name a man aliue but you. Into her housecame at vnaware, Her backe was to me andwas not seene,stole behind her tillhad her faire, Then with my handsclosed both her eyne, She blinded thus, beginneth to bethinke her Which of her Loues it was that did hood-winck her, First she begins to guesse & name a man Thatwell knew, but she had knowne far better. The nextneuer did suspect till than: Still of my namecould not heare a letter, Then mad, she did name, and then, Till she had reckoned vp some twentie names, At length when she had counted vp her score, As one among the rest she hit on mee:askt her if she could not recken more, And pluckt away my hands to let her see. But when she lookt back and saw me behind her She blusht, and askt if it weredid blind her? And sincesware both by her maske and fan, To trust no she tongue, that can name a man.
Your great oath hath some exceptions: But to our former purpose, yon is Mistris, We will attempt another kind of wooing, And make her hate her husband if we can.
But not a word of passion or of loue. Haue at her now to trie her patience, God saue you mistris.
You are welcome sir.
pray you wheres your husband?
Not within.
Who M.? himsaw euen nowAt mistristhe braue Curtizans.
Wrong not my husbands reputatio~ so, I neither can nor will beleeue you sir.
Poore gentlewoman how muchpittie you, Your husband is become her only guest: He lodges there, and daily diets there, He riots, reuels, and doth all things, Nay he is held the M. of misrule, Mongst a most loathed and abhorred Crew: And can you being a woman suffer this?
Sir, sir, I vnderstand you well inough, Admit my husband doth frequent that house Of such dishonest vsage,suppose He doth it but in zeale to bring them home By his good counsell, from that course of sinne: And like a Christian, seeing them astray In the broad path that to damnation leades, He vseth thither to direct their feete Into the narrow way that guides to heauen.
Was euer woman guld so palpably? But Mistristhinke you as you say?
Sir whatthinkthink, and what I say I would I could enioyne you to beleeue.
Faith mistrisI am sory for you, And in good sooth, I wish it laie in me To remedie the least part of these wrongs Your vnkind husband daily profers you.
You are deceiu'd he is not vnkind, Although he beare an outward face of hate, His hart and soule are both assured mine.
Fie mistris, take a better spirit, Be not so timerous to rehearse your wrongs,say your husband haunts bad company, Swaggerers, cheaters, wanton Curtizans.There he defiles his bodie, staines his soule, Consumes his wealth, vndoes himselfe and you, In danger of diseases, whose vilde names Are not for any honest mouthes to speake, Nor any chaste eares to receiue and heare. O he will bring that face admir'd for beautie, To be more loathed then a leaprous skin: Diuorce your selfe now whilst the clouds grow black, Prepare your selfe a shelter for the storme, Abandon his most loathed fellowship: You are yong mistris, will you loose your youth?
Tempt no more diuel, thy deformitie Hath chaung'd it selfe into an angels shape, But yetknow thee by thy course of speech: Thou gets an apple to betray poore, Whose outside beares a show of pleasant fruite, But the vilde branch on which this apple grew, Was that which drew poorefrom Paradice. Thy Syrens song could make me drowne my selfe, Butam tyed vnto the mast of truth. Admit my husband be inclin'd to vice, My vertues may in time recall him home, But if we both should desp'rate runne to sinne, We should abide certaine destruction. But hee's like one that ouer a sweet face Puts a deformed vizard for his soule, Is free from any such intents of ill: Only to try my patience, he puts on An vgly shape of black intemperance. Therefore this blot of shame which he now weares, I with my praiers will purge, wash with teares.
How lik'st thou this?
As schoole-boyes, Apes whips, as Lions Cocks, As Furies do fasting daies, and diuels crosses, As maides to haue their mariage daies put off:like it as the thingmost do loath, What wilt thou do? for shame persist no more In this extremitie of friuolous loue.see my doctrine moues no precise eares, But such as are profest inamoratos.
Oshall die.
Tush liue to laugh a little, Here's the best subiect that thy loue affords, Listen a while and heare this: hoboy speake.
As in presenti, thou loath'st the gift I sent thee,tarrie but die, for the beautious marry, Fain wolddie by a sword, but what sword shaldie by? Or by a stone, what stone?Knife I haue none to sheath in my brest, or emptie my full vaines, Here is no wal or post which I can soile with my brus'd braines. First will I therfore say 2. or 3. Creedes and Auemaries, And after goe buy a poison at the Apothecaries.
pretheebut obserue this fellow, Doest not heare him? he would die for loue, That mishapt loue thou wouldst condemne in him, I see in thee, I prethee note him well.
Were I assur'dthat I were such a Louer, I should be with my selfe quite out of loue: I prethee lets perswade him still to liue.
That were a dangerous case, perhaps the fellow In desperation would to sooth vs vp, Promise repentant recantation, And after fall into that desperate course, Both which I will preuent with policie.
O death come with thy dart, come death whe~ I bid thee,, and from this misery rid mee. She whom I lou'd, whom I lou'd, eue~ she my sweet pretie, Doth but flout & mock, & Iest, and dissimulary.
Ile fit him finely: in this paper is The Iuice of Mandrake, by a Doctor made To cast a man whose leg should be cut off, Into a deep, a cold and senceles sleepe, Of such approued operation, That who so takes it, is for twice twelue houres Breathlesse, and to all mens iudgements past all sence: This will I giue the pedant but in sport, For when tis knowne to take effect in him, The world will but esteeme it as a Iest: Besides it may be a meanes to saue his life, For being perfect poyson as it seemes, His meaning is, some couetous slaue for coyne Will sell it him, though it be held by lawe To be no better then flat felonie.
Vphold the Iest, but he hath spied vs, peace.
Gentiles God saue you, Here is a man I haue noted oft, most learned in Physick, One man he helpt of the Cough, another he heald of the tisick: And I will boord him thus:o`.
Attend me sir, I haue a simple house, But as the learnedsaith In his Epistle to, It is extremely troubled with great Ratts, I haue no mus pusse nor grey eyde Cat To hunt them out. O could your learned Art Shew me a meanes how I might poyson them:, sir.
With all my hart, I am no Rat-catcher, But if you need a poyson, here is that Will pepper both your Dogs & Rats and Cats: Nay spare your purse, I giue this in good will, And as it proues I pray you send to me, And let me know, wold you ought else with me?
, heer's that you say wil take them? A thousand thankes sweet sir, I say to you Asin his Aesops Fables said,, so farewell,.
Adiew. Come let vs goe, I long to see What the euent of this new Iest will bee.
Good morrow gentlemen, saw you not this way As you were walking, Sir?
M.as I take it.
Sir the same.
Sir I desire you more familiar loue, Would I could bid my selfe vnto your house, For I haue wisht for your acquaintance long.
Sweet M.I desire yours too: Wil you come dine with me at home to morow, You shall be welcome I assure you sir.
I feare sir I shall proue too bold a guest.
You shal be welcome if you bring your friend.
O Lord sir, we shall be too troublesome.
Nay now I will inforce a promise from you, Shall I expect you?
Yes with all my heart.
A thousand thankes. Yonders the schoolemaister. So till to morrow twentie times farewell.
I double all your farewels twentie fold.
O this acquaintance was well scrapte of me,By this my Loue to morrow I shall see.
This poyson shall by force expell,loue,hell., For my sweet louely Lasse will die.
What do I hear of poison, which sweet means Must make me a braue frolick widower? It seemes the doting foole being forlorne Hath got some compound mixture, in dispaire To end his desperate fortunes and his life: Ile get it from him, and with this make way To my wiues night, and to my Loues faire day.
In, friends farewell: I know death comes here's such a smell., father and mother,, sister and brother, And my sweet, not these drugges, Do send me to the Infernall bugges, But thy vnkindnesse, so adieu, Hob-goblins now I come to you.
Hold man I say, what wil the mad man do? I haue I got thee, thou shalt goe with me: No more of that, fie SirDestroy your selfe: If I but heare hereafter You practice such reuenge vpon your selfe, All your friends shall know that for a wench, A paltry wench, you would haue kild your selfe.
, do not name This frantick deed of mine for shame: My sweet magister not a word, Ile neither drowne me in a ford Nor giue my necke such a scope, To imbrace it with a hempen rope, Ile die no way till nature will me,And death come with his dart and kill me. If what is past you will conceale, And nothing to the world reueale, Nay assaid of yore, Ile striue to kill my selfe no more.
On that condition Ile conceale this deed, To morow pray come and dine with me: For I haue many strangers, mongst the rest, Some are desirous of your company. You will not faile me?
No in sooth, Ile try the sharpnes of my tooth, In steed of poyson, I will eate Rabets, Capons, and such meate: And so assaies, With wholesome fare prolong my daies. But Sir will Mistrisbe there?
She shall, she shall man neuer feare.
Then my spirit becomes stronger, And I will liue and stretch longer: Forsaid, and did not lie, That poysoned men do often die. But poyson henceforth Ile not eate, Whilst I can other victualls get: To morow if you make a feast, Be sure sir I will be your guest. But keep my counsell,, And till to morow sir adieu: At your Tablewill proue Ifcan eate away my loue.
Oam gladhaue thee, now deuise A way how to bestow it cunningly: It shall be thus: to morow Ile pretend A reconcilementtwixt my wife and me, And to that end I will inuite thus many:First Iustice, as the chiefe man there. My Father, old, yong, M., And M.haue bid alreadie. Then willhaue my louelytoo, Be it but to spight my wife before she die: For die she shall before to morrow night. The operation of this poyson is Not suddenly to kill, they that take it Fall in a sleepe, and then tis past recure, And this willput in her Cup to morrow.
This tis to haue such a Maister,haue sought him at the Change, at the schoole, at euery place, butcannot finde him no where. O cry mercy, my Mistris would intreat you to come home.
I cannot come to night, some vrgent busines Will all this night imploy me otherwise.
I beleeue my Mistresse would con you as much thanke to do that businesse at home as abroad.
Here take my purse, and bid my wife prouide Good cheare against to morrow, there will be Two or three strangers of my late acquaintance. Sirra goe you to Iusticehouse, Inuite him first with all solemnitie. Goe to my Fathers, and my Father in lawes, Here take this note. The rest that comewill inuite my selfe, About it with what quick dispatch thou canst.
I warrant you Maister Ile dispatch this businesse with more honestie, then youle dispatch yours. But Maister will the gentlewoman be there?
What gentlewoman?
The gentlewoman of the old house, that is as wel knowne by the colour shee laies of her chees, as anAle-house by the painting is laid of his Lettice: she that is like, Common to all men: she that is beholding to no Trade, but liues of her selfe.
Sirra be gone, or I will send you hence.
Ile go, but by this hand Ile tell my Mistris as soone as I come home, that Mistris light-heeles comes to dinner to morrow.
Sweet MistrisIle inuite my selfe: And there Ile frolick, sup, and spend the night. My Plot is currant, here tis in my hand Will make me happie in my second choyce, And I may freely chalenge as mine owne, What I am now inforc'tto seeke by stealth. Loue is not much vnlike Ambition, For in them both all lets must be remoued Twixt euery Crowne & him that would aspire, And he that will attempt to winne the same, Must plundge vp to the depth ore head & eares, And hazard drowning in that purple sea. So he that loues, must needs through blood and fire, And do all things to compasse his desire.
Come spread the Table: Is the hall well rubd, The cushions in the windowes neatly laid, The Cupboord of plate set out, the Casements stuck With Rosemary and Flowers, the Carpets brusht?
I forsooth Mistris.
Looke to the kitchen Mayd, and bid the Cooke take downe the Ouen stone, the pies be burnt: here take my keyes and giue him out more spice.
Yes forsooth Mistris.
Where's that knaue, bid him spred the cloth, Fetch the cleane diaper napkins from my chest, Set out the guilded salt, and bid the fellowMake himselfe handsome, get him a cleane band.
Indeed forsooth Mistris he is such a slouen That nothing will sit handsome about him, He had a pound of sope to scowre his face, And yet his brow lookes like the chimney stocke.
Heele be a slouen stil: Mayd take this Apron, And bring me one of Linnen, quickly Mayd.
I goe forsooth.
There was a curtsie, let me see't againe. I that was well. I feare my guests will come Ere we be readie, what a spight is this.
What's the matter?
Mistris I pray takefrom the fire, We cannot keepe his fingers from the rost.
Bid him come hither, what a knaue is that. Fie, fie, neuer out of the kitchin, Still broyling by the fire.
I hope you will not take Pipkin from the fire Till the broath be inough.
Well sirra get a Napkin and a Trencher And wait to day. So let me see my Apron.
Mistris I can tell ye one thing, my M. wench Will come home to day to dinner.
She shall be welcome if she be his guest. But heer's some of our guests are come alreadie, A Chaire for Iusticesirra.
Good morrow Mistris, you are like a good huswife, At your request I am come home, what a Chaire! Thus age seekes ease: where is your husband Mistris? What a cushion too!
pray you ease your taile Sir.
Mary and will good fellow, twentie thankes.
M.as welcom as hart can tel, or tong can think.
thank you M.,haue got many a good dish of broth by your meanes.
According to the auncientCurtesie you are welcome: according to the time and place, you are hartily welcome: when they are busied at the boord, we wil find our selues busied in the Buttrie: and so sweetaccording to our schollers phrase,.
I wil answer you with the like sweet,.
As much grace as you wil, but as little of it as you can good. But here comes more guests.
More stooles & cushions for these gentlemen.
What M. Iustice, are you here? Who would haue thought to haue met you in this place?
What say mine eyes, is Iusticehere? Mountaines may meet, and sosee may wee.
Well when men meete they meete, And when they part, they oft leaue one anothers company: So we being met, are met.
Truly you say true: And M. Iusticespeakes but reason. To heare how wisely men of lawe will speake.
Good morrow gentlemen.
What are you there.
Good morrow Mistris, and good morow all.
Ifmay be so bold in a strange place, I say good morrow, and as much to you.pray gentlemen will you sit downe? We haue bene yong like you, and if you liue Vnto our age, you will be old like vs.
Be rul'd by reason, but whose here?
, and good day To all at once, as I may say, First Maister, next old, That giues me pension by the quarter: To my good Mistresse, and the rest, That are the founders of this feast. In briefe I speake toall, That to their meate intend to fall.
Welcome Syr, o` my sonne Hath profited exceeding well with you, Sit downe, sit downe, by Mistrisleaue.
Gentlemen, welcome all, whil'st I deliuer Their priuate welcomes, Wife be it your charge, To giue this Gentlewoman entertainment.
Husband,wil: o` this is she vsurpes The precious interest of my Husbands loue: Though asam a woman, I could well Thrust such a leaud companion out of doores, Yet asam a true obedient Wife, Ide kisse her feete to do my Husbands will. You are intirely welcome Gentlewoman, Indeed you are, pray do not doubt of it.
I thank you Mistris, now by my litle honestie, It much repents me to wrong so chaste a woman.
Gentles, put ore your legges, first M. Iustice, Here you shall sit.
And here shall mistrissit by me.
Pardon me sir, she shall haue my wifes place.
Indeed you shall, for he will haue it so.
If you will needs, but I shall doo you wrong to take your place.
I by my faith you should.
That is no wrong which we impute no wro~g,pray you sit.
Gentlemen all,pray you seate your selues: What sir,know where your hart is.
Mum not a word,, peace: Come gentiles Ile be of this messe.
So, who giues thankes?
Sir that will.
pray you too it by and by, where's, Wait at the boord, let M.man Be had into the buttry, but first giue him A napkin and a trencher. Well said, Wait at your Maisters elbow, now say grace.
, sirs, Attend me now whilstsay grace. For bread and salt, for grapes and malt, For flesh and fish, and euery dish: Mutton and beefe, of all meates cheefe: For Cow-heels, chitterlings, tripes and sowse, And other meate thats in the house: For racks, for brests, for legges, for loines, For pies with raisons, and with proines: For fritters, pancakes, and for frayes, For venison pasties and minct pies: Sheephead and garlick, brawne and mustard, Wafers, spiced cakes, tart and custard, For capons, rabets, pigges and geese, For apples, carawaies and cheese: For all these and many moe,.
con you thankes, but sir, Is that your scholler? nowpromise youHe is a toward stripling of his age.
Whoforsooth, yes indeed forsootham his scholler,would you should well thinkehaue profited vnder him too, you shall heare if he shall pose me.
pray you lets heare him.
, how many Cases are there?
Mary a great many:
Well answered a great many, there are sixe, Sixe a great many, tis well answered, And which be they?
A Bow-case, a Cap-case, a Combe-case, a Lute-case, a Fidle-case, and a Candle-case.
know them all, againe well answered: Pray God my yongest boy profit no worse.
How many parsons are there?
Ile tell you as many asknow, if youle giue me leaue to reckon them.
prethee doo.
The Parson of, the Parson of, and the Parson of.
Well sir about your businesse: now willTemper the Cup my loathed wife shall drinke:
Daughter me thinkes you are exceeding sad:
Faith daughter so thou art exceeding sad:
Tis but my countenance, for my hart is mery, Mistris were you as merie as you are welcome, You should not sit so sadlie as you do.
Tis but becauseam seated in your place, Which is frequented seldome with true mirth.
The fault is neither in the place nor me.
How say you Ladie to him you last did lie by?All this is no more.
I thanke you sir, Mistris this draught shall be To him that loues both you and me.
I know your meaning.
Now to me; If she haue either loue or charitie.
Heare M. Iustice, this to your graue yeares, A mournfull draught God wot, halfe wine, halfe teares.
Let come my wench, here youngsters, to you all, You are silent, here's that will make you talke. Wenches, me thinke you sit like Puritants, Neuer a Ieast abroad to make them laugh?
Sir, since you moue speech of a Puritant, If you will giue me audience I will tell ye As good a Ieast as euer you did heare.
A Ieast, thats excellent.
Before hand lets prepare our selues to laugh, A Ieast is nothing if it be not grac'd: Now, now,pray you when begins this Ieast?
I came vnto a Puritant to wooe her, And roughly did salute her with a kisse: Away quoth she, and rudely pusht me fro her, Brother, by yea and nay I like not this, And still with amorous talke she was saluted, My artlesse speech with scripture was confuted.
Good, good indeed, the best that ere I heard.
I promise you it was exceeding good.
Oftfrequented her abroad by night, And courted her, and spake her wondrous faire, But euer somewhat did offend her sight, Either my double ruffe, or my long hayre: My skarfe was vain, my garments hung too low, My Spanish shooe was cut too broad at toe.
Ha, ha, the best that euer I heard.
I parted for that time, and came againe,Seeming to be conformd in looke and speech, My shooes were sharpe toed, and my band was plaine, Close to my thigh my metamorphis'd breech: My cloake was narrow Capte, my haire cut shorter, Off went my Skarfe, thus marcht I to the Porter.
Ha, ha, was euer heard the like?
The Porter spying me, did lead me in, Where his faire mistris sat reading on a chapter: Peace to this house quoth I, and those within, Which holy speech with admiration wrapt her, And euer asspake, and came her nie, Seeming diuine, turnd vp the white of eye.
So, so, what then, what then?
Forward, I pray forward sir.
I spake diuinely, and I call'd her sister, And by this meanes we were acquainted well: By yea and nay,will quoth, and kist her. She blusht & said that long tongu'd men would tell,seem'd to be as secret as the night, And said, on soothwould put out the light.
In sooth he would, a passing passing Ieast.
O do not sweare quoth she, yet put it out, Becausewould not haue you breake your oath.felt a bed there asgroapt about, In troath quoth, here will we rest vs both. Sweare you in troth quoth she, had you not swornehad not don't, but tooke it in foule scorne, Then you will come quoth; thoughbe loath, Ile come quoth she, be it but to keepe your oath.
Tis verie pretie, but now whens the Ieast?
O forward to the Ieast in any case.
would not for angell loose the Ieast.
Heres right the dunghil Cock that finds a pearle, To talke of wit to these, is as a manShould cast out Iewels to a heard of swine, Why in the last words did consist the Ieast.
I, in the last words? ha, ha, ha, It was an excellent admired ieast, To them that vnderstood it.
It was indeed,must for fashions sake Say as they say, but otherwise, o` God. Good M.thankes for our good cheare.
Gentleme~, welcome all, now heare me speak; One speciall cause that mou'd me lead you hither, Is for auncient grudge that hath long since Continued twixt my modest wife and me, The wrongs that I haue done her, I recant. In either hand I hold a seuerall Cup, This in the right hand, Wife I drinke to thee, This in the left hand pledge me in this draught, Burying all former hatred, so haue to thee.
The welcom'st pledge that yet I euer tooke: Were this wine poyson, or did taste like gall, The honey sweet condition of your draught, Would make it drinke like Nectar, I will pledge you, Were it the last that I should euer drinke.
Make that account; thus Gentlemen you see, Our late discord brought to a vnitie.
My heart doth tast the sweetnes of your pledge, And I am glad to see this sweete accord.
Glad quotha, theres not one amongst vs, But may be exceeding glad.
I am, I marrie am I, that I am.
The best accord that could betide their loues.
The worst accord that could betide my loue.
What rising Gentles, keep your places, Ile close vp your stomackes with a grace., That giu'st vs wine in stead of water, And from the Pond and Riuer cleere, Mak'st nappie Ale and good March Beere, That send'st vs sundry sorts of meate, And euery thing we drinke or eate, To maides, to wiues, to boyes, to men,.
So much good do ye all, and Gentlemen, Accept your welcomes better then your cheare.
Nay so we doo, Ile giue you thankes for all. Come M., you do walke our way, And M., and oldyour man, Weele be the first will straine curtesie.
God be with you all.
, Ile be the next, And man you home, how say you Lady?
I pray you do, good sir.
Syr, if it be not too much trouble to you, Let me intreat that kindnesse at your hands.
Intreat, fie, no sweete Lasse commaund., now take the vpper hand.
Come wife, this meeting was all for our sakes, I long to see the force my poyson takes.
My deare, deare husband, in exchange of hate, My loue and heart shall on your seruice waite.
So doth my loue on thee, but long no more, To her rich loue, thy seruice is too poore.
For shame no more, you had best expostulate Your loue with euery straunger, leaue these sighes, And chaunge them to familiar conference.
Trust me the vertues of youngwife, Her constancie, modest humilitie, Her patience, and admired temperance, Haue made me loue all women kinde the better.
O my mistris, my mistris, shees dead, shees gone, shees dead, shees gone.
What's that he sayes?
Out of my way, stand backsay, all ioy from earth is fled, She is this day as cold as clay, my Mistris she is dead: O Lord, my mistris, my mistris.
What mistrisdead? my soule is vanisht, And the worlds wonder from the world quite banisht: Oam sicke, my paine growes worse and worse,am quite strooke thorow with this late discourse.
What faints thou ma~? Ile lead thee hence for shame, Sound at the tydings of a womans death? Intollerable, and beyond all thought, Come my loues foole, giue me thy hand to lead, This day one body and two hearts are dead.
But now she was as well as well might be, And on the sudden dead; ioy in excesse Hath ouerrunne her poore disturbed soule. Ile after and see how Maistertakes it. His former hate far more suspitious makes it.
My M. hath left his gloues behind where he sat in his chaire, and hath sent me to fetch them, it is such an old snudge, he will not loose the dropping of his nose.
O Mistris, o`, o`, o` Mistris,mustneeds beate thee, I am mad, I am lunatike, I must fall vpon thee, my Mistris is dead.
O M., what do you meane, what do you meane M.?
O, o` Mistris, o` Mistris, o`.
O, o` God, o` God, o`.
O, I am mad, beare with me, I cannot chuse, o` death, o` Mistris, o` Mistris, o` death.
Death quotha, he hath almost made me dead with beating.
I wonder why the knaue my man stayes thus, And comes not backe, see where the villaine loyters.
O M., M., M., wonder not why I thus blow and bluster, my Mistris is dead, dead is my Mistris, and therefore hang your selues, o` my Mistris, my Mistris.
My sonnes wife dead?
My daughter.
Mistris, here comes her husband.
O here the wofuls husband comes aliue, No husband now, the wight that did vphold That name of husband is now quite orethrowne, And I am left a haplesse Widower.
Faine would I speake, if griefe would suffer me.
As Maistersayes, so say I, If griefe would let me, I would weeping die, To be thus haplesse in my aged yeares, O I would speake, but my words melt to teares.
Go in, go in, and view the sweetest Course That ere was laid vpon a mournfull roome, You cannot speake for weeping sorrowes doome.Bad newes are rife, good tidings sildome come.
What frantike humor doth thus haunt my sence, Striuing to breed destruction in my spirit? When I would sleepe, the ghost of my sweete loue, Appeares vnto me in an Angels shape, When I am wake, my phantasie presents As in a glasse, the shadow of my loue: When I would speake, her name intrudes it selfe Into the perfect ecchoes of my speech. And though my thought beget some other word, Yet will my tongue speake nothing but her name: If I do meditate it is on her, If dreame on her, or if discourse on her, I thinke her ghost doth haunt me, as in times Of former darknesse old wiues tales report,
Here comes my bitter Genius, whose aduice Directs me still in all my actions. How now, from whence come you?
Faith from the street, in which as I past by, I met the modest MistrisCourse: And after her as mourners, first her husband, Next Iustice, then old M., Old M., and youngtoo, With many other kinsfolks, neighbours, friends, And others that lament her Funerall, Her bodie is by this laid in the vault.
And in that vault my bodie I will lay, I prithee leaue me, thither is my way.
I am sure you ieast, you meane not as you say.
No, no, Ile but go to the Church and pray.
Nay then we shall be troubled with your humor.
As euer thou didst loue me, or as euerThou didst delight in my societie, By all the rights of friendship, and of loue, Let me intreat thy absence but one houre, And at the houres end I will come to thee.
Nay if you wil be foolish, and past reason, Ile wash my hands like, from thy follie, And suffer thee in these extremities.
Now it is night, & the bright lamps of heauen Are halfe burnt out, now bright Adelbora Welcomes the cheerefull Day-star to the Fast, And harmlesse stilnesse hath possest the world. This is the Church, this hollow is the Vault, Where the dead bodie of my Saint remaines, And this the Coffin that inshrines her bodie, For her bright soule is now in paradice. My comming is with no intent of sinne, Or to defile the bodie of the dead, But rather take my last farewell of her, Or languishing and dying by her side. My ayrie soule post after hers to heauen, First with this latest kisse I seale my loue. Her lips are warme, andam much deceiu'd If that she stirre not: o` this Golgotha, This place of dead mens bones is terrible, Presenting fearfull apparitions.
It is some spirit that in the Coffin lies, And makes my haire start vp an end with feare, Come to thy selfe faint heart, she sits vpright, Owould hide me, butknow not where; Tush if it be a spirit, tis a good spirit, For with her bodie liuing, ill she knew not, And with her bodie dead, ill cannot meddle.
Who am I? or where am?
O she speakes, and by her language nowknow she liues.
O who can tell me wheream become? For in this darknes I haue lost my selfe,am not dead, for I haue sence and life, How comethen in this Coffin buried?
be bold she liues, and Destinie Hath traind thee hither to redeeme her life.
Liues any mongst these dead? none but my self.
O yes, a man whose heart till now was dead, Liues and suruiues at your returne to life: Nay start not,am, one who long Hath doted on your faire perfection, And louing you more then became me well, Was hither sent by some strange prouidence, To bring you from these hollow vaults below, To be a liuer in the world againe.
vnderstand you, and I thanke the heauens, That sent you to reuiue me from this feare, And I embrace my safetie with good will.
Shake off thy sleepe, get vp betimes, go to the church and pray, And neuer feare, God wil thee heare, & keepe thee all the day. Good counsel boyes, obserue it, marke it well, This early rising, this, Is good both for your bodies and your minds. Tis not yet day, giue me my Tinder-box, Mean time vnloose your sachels & your bookes, Draw, draw, and take you to your lessons boyes.
O Lord M. whats that in the white sheete?
In the white sheete my boy,, where?
Maister,there.
O, keep vs from euill, A charme from flesh, the world, & the diuell.
O tel me not my husband was ingrate, Or that he did attempt to poyson me, Or that he laid me here, and I was dead, These are no meanes at all to win my loue.
Sweet Mistris, he bequath'd you to the earth, You promis'd him to be his wife till death, And you haue kept your promise, but now since The world, your husba~d, & your friends suppose That you are dead, grant me but one request, And I will sweare neuer to sollicite more, Your sacred thoughts to my dishonest loue.
So your demand may be no preiudise To my chast name, no wrong vnto my husband, No sute that may concern my Wedlock breach, I yeeld vnto it, but to passe the bands of modestie & chastitie, First willbequeath my selfe againe Vnto this graue, and neuer part from hence, Then taint my soule with blacke impuritie.
Take here my hand & faithful hart to gage, That I will neuer tempt you more to sinne: This my request is, since your husband doates Vpon a leaud lasciuious Curtezan, Since he hath broke the bands of your chaste bed, And like a murderer sent you to your graue, Do but go with me to my mothers house, There shall you liue in secret for a space, Onely to see the end of such leaud lust, And know the difference of a chaste wifes bed, And one whose life is in all loosenesse led.
Your mother is a vertuous Matron held,Her counsell, conference, and companie, May much auaile me, there a space Ile stay, Vpon condition as you said before, You neuer will moue your vnchaste sute more.
My faith is pawnd, o` neuer had chaste wife, A husband of so leaud and vnchast life.
Mistris I long haue seru'd you, euen since These bristled hayres vpon my graue like chin Were all vnborne: whenfirst came to you These Infant feathers of these rauens wings, Were not once begunne.
No indeed they were not.
Now in my two Muchatoes for a need, Wanting a rope, I well could hang my selfe: I prithee Mistris, for all my long seruice, For all the loue that I haue borne thee long, Do me this fauour now to marry me.
Marry come vp you blockhead, you great asse, What wouldst thou haue me marie with a diuel, But peace, no more, here comes the silly foole That we so long haue set our lime-twigs for, Be gone, and leaue me to intangle him.
What Mistris!
O good maister, where haue you bene this weeke, this moneth, this yeare? This yeare said I? where haue you bene this age? Vnto a Louer euery minute seemes time out of minde. How shouldthinke you loue me, That can indure to stay so long from me?
In faith sweet heart I saw thee yesternight.
I true, you did, but since you saw me not, at twelue a clocke you parted from my house,And now tis morning, and new strucken seuen. Seuen houres thou staidst fro~ me, why didst thou so? They are my seuen yeares Prentiship of woe.
I prithee be patient,had some occasion That did inforce me from thee yesternight.
I you are soone inforc'd, foole that I am, To dote on one that nought respecteth me: Tis but my fortune, I am borne to beare it, And euerie one shall haue their destinie.
Nay weepe not wench, thou woundst mee with thy teares.
I am a foole, and so you make me too, These teares were better kept, then spent in waste, On one that neither tenders them nor me: What remedie, but if I chance to die, Or to miscarrie with that I go withall, Ile take my death that thou art cause thereof. You told me, that when your wife was dead, You would forsake all others, and take me.
I told thee so, & I will keep my word, And for that end I came thus early to thee: I haue procur'd a licence, and this night We will be married in a lawlesse Church.
These newes reuiue me, & do somewhat ease The thought that was new gotten to my heart. But shall it be to night?
wench, to night. A sennet and odde dayes since my wife died Is past alreadie, and her timelesse death, Is but a nine daies talke, come go with me, And it shall be dispatched presently.
Nay then I see thou louest me, & I finde By this last motio~, thou art growne more kinde.
My loue and kindnesse like my age shal grow,And with the time increase, and thou shalt see, The oldergrow, the kinderwill bee.
sohope it will, but as for mine, That with my age shall day by day decline. Come, shall we goe?
With thee to the worlds end. Whose beautie most admire, and all commend.