Wee are heere before 'hem, me thinkes.
All the better, we shall see 'hem come in now.
What doe you lacke, Gentlemen, what is't you lacke? a fine Horse? a Lyon? a Bull? a Beare? a Dog, or a Cat? an excellent fine? or an Instrument? what is't you lacke?
S'lid! heere'samong the beasts, with his Fiddle, and all!
Will you buy any comfortable bread, Gentlemen?
Andselling her daughters picture, in Ginger-worke!
That these people should be so ignorant to thinke vs chapmen for 'hem! doe wee looke as if wee would buy Ginger-bread? or Hobby-horses?
Why, they know no better ware then they haue, nor better customers then come. And our very being here makes vs fit to be demanded, as well as others. Wouldwould come! there were a true customer for 'hem.
How much is't? thirty shillings? who's yonder!? and, I thinke! yes, (gi' me it all) (gi' me it all) Master! Master! will you take a pipe of tabacco with vs? do not discredit me now,.
Doe not see him! he is the roaring horse-courser, pray thee let's auoyd him: turne downe this way.
S'lud, I'le see him, and roare with him, too, and hee roar'd as loud as, pray thee goe with me.
You may draw me to as likely an inconuenience, when you please, as this.
Goe to then, come along, we ha' nothing to doe, man, but to see sights, now.
Welcome Master, and Master! will you take any froth, and smoake with vs?
Yes, Sir, but you'l pardon vs, if we knew not of so much familiarity betweene vs afore.
As what, Sir?
To be so lightly inuited to smoake, and froth.
A good vapour! will you sit downe, Sir? this is oldmansion, how like you her bower? heere you may ha' your Punque, and your Pigge in state, Sir, both piping hot.
I had rather ha' my Punque, cold, Sir.
There's for me, Punque! and Pigge!
What? you Rogue.
By and by, the bottle is almost off Mistresse, here Master.
I'le part you, and your play-fellow there, i' the garded coat, an' you sunder not the sooner.
Master, you are proud (me thinkes) you doe not talke, nor drinke, are you proud?
Not of the company I am in, Sir, nor the place, I assure you.
You doe not except at the company! doe you? are you in vapours, Sir?
Nay, good Master, respect my Mistris Bower, as you call it; for the honour of our Booth, none o' your vapours, heere.
Why, you thinne leane Polcat you, and they haue a minde to be i' their vapours, must you hinder 'hem? what did you know Vermine, if they would ha' lost a cloake, or such a trifle? must you be drawing the ayre of pacification heere? while I am tormented, within, i' the fire, you Weasell?
Good Mistresse, 'twas in the behalfe of your Booth's credit, that I spoke.
Why? would my Booth ha' broake, if they had fal'ne out in't? Sir? or would their heate ha' fir'd it? in, you Rogue, and wipe the pigges, and mend the fire, that they fall not, or I'le both baste and roast you, till your eyes drop out, like 'hem. (Leaue the bottle behinde you, and be curst a while.)
Body o' the! what's this? mother o' the Bawds?
No, she's mother o' the Pigs, Sir, mother o' the Pigs!
Mother o' the, I thinke, by her firebrand.
Nay, shee is too fat to be a, sure, some walking Sow of tallow!
An inspir'd vessell of Kitchin-stuffe!
She'll make excellent geere for the Coach-makers, here in Smithfield, to anoynt wheeles and axell trees with.
I, I, Gamesters, mocke a plaine plumpe soft wench o' the Suburbs, doe, because she's iuicy and wholesome: you must ha' your thinne pinch'd ware, pent vp i' the compasse of a dogge-collar, (or 'twill not do) that lookes like a long lac'd, set vpright, and a greene feather, like fennell i' the Ioll on't.
Well said, my good; to 'hem.
Is shee your quagmire,? is this your Bogge?
We shall haue a quarrel presently.
How? Bog? Quagmire? foule vapours! hum'h!
Yes, hee that would venture for't, I assure him, might sinke into her, and be drown'd a weeke, ere any friend hee had, could find where he were.
And then he would be a fort'night weighing vp againe.
'Twere like falling into a wholeof butter: they had need be a teeme of, should draw him out.
Answer 'hem,, where's thy, now?, thy?
Hang 'hem, rotten, roguy Cheaters, I hope to see 'hem plagu'd one day (pox'd they are already, I am sure) with leane playhouse poultry, that has the boany rumpe, sticking out like the Ace of Spades, or the point of a Partizan, that euery rib of 'hem is like the tooth of a Saw: andwill so grate 'hem with their hips, & shoulders, as (take 'hem altogether) they were as good lye with a hurdle.
Out vpon her, how she drips! she's able to giue a man the sweating Sicknesse, with looking on her.
Mary looke off, with a patch o' your face; and a dosen i' your breech, though they be o' scarlet, Sir. I ha' seene as fine outsides, as either o' yours, bring lowsie linings to the Brokers, ere now, twice a weeke?
Doe you thinke there may be a fine new Cuckingstoole i' the, to be purchas'd? one large inough, I meane. I know there is a pond of capacity, for her.
For your mother, you Rascall, out you Rogue, you hedge bird, you Pimpe, you pannier-mans bastard, you.
Ha, ha, ha.
Doe you sneere, you dogs-head, you! you looke as you were begotten a' top of a Cart in haruest-time, when the whelp was hot and eager. Go, snuffe after your brothers bitch, M=rs=, that's the Liuory you weare, 'twill be out at the elbows, shortly. It's time you went to't, for the to'ther remnant.
Peace,, peace,, they'll kill the poore Whale, and make oyle of her. Pray thee goe in.
I'le see 'hem pox'd first, and pil'd, and double pil'd.
Let's away, her language growes greasier then her Pigs.
Dos't so, snotty nose? good Lord! are you sniueling? you were engendred on a she-begger, in a barne, when the bald Thrasher, your Sire, was scarce warme.
Pray thee, let's goe.
No, faith: I'le stay the end of her, now: I know shee cannot last long; I finde by her, shee wanes a pace.
Do's shee so? I'le set you gone. Gi' mee my Pig-pan hither a little. I'le scald you hence, and you will not goe.
Gentlemen, these are very strange vapours! and very idle vapours! I assure you.
You are a very serious asse, wee assure you.
Humh! Asse? and serious? nay, then pardon mee my vapour. I haue a foolish vapour, Gentlemen: any man that doe's vapour me, the Asse, Master--
What then, Master?
I doe vapour him the lye.
Faith, and to any man that vapours mee the lie, I doe vapour that.
Nay, then, vapours vpon vapours.
'Ware the pan, the pan, the pan, shee comes with the pan, Gentlemen. God blesse the woman.
Oh.
What's the matter?
Goodly woman!
Mistresse!
Curse of hell, that euer I saw these Feinds, oh! I ha' scalded my leg, my leg, my leg, my leg. I ha' lost a limb in the seruice! run for some creame and sallad oyle, quickly. Are you vnder-peering, you Baboun? rip off my hose, an' you be men, men, men.
Runne you for some creame, good mother. I'le looke to your basket.
Best sit vp i' your chaire,. Helpe, Gentlemen.
Be of a good cheere,, thou hast hindred me the currying of a couple of Stallions, here, that abus'd the goodo' Smithfield; 'twas time for 'hem to goe.
I faith, when the panne came, they had made you runne else. (this had beene a fine time for purchase, if you had ventur'd.)
Not a whit, these fellowes were too fine to carry money.
, get some helpe to carry her legge out o' the ayre; take off her shooes; body o' me, she has the Mallanders, the scratches, the crowne scabbe, and the quitter bone, i' the tother legge.
Oh! the poxe, why doe you put me in minde o' my leg, thus, to make it prick, and shoot? would you ha' me i' the Hospitall, afore my time?
Patience,, take a good heart, 'tis but a blister, as big as a Windgall; I'le take it away with the white of an egge, a little honey, and hogs grease, ha' thy pasternes well rol'd, and thou shall't pase againe by to morrow. I'le tend thy Booth, and looke to thy affaires, the while: thou shalt sit i' thy chaire, and giue directions, and shine.
These are the fruites of the bottle-ale, and tabacco! the some of the one, and the fumes of the other! Stay young man, and despise not the wisedome of these few hayres, that are growne gray in care of thee.
, stay a little. Indeede I'le heare some o' this!
Come,, come, where are you? welcome into the, Mistris.
S'light, hee will call company, you shall see, and put vs into doings presently.
Thirst not after that frothy liquor, Ale: for, who knowes, when hee openeth the stopple, what may be in the bottle? hath not a Snaile, a Spider, yea, a Neuft bin found there? thirst not after it, youth: thirst not after it.
This is a braue fellow,, let's heare him.
S'blood, how braue is he? in a garded coate? you were best trucke with him, e'en strip, and trucke presently, it will become you, why will you heare him, because he is an Asse, and may be a kinneto the?
O, good!
Neither doe thou lust after that tawney weede, tabacco.
Braue words!
Whose complexion is like the Indians that vents it!
Are they not braue words, Sister?
And who can tell, if, before the gathering, and making vp thereof, thehath not piss'd thereon?
'Heart let 'hem be braue words, as braue as they will! and they were all the braue words in a Countrey, how then? will you away yet? ha' you inough on him? Mistris, come you away, I pray you, be not you accessary. If you doe lose your Licence, or somewhat else, Sir, with listning to his fables: say,, is a witch, with all my heart, doe, say so.
Avoyd i' your sattin doublet,.
The creeping venome of which subtill serpent, as somelate writers affirme; neither the cutting of the perrillous plant, nor the drying of it, nor the lighting, or burning, can any way perssway, or asswage.
Good, i' faith! is't not Sister?
Hence it is, that the lungs of the Tabacconist are rotted, the Liuer spotted, the braine smoak'd like the backside of the Pig-womans Booth, here, and the whole body within, blacke, as her Pan, you saw e'en now, without.
A fine similitude, that, Sir! did you see the panne?
Yes, Sir.
Nay, the hole in the nose heere, of some tabacco-takers, or the third nostrill, (if I may so call it) which makes, that they can vent the tabacco out, like the Ace of clubs, or rather the Flower-de-lice, is caused from the tabacco, the meere tabacco! when the poore innocent pox, hauing nothing to doe there, is miserably, and most vnconscionably slander'd.
Who would ha' mist this, Sister?
Not any body, but.
He do's not vnderstand.
Nor you feele.
What would you haue, Sister, of a fellow that knowes nothing but a basket-hilt, and an old Fox in't? the best musique i' the, will not moue a logge.
In, to, and carry her comfort: see it told. This fellow was sent to vs by fortune, for our first fairing.
But what speake I of the diseases of the body, children of the?
That's to vs, Sister. Braue i' faith!
Harke, O, you sonnes and daughters of Smithfield! and heare what mallady it doth the minde: It causeth swearing, it causeth swaggering, it causeth snuffling, and snarling, and now and then a hurt.
He hath something of Master, mee thinkes, brother.
So mee thought, Sister, very much of my brother: And 'tis, when he speakes.
Looke into any Angle o' the towne, (the Streights, or thewhere the quarrelling lesson is read, and how doe they entertaine the time, but with bottle-ale, and tabacco? The Lecturer is o' one side, and his Pupils o' the other; But the seconds are still bottle-ale, and tabacco, for which the Lecturer reads, and the Nouices pay. Thirty pound a weeke in bottle-ale! forty in tabacco! and ten more in Ale againe. Then for a sute to drinke in, so much, and (that being slauer'd) so much for another sute, and then a third sute, and a fourth sute! and still the bottle-ale slauereth, and the tabacco stinketh!
Heart of a mad-man! are you rooted heere? willyouneuer away? what can any man finde out in this bawling fellow, to grow heere for? hee is a full handfull higher, sin' he heard him, will you fix heere? and set vp a Booth? Sir?
I will conclude briefely --
Hold your peace, you roaring Rascall, I'le runne my head i' your chaps else. You were best build a Booth, and entertaine him, make your Will, and you say the word, and him your heyre! heart, I neuer knew one taken with a mouth of a pecke, afore. By this light, I'le carry you away o' my backe, and you will not come.
Stay, stay, set mee downe: I ha' lost my purse,, O my purse! one o' my fine purses is gone.
Is't indeed, brother?
I, as I am an honest man, would I were an errant Rogue, else! a plague of all roguy, damn'd cut-purses for me.
Blesse 'hem with all my heart, with all my heart, do you see! Now, as I am no Infidell, that I know of, I am glad on't. I I am, (here's my witnesse!) doe you see, Sir? I did not tell you of his fables, I? no, no, I am a dull malt-horse, I, I know nothing. Are you not iustly seru'd i' your conscience now? speake i' your conscience. Much good doe you with all my heart, and his good heart that has it, with all my heart againe.
This fellow is very charitable, would he had a purse too! but, I must not be too bold, all at a time.
Nay,, it is not my best purse.
Not your best! death! why should it be your worst? why should it be any, indeed, at all? answer me to that, gi' mee a reason from you, why it should be any?
Nor my gold,; I ha' that yet, looke heere else, Sister.
Why so, there's all the feeling he has!
I pray you, haue a better care of that, brother.
Nay, so I will, I warrant you; let him catch this, that catch can. I would faine see him get this, looke you heere.
So, so, so, so, so, so, so, so! Very good.
I would ha' him come againe, now, and but offer at it. Sister, will you take notice of a good iest? I will put it iust where th'other was, and if we ha' good lucke, you shall see a delicate fine trap to catch the cutpurse, nibling.
Faith, and he'll trye ere you be out o' the.
Come, Mistresse, pre'thee be not melancholy for my mis-chance; sorrow wi' not keepe it, Sweet heart.
I doe not thinke on't, Sir.
'Twas but a little scuruy white money, hang it: it may hang the cutpurse, one day. I ha' gold left to gi' thee a fayring, yet, as hard as the world goes: nothing angers me, but that no body heere, look'd like a cutpurse, vnlesse 'twere.
How? I? I looke like a cutpurse? death! your Sister's a cutpurse! and your mother and father, and all your kinne were cutpurses! And here is a Rogue is the baud o' the cutpurses, whom I will beat to begin with.
Hold thy hand, childe of wrath, and heyre of anger, make it not Childermasse day in thy fury, or the feast of the French, Parent of the Massacre.
Good M=r=.
You are the! are you? the Patriarch of the cutpurses? you share, Sir, they say, let them share this with you. Are you i' your hot fit of preaching againe? I'le coole you.
Murther, murther, murther.
Nay, tish all gone, now! dish tish, phen tou vilt not be phitin call, Master Offisher, phat ish a man te better to lishen out noyshes for tee, & tou art in an oder 'orld, being very shuffishient noyshes and gallantsh too, one o' their brabblesh woud haue fed vsh all dish fortnight, but tou art so bushy about beggersh stil, tou hast no leshure to intend shentlemen, and't be.
Why, I told you,.
Come, come, you told mee a pudding,; A matter of nothing; I am sure it came to nothing! you said, let's goe to, indeede; but then you met the man with themonsters, and I could not get you from him. An old foole, not leaue seeing yet?
Why, who would ha' thought any body would ha' quarrell'd so earely? or that the ale o' thewould ha' beene vp so soone?
Phy? phat a clocke toest tou tinke it ish, man?
I cannot tell.
Tou art a vishe vatchman, i' te meane teeme.
Why? should the watch goe by the clocke, or the clock by the watch, I pray?
One should goe by another, if they did well.
Tou art right now! phen didst tou euer know, or heare of a shuffishient vatchman, but he did tell the clocke, phat bushinesse soeuer he had?
Nay, that's most true, a sufficient watchman knowes what a clocke it is.
Shleeping, or vaking! ash well as te clocke himshelfe, or te Iack dat shtrikes him!
Let's enquire of Master, orheere. Master, doe you heare, Master?
If it be a Ledderhead, tish a very tick Ledderhead, tat sho mush noish vill not perishhim.
I haue a little businesse now, good friends doe not trouble me.
Phat? because o' ty wrought neet cap, and ty pheluet sherkin, Man? phy? I haue sheene tee in ty Ledder sherkin, ere now, Mashter o' de hobby-Horses, as bushy and as stately as tou sheem'st to be.
Why, what an' you haue, Captaine? hee has his choyce of Ierkins, you may see by that, and his caps too, I assure you, when hee pleases to be either sicke, or imploy'd.
God a mercy, answer for me.
Away, be not sheen i' my company, here be shentlemen, and men of vorship.
Wee had wonderfull ill lucke, to misse this prologue o' the purse, but the best is, we shall haue fiueof him ere night: hee'le be spectacle enough! I'le answer for't.
O Creesh! Duke, how dosht tou? tou dosht not know me, I feare? I am te vishesht man, but Iustish, in all, now. Gi' me tweluepence from tee, I vill help tee to a vife vorth forty marks for't, and't be.
Away, Rogue, Pimpe away.
And shee shew tee as fine cut o'rke fort't in her shmock too, as tou cansht vishe i'faith; vilt tou haue her, vorshipfull? I vill helpe tee to her, heere, be an't be, in te pig-quarter, gi' me ty twelpence from tee,
Why, there's twelpence, pray thee wilt thou be gone?
Tou art a vorthy man, and a vorshipfull man still.
Get you gone, Rascall.
I doe meane it, man. Prinshif tou hasht need on me, tou shalt finde me heere, at, I vill see phat ale, and punque ish i' te pigshty, for tee, blesse ty good vorship.
Looke! who comes heere!
And his wife, and my widdow, her mother: the whole family.
'Slight, you must gi' hem all fairings, now!
Not I, I'le not see 'hem.
They are going a feasting. What Schole-master's that is with 'hem?
That's my Riuall, I beleeue, the Baker!
So, walke on in the middle way, fore-right, turne neyther to the right hand, nor to the left: let not your eyes be drawne aside with vanity, nor your eare with noyses.
O, I know him by that start!
What do you lack? what do you buy, pretty Mistris! a fine Hobby-Horse, to make your sonne a Tilter? a Drum to make him a Souldier? a Fiddle, to make him a Reueller? What is't you lack? Little Dogs for your Daughters? or Babies, male, or female?
Look not toward them, harken not: the place is, or the field of Smiths, the Groue of Hobbi-horses and trinkets, the wares are the wares of diuels. And the wholeis the shop of! They are hooks, and baites, very baites, that are hung out on euery side, to catch you, and to hold you as it were, by the gills; and by the nostrills, as the Fisher doth: therefore, you must not looke, nor turne toward them -- The Heathen man could stop his eares with wax, against the harlot o' the sea: Doe you the like, with your fingers against the bells of the Beast.
What flashes comes from him!
O, he has those of his ouen! a notable hot Baker 'twas, when hee ply'd the peele: hee is leading his flocke into the, now.
Rather driuing 'hem to the Pens: for he will let 'hem looke vpon nothing.
Gentlewomen, the weather's hot! whither walke you?Haue a care o' your fine veluet caps, theis dusty. Take a sweet delicate Booth, with boughs, here, i' theway, and coole your selues i' the shade: you and your friends. The best pig and bottle-ale i' the, Sir. Oldis Cooke, there you may read: the pigges head speakes it. Poore soule, shee has had a, the: but shee's prettily amended.
A delicate show-pig, little Mistris, with shweet sauce, and crackling, like de bay-leafe i' de fire, la! Tou shalt ha' de cleane side o' de table-clot and di glass vash'd with phatersh of Dame.
This's fine, verily, here be the best pigs: and shee doe's roast 'hem as well as euer she did; the Pigs head sayes.
Excellent, excellent, Mistris, with fire o'andbranches! The Oracle of the Pigs head, that, Sir.
Sonne, were you not warn'd of the vanity of the eye? haue you forgot the wholesome admonition, so soone?
Good mother, how shall we finde a pigge, if we doe not looke about for't? will it run off o' the spit, into our mouths thinke you? as in? and cry,?
No, but your mother, religiously wise, conceiueth it may offer it selfe, by other meanes, to the sense, as by way of steeme, which I thinke it doth, here in this place (Huh, huh) yes, it doth. and it were a sinne of obstinacy, great obstinacy, high and horrible obstinacy, to decline, or resist the good titillation of the famelick sense, which is the smell. Therefore be bold (huh, huh, huh) follow the sent. Enter the Tents of the vncleane, for once, and satisfie your wiues frailty. Let your fraile wife be satisfied: your zealous mother, and my suffering selfe, will also be satisfied.
Come,, as good winny here, as goe farther, and see nothing.
Wee scape so much of the other vanities, by our earely entring.
It is an aedifying consideration.
This is scuruy, that wee must come into the, and not looke on't.
, haue patience,, I'le tell you more anon.
, entertaine within there, the best pig i' the Booth; a Porklike pig. These are, o' the sincere stud, come a pigge-hunting., wait, looke to your charge.
A pigge prepare, presently, let a pigge be prepared to vs.
S'light, who be these?
Is this the good seruice,, you'ld doe me?
Why,? why,? thou'lt ha' vapours i' thy legge againe presently, pray thee go in, 't may turne to the scratches else.
Hang your vapours, they are stale, and stinke like you, are these the guests o' the game, you promis'd to fill my pit withall, to day?
I, what aile they?
Aile they? they are all sippers, sippers o' the City, they looke as they would not drinke off two penn'orth of bottle-ale amongst 'hem.
A body may read that i' their small printed ruffes.
Away, thou art a foole,, and thytoo, i' your ignorant vapours, now? hence, good guests, I say right hypocrites, good gluttons. In, and set a couple o' pigs o' the board, and halfe a dozen of the biggest bottles afore 'hem, and call, I doe not loue to heare Innocents abus'd: Fine ambling hypocrites! and a stone-puritane, with a sorrell head, and beard, good mouth'd gluttons: two to a pigge, away.
Are you sure they are such?
O' the right breed, thou shalt try 'hem by the teeth,, where's this?
Well said, braue, in, and feare the ale out o' the bottles, into the bellies of the brethren, and the sisters drinke to the cause, and pure vapours.
My Roarer is turn'd Tapster, mee thinks. Now were a fine time for thee,, to lay aboard thy widow, thou'lt neuer be Master of a better season, or place; shee that will venture her selfe into the, and a pig-boxe, will admit any assault, be assur'd of that.
I loue not enterprises of that suddennesse, though.
I'le warrant thee, then, no wife out o' the widdowes Hundred: if I had but as much Title to her, as to haue breath'd once on that streight stomacher of hers, I would now assure my selfe to carryher, yet, ere she went out of. Or she should carry me, which were the fitter sight, I confesse. But you are a modest vndertaker, by circumstances, and degrees; come, 'tis Disease in thee, not Iudgement, I should offer at all together. Looke, here's the poore foole, againe, that was stung by the waspe, ere while.
I will make no more orations, shall draw on these tragicall conclusions. And I begin now to thinke, that by a spice of collaterall Iustice,, deseru'd this beating; for I the said, was one cause (a by-cause) why the purse was lost: and my wiues brothers purse too, which they know not of yet. But I shall make very good mirth with it, at supper, (that will be the sport) and put my little friend, M=r=choler quite out of countenance. When, sitting at the vpper end o' my Table, as I vse, & drinking to my brother, and M=rs=., as I wil, my wife, for their good affectio~ to old, I deliuer to 'hem, it was I, that was cudgell'd, and shew 'hem the marks. To see what bad euents may peepe out o' the taile of good purposes! the care I had of that ciuil yong man, I tooke fancy to this morning, (and haue not left it yet) drew me to that exhortation, which drew the company, indeede, which drew the cut-purse; which drew the money; which drew my brotherhis losse; which drew onanger; which drew on my beating: a pretty gradation! And they shall ha' it i' their dish, i' faith, at night for fruit: I loue to be merry at my Table. I had thought once, at one speciall blow he ga' me, to haue reuealed my selfe? but then (I thank thee fortitude) I remembred that a wise man (and who is euer so great a part, o' the Common-wealth in himselfe) for no particular disaster ought to abandon a publike good designe. The husbandman ought not for one vnthankful yeer, to forsake the plough; The Shepheard ought not, for one scabb'd sheep, to throw by his tar-boxe; The Pilot ought not for one leake i' the poope, to quit the Helme; Nor the Alderman ought not for one custerd more, at a meale, to giue vp his cloake; The Constable ought not to breake his staffe, and forsweare the watch, for one roaring night; Nor the Piper o' the Parishto put vp his pipes, for one rainy Sunday. These are certaine knocking conclusions; out of which, I am resolu'd, come what come can, come beating, come imprisonment, come infamy, come banishment, nay, come the rack, come the hurdle, (welcome all) I will not discouer who I am, till my due time; and yet still, all shall be, as I said euer, in Iustice name, and the King's, and for the Common-wealth.
What doe's he talke to himselfe, and act so seriously? poore foole!
No matter what. Here's fresher argument, intend that.
Come, Mistresse, come Sister, heere's more fine sights, yet, i' faith. Gods'lid where's?
What doe you lacke, Gentlemen? what is't you buy? fine Rattles! Drummes? Babies? little Dogges? and Birds for Ladies? What doe you lacke?
Good honest, keepe afore, I am so afraid thou'lt lose somewhat: my heart was at my mouth, when I mist thee.
You were best buy a whip i' your hand to driue me.
Nay, doe not mistake,, thou art so apt to mistake: I would but watch the goods. Looke you now, the treble fiddle, was e'en almost like to be lost.
Pray you take heede you lose not your selfe: your best way, were e'en get vp, and ride for more surety. Buy a tokens worth of great pinnes, to fasten your selfe to my shoulder.
What doe you lacke, Gentlemen? fine purses, pouches, pincases, pipes? What is't you lacke? a paire o' smithes to wake you i' the morning? or a fine whistling bird?
, here be finer things then any we ha' bought by oddes! and more delicate horses, a great deale! good, stay, and come hither.
Will you scourse with him? you are in, you may fit your selfe with a fine easy-going street-nag, for your saddle again', doe, has he ne'er a little odde cart for you, to make a Carroch on, i' the countrey, with foure pyed hobbyhorses? why the meazills, should you stand heere, with your traine, cheaping of Dogges, Birds, and Babies? you ha' no children to bestow 'hem on? ha' you?
No, but again' I ha' children,, that's all one.
Do, do, do, do; how many shall you haue, think you? an' I were as you, I'ld buy for all my Tenants, too, they are a kind o' ciuill Sauages, that wil part with their children for rattles, pipes, and kniues. You were best buy a hatchet, or two, & truck with 'hem.
Good, hold that little tongue o' thine, and saue it a labour. I am resolute, thou know'st.
A resolute foole, you are, I know, and a very sufficient Coxcombe; with all my heart; nay you haue it, Sir, and you be angry, turd i' your teeth, twice: (if I said it not once afore) and much good doe you.
Was there euer such a selfe-affliction? and so impertinent?
Alas! his care will goe neere to cracke him, let's in, and comfort him.
Would I had beene set i' the ground, all but the head on me, and had my braines bowl'd at, or thresh'd out, when first I vnderwent this plague of a charge!
How now! almost tir'd i' your Protectorship? ouerparted? ouerparted?
Why, I cannot tell, Sir, it may be I am, dos't grieue you?
No, I sweare dos't not,: to satisfie you.
S'blood, you are fine and familiar! how long ha' wee bin acquainted, I pray you?
I thinke it may be remembred,, that? 'twas since morning sure.
Why, I hope I know't well enough, Sir, I did not aske to be told.
No? why then?
It's no matter why, you see with your eyes, now, what I said to you to day? you'll beleeue me another time?
Are you remouing the?
A pretty question! and a very ciuill one! yes faith, I ha' my lading you see; or shall haue anon, you may know whose beast I am, by my burthen. If the pannier-mans Iacke were euer better knowne by his loynes of mutton, I'le be flead, and feede dogs for him, when his time comes.
How melancholi' Mistresseis yonder! pray thee let's goe enter our selues in, with her.
Those sixe horses, friend I'le haue --
How!
And the three Iewes trumps; and halfe a dozen o' Birds, and that Drum, (I haue one Drumme already) and your Smiths; I like that deuice o' your smiths, very pretty well, and foure Halberts -- and (le' me see) that fine painted great Lady, and her three women for state, I'le haue.
No, the shop; buy the whole shop, it will be best, the shop, the shop!
If his worship please.
Yes, and keepe it during the, Bobchin.
Peace,, friend, doe not meddle with him, an'you be wise, and would shew your head aboue board: hee will sting thorow your wrought night-cap, beleeue me. A set of these Violines, I would buy too, for a delicate young noise I haue i' the countrey, that are euery one a size lesse then another, iust like your fiddles. I would faine haue a fine young Masque at my marriage, now I thinke on't: but I doe want such a number o' things. Andwill not helpe me now, and I dare not speake to him.
Will your worship buy any ginger-bread, very good bread, comfortable bread?
Ginger-bread! yes, let's see.
There's the tother sprindge?
Is this well, goody? to interrupt my market? in the midst? and call away my customers? can you answer this, at the?
Why? if his Master-ship haue a minde to buy, I hope my ware lies as open as another's; I may shew my ware, as well as you yours.
Hold your peace; I'le content you both: I'le buy vp his shop, and thy basket.
Will you i' faith?
Why should you put him from it, friend?
Cry you mercy! you'ld be sold too, would you? what's the price on you? Ierkin, and all as you stand? ha' you any qualities?
Yes, good-man angry-man, you shall finde he has qualities, if you cheapen him.
God's so, you ha' the selling of him! what are they? will they be bought for loue, or money?
No indeed, Sir.
For what then? victualls?
He scornes victuals, Sir, he has bread and butter at home, thanks be to God! and yet he will do more for a goode meale, if the toy take him i' the belly, mary then they must not set him at lower end; if they do, he'll goe away, though he fast. But put him a top o' the Table, where his place is, and hee'll doe you forty fine things. Hee has not been sent for, and sought out for nothing, at your great citty-suppers, to put downe, and, and bin laught at for his labour; he'll play you all the Puppets i' the towne ouer, and the Players, euery company, and his owne company too; he spares no body!
I' faith?
Hee was the first, Sir, that euer baited the fellow i' the beare's skin, an't like your worship: no dog euer came neer him, since. And for fine motions!
Is hee good at those too? can hee set out a Masque, trow?
O Lord, Master! sought to farre, and neere, for hisinuentions: and hee engrosses all, hee makes all the Puppets i' the.
Do'st thou (in troth) old veluet Ierkin? giue mee thy hand.
Nay, Sir, you shall see him in his veluet Ierkin, and a scarfe, too, at night, when you heare him interpret MasterMotion.
Speake no more, but shut vp shop presently, friend. I'le buy both it, and thee too, to carry downe with me, and her hamper, beside. Thy shop shall furnish out the Masque, and hers the Banquet: I cannot goe lesse, to set out any thing with credit. what's the price, at a word, o' thy whole shop, case, and all as it stands?
Sir, it stands me in sixe and twenty shillings seuen pence, halfe-peny, besides three shillings for my ground.
Well, thirty shillings will doe all, then! And what comes yours too?
Foure shillings, and eleauen pence, Sir, ground, and all, an't like your worship.
Yes, it do's like my worship very well, poore woman, that's fiue shillings more, what a Masque shall I furnish out, for forty shillings? (twenty pound scotsh) and a Banquet of Ginger-bread? there's a stately thing!Sister? and my wedding gloues too? (that I neuer thought on afore.) All my wedding gloues, Ginger-bread? O me! what a deuice will there be? to make 'hem eate their fingers ends! and delicate Brooches for the Bride-men! and all! and then I'le ha' this poesie put to 'hem:, meaning Mistresse, my wedding poesie.
I am beholden to you, Sir, and to your.
You doe not meane this, doe you? is this your first purchase?
Yes faith, and I doe not thinke,, but thou'lt say, it was the wisest Act, that euer I did in my wardship.
Like inough! I shall say any thing. I!
I Cannot beget a, with all my politicall braine, yet; myis how to fetch off this proper young man, from his debaucht company: I haue followed him all theouer, and still I finde him with this songster: And I begin shrewdly to suspect their familiarity; and the young man of a terrible taint,! with which idle disease, if he be infected, there's no hope of him, in a state-course., of him for a common-wealths-man: if hee goe to't in, once.
Yonder he is buying o' Ginger-bread: set in quickly, before he part with too much on his money.
Ballads! harke, harke! pray thee, fellow, stay a little, good, looke to the goods. What Ballads hast thou? let me see, let me see my selfe.
Why so! hee's flowne 'to another lime-bush, there he will flutter as long more; till hee ha' ne'r a feather left. Is there a vexation like this, Gentlemen? will you beleeue mee now, hereafter? shall I haue credit with you?
Yes faith, shalt thou,, and thou art worthy on't, for thou sweatest for't. I neuer saw a young Pimpe errant, and his Squire better match'd.
Faith, the sister comes after 'hem, well, too.
Nay, if you saw the Iustice her husband, my Guardian, you were fitted for the Messe, hee is such a wise one his way --
I wonder, wee see him not heere.
O! hee is too serious for this place, and yet better sport thenthe other three, I assure you, Gentlemen: where ere he is, though't be o' the Bench.
How dost thou call it!! a good iest, i' faith, I would faine see that, your Cutpurse, you talke of, that delicate handed Diuell; they say he walkes hereabout; I would see him walke, now. Looke you sister, here, here, let him come, sister, and welcome. Ballad-man, do's any cutpurses haunt hereabout? pray thee raise me one or two: beginne and shew me one.
Sir, this is a spell against 'hem, spicke and span new; and 'tis made as 'twere in mine owne person, and I sing it in mine ownedefence. But 'twill cost a penny alone, if you buy it.
No matter for the price, thou dost not know me, I see, I am an odd.
Has't a fine picture, Brother?
O Sister, doe you remember the ballads ouer the Nursery-chimney at home o' my owne pasting vp, there be braue pictures. Other manner of pictures, than these, friend.
Yet these will serue to picke the pictures out o' your pockets, you shall see.
So, I heard 'hem say. Pray thee mind him not, fellow: hee'll haue an oare in euery thing.
It was intended Sir, as if a purse should chance to be cut in my presence, now, I may be blamelesse, though: as by the sequell, will more plainely appeare.
We shall find that i' the matter. Pray thee begin.
To the tune of, Sir.
Nay, I'll put thee in tune, and all! mine owne country dance! Pray thee begin.
It is a gentle admonition, you must know, Sir, both to the purse-cutter, and the purse-bearer.
Not a word more, out o' the tune, an' thou lou'st mee:. Come, when?
Ha, ha, this chimes! good counsell at first dash.
Good!
Well said! hee were to blame that wold not i' faith.
Good i' faith, how say you,? Is there any harme i' this?
The more coxco~bes they that did it, I wusse.
God a mercy for that! why should they be more free indeede?
That againe, good Ballad-man, that againe. O rare! I would faine rubbe mine elbow now, but I dare not pull out my hand. On, I pray thee, hee that made this ballad, shall beto my.
,
Is it possible?
I' faith?
? pray thee stay a little, friend, yet, o' thy conscience,, speake, is there any harme i' this?
To tell you true, 'tis too good for you, lesse you had grace to follow it.
It doth discouer enormitie, I'le marke it more: I ha' not lik'd a paltry piece of poetry, so well a good while.
! where's this youth, now? A man must call vpon him, for his owne good, and yet hee will not appeare: looke here, here's for him; handy-dandy, which hand will he haue? On, I pray thee, with the rest, I doe heare of him, but I cannot see him, this Master, the cutpurse.
Stare-abouts,Court,Christmas,,
That was a fine fellow! I would haue him, now.
But where's their cunning, now, when they should vse it? they are all chain'd now, I warrant you.The Rat-catchers charme, are all fooles and Asses to this! A poxe on 'hem, that they will not come! that a man should haue such a desire to a thing, and want it.
'Fore God, I'ld guie halfe the, and 'twere mine, for a cutpurse for him, to saue his longing.
Looke you Sister, heere, heere, where is't now? which pocket is't in? for a wager?
I beseech you leaue your wagers, and let him end his matter, an't may be.
O, are you aedified?
Indeed hee do's interrupt him, too much: Therespoke to purpose.
Sister, I am an Asse, I cannot keepe my purse: on, on; I pray thee, friend.
Will you see sport? looke, there's a fellow gathers vp to him, marke.
Good, i' faith! o` he has lighted on the wro~g pocket.
He has it, 'fore God hee is a braue fellow; pitty hee should be detected.
An excellent ballad! an excellent ballad!
Friend, let mee ha' the first, let mee ha' the first, I pray you.
Pardon mee, Sir. First come, first seru'd; and I'le buy the whole bundle too.
That conueyance was better then all, did you see't? he has giuen the purse to the ballad-singer.
Has hee?
Sir, I cry you mercy; I'le not hinder the poore mans profit: pray you mistake me not.
Sir, I take you for an honest Gentleman; if that be mistaking, I met you to day afore: ha! humh! O God! my purse is gone, my purse, my purse, &c.
Come, doe not make a stirre, and cry your selfe an Asse, thorow theafore your time.
Why, hast thou it,? good, how come you by it? I mar'le!
I pray you seeke some other gamster, to play the foole with: you may lose it time enough, for all your.
By this good hand, gloue and all, I ha' lost it already, if thou hast it not: feele else, and Mistrishandkercher, too, out o' the tother pocket.
Why, 'tis well; very well, exceeding pretty, and well.
Are you sure you ha' lost it, Sir?
O God! yes; as I am an honest man, I had it but e'en now, at.
I hope you suspect not me, Sir.
Thee? that were a iest indeede! Dost thou thinke the Gentleman is foolish? where hadst thou hands, I pray thee? Away Asse, away.
I shall be beaten againe, if I be spi'd.
Sir, I suspect an odde fellow, yonder, is stealing away.
Brother, it is the preaching fellow! you shall suspect him. He was at your tother purse, you know! Nay, stay, Sir, and view the worke you ha' done, an' you be benefic'd at the Gallowes, and preach there, thanke your owne handy-worke.
Sir, you shall take no pride in your preferment: you shall be silenc'd quickly.
What doe you meane? sweet buds of gentility.
To ha' my peneworths out on you: Bud. No lesse then two purses a day, serue you? I thought you a simple fellow, when my manbeate you, i' the morning, and pittied you --
So did I, I'le be sworne, brother; but now I see hee is a lewd, and pernicious Enormity: (as Mastercalls him.)
Mine owne words turn'd vpon mee, like swords.
Cannot a man's purse be at quiet for you, i' the Masters pocket, but you must intice it forth, and debauch it?
Sir, Sir, keepe your debauch, and your fineto your selfe; and make as much on 'hem as you please. But gi' me this from you, i' the meane time: I beseech you, see if I can looke to this.
Why,?
Why? because you are an Asse, Sir, there's a reason the shortest way, and you will needs ha' it; now you ha' got the tricke of losing, you'ld lose your breech, an't 'twere loose. I know you, Sir, come, deliuer, you'll goe and cracke the vermine, you breed now, will you? 'tis very fine, will you ha' the truth on't? they are suchretchlesse flies as you are, that blow cutpurses abroad in euery corner; your foolish hauing of money, makes 'hem. An' there were no wiser then I, Sir, the trade should lye open for you, Sir, it should i' faith, Sir. I would teach your wit to come to your head, Sir, as well as your land to come into your hand, I assure you, Sir.
Alacke, good.
Nay, Gentlemen, neuer pitty mee, I am not worth it: Lord send me at home once, too' theagaine, if I trauell any more, call me; with all my heart.
Stay, Sir, I must haue a word with you in priuate. Doe you heare?
With me, Sir? what's your pleasure? good Sir.
Doe not deny it. You are a cutpurse, Sir, this Gentleman here, and I, saw you, nor doe we meane to detect you (though we can sufficiently informe our selues, toward the danger of concealing you) but you must doe vs a piece of seruice.
Good Gentlemen, doe not vndoe me; I am a ciuill young man, and but a beginner, indeed.
Sir, your beginning shall bring on your ending, for vs.We are no Catchpoles nor Constables. That you are to vndertake, is this; you saw the old fellow, with the blacke boxe, here?
The little old Gouernour, Sir?
That same: I see, you haue flowne him to a marke already. I would ha' you get away that boxe from him, and bring it vs.
Would you ha' the boxe and all, Sir? or onely that, that is in't? I'le get you that, and leaue him the boxe, to play with still: (which will be the harder o' the two) because I would gaine your worships good opinion of me.
He sayes well, 'tis the greater Mastry, and 'twill make the more sport when 'tis mist.
I, and 'twill be the longer a missing, to draw on the sport.
But looke you doe it now, sirrah, and keepe your word: or --
Sir, if euer I breake my word, with a Gentleman, may I neuer read word at my need. Where shall I find you?
Some-where i' the, heereabouts. Dispatch it quickly. I would faine see the carefull foole deluded! of all Beasts, I loue the serious Asse. He that takes paines to be one, and playes the foole, with the greatest diligence that can be.
Then you would not chose, Sir, but loue my Guardian, Iustice, who is answerable to that description, in euery haire of him.
So I haue heard. But how came you, Mistris, to be his Ward? or haue relation to him, at first?
Faith, through a common calamity, he bought me, Sir; and now he will marry me to his wiues brother, this wise Gentleman, that you see, or else I must pay value o' my land
S'lid, is there no deuice of disparagement? or so? talke with some crafty fellow, some picklocke o' the Law! Would I had studied a yeere longer i' the Innes of Court, and't had beene but i' your case.
I Master, are you proffering?
You'ld bring but little ayde, Sir.
(I'le looke to you i' faith, Gamester.) An vnfortunate foolishyou are falne into, Lady, I wonder you can endure 'hem.
Sir, they cannot worke their fetters off; must weare 'hem.
You see what care they haue on you, to leaue you thus.
Faith the same they haue of themselues, Sir. I cannot greatly complaine, if this were all the plea I had against 'hem.
'Tis true! but will you please to withdraw with vs, a little, and make them thinke, they haue lost you. I hope our manners ha' beene such hitherto, and our language, as will giueyou no cause, to doubt your selfe, in our company.
Sir, I will giue my selfe, no cause; I am so secure of mine owne manners, as I suspect not yours.
Looke wherecomes.
Away, I'le not be seene, by him.
No, you were not best, hee'ld tell his mother, the widdow.
Heart, what doe you meane?
Cry you mercy, is the winde there? must not the
widdow be nam'd?