Sir, perswade me not: I will make a Star-Chamber matter of it, if hee were twenty Sir, he shall not abuseEsquire.
In the County of, Iustice of Peace and Coram.
I (Cosen) and.
I, andtoo; and a Gentleman borne (Master Parson) who writes himselfe, in any Bill, Warrant, Quittance, or Obligation,.
I that I doe, and haue done any time these three hundred yeeres.
All his successors (gone before him) hath don't: and all his Ancestors (that come after him) may: they may giue the dozen white Luces in their Coate.
It is an olde Coate.
The dozen white Lowses doe become an old Coat well: it agrees well passant: It is a familiar beast to man, and signifies Loue.
The Luse is the fresh-fish, the salt-fish, is an old Coate.
I may quarter (Coz).
You may, by marrying.
It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.
Not a whit.
Yes per-lady: if he ha's a quarter of your coat, there is but three Skirts for your selfe, in my simple coniectures; but that is all one: if Sirhaue committed disparagements vnto you, I am of the Church and will be glad to do my beneuolence, to make attonements and compremises betweene you.
The Councell shall heare it, it is a Riot.
It is not meet the Councell heare a Riot: there is no feare of Got in a Riot: The Councell (looke you) shall desire to heare the feare of Got, and not to heare a Riot: take your viza-ments in that.
Ha; o' my life, if I were yong againe, the sword should end it.
It is petter that friends is the sword, and end it: and there is also another deuice in my praine, which peraduenture prings goot discretions with it. There is, which is daughter to Master, which is pretty virginity.
? she has browne haire, and speakes small like a woman.
It is that ferry person for all the orld, as iust as you will desire, and seuen hundred pounds of Moneyes, and Gold, and Siluer, is her Grand-sire vpon his deathsbed, (Got deliuer to a ioyfull resurrections) giue, when she is able to ouertake seuenteene yeeres old. It were a goot motion, if we leaue our pribbles and prabbles, and desire a marriage betweene Master, and Mistris.
Did her Grand-sire leaue her seauen hundred pound?
I, and her father is make her a petter penny.
I know the young Gentlewoman, she has good gifts.
Seuen hundred pounds, and possibilities, is goot gifts.
Wel, let vs see honest M=r=: isthere?
Shall I tell you a lye? I doe despise a lyer, as I doe despise one that is false, or as I despise one that is not true: the Knight Siris there, and I beseech you be ruled by your well-willers: I will peat the doore for M=r=.. What hoa? Got-plesse your house heere.
Who's there?
Here is go't's plessing and your friend, and Iustice, and heere yong Master: that peraduentures shall tell you another tale, if matters grow to your likings.
I am glad to see your Worships well: I thanke you for my Venison Master.
Master, I am glad to see you: much good doe it your good heart: I wish'd your Venison better, it was ill killd: how doth good Mistresse? and I thank you alwaies with my heart, la: with my heart.
Sir, I thanke you.
Sir, I thanke you: by yea, and no I doe.
I am glad to see you, good Master.
How do's your fallow Greyhound, Sir, I heard say he was out-run on.
It could not be iudg'd, Sir.
You'll not confesse: you'll not confesse.
That he will not, 'tis your fault, 'tis your fault: 'tis a good dogge.
A Cur, Sir.
Sir: hee's a good dog, and a faire dog, can there be more said? he is good, and faire. Is Sirheere?
Sir, hee is within: and I would I could doe a good office betweeneyou.
It is spoke as a Christians ought to speake.
He hath wrong'd me (Master.)
Sir, he doth in some sort confesse it.
If it be confessed, it is not redressed; is not that so (M.?) he hath wrong'd me, indeed he hath, at a word he hath: beleeue me,Esquire, saith he is wronged.
Here comes Sir.
Now, Master, you'll complaine of me to the King?
Knight, you haue beaten my men, kill'd my deere, and broke open my Lodge.
But not kiss'd your Keepers daughter?
Tut, a pin: this shall be answer'd.
I will answere it strait, I haue done all this: That is now answer'd.
The Councell shall know this.
'Twere better for you if it were known in councell: you'll be laugh'd at.
; (Sir) good worts.
Good worts? good Cabidge;, I broke your head: what matter haue you against me?
Marry sir, I haue matter in my head against you, and against your cony-catching Rascalls,, and.
You Banbery Cheese.
I, it is no matter.
How now,?
I, it is no matter.
Slice, I say;: Slice, that's my humor.
Where'smy man? can you tell, Cosen?
Peace, I pray you: now let vs vnderstand: there is three Vmpires in this matter, as I vnderstand; that is, Master(Master,) & there is my selfe, (my selfe) and the three party is (lastly, and finally) mine Host of the Gater.
We three to hear it, & end it between them.
Ferry goo't, I will make a priefe of it in my note-booke, and we wil afterwards orke vpon the cause, with as great discreetly as we can.
He heares with eares.
The Teuill and his Tam: what phrase is this? he heares with eare? why, it is affectations.
, did you picke M.purse?
I, by these gloues did hee, or I would I might neuer come in mine owne great chamber againe else, of seauen groates in mill-sixpences, and twoShouelboords, that cost me two shilling and two pence a peece of: by these gloues.
Is this true,?
No, it is false, if it is a picke-purse.
Ha, thou mountaine Forreyner: Sir, and Master mine, I combat challenge of this Latine Bilboe: word of deniall in thyhere; word of denial; froth, and scum thou liest.
By these gloues, then 'twas he.
Be auis'd sir, and passe good humours: I will say marry trap with you, if you runne the nut-hooks humor on me, that is the very note of it.
By this hat, then he in the red face had it: for though I cannot remember what I did when you made me drunke, yet I am not altogether an asse.
What say you, and?
Why sir, (for my part) I say the Gentleman had drunke himselfe out of his fiue sentences.
It is his fiue sences: fie, what the ignorance is.
And being fap, sir, was (as they say) casheerd: and so conclusions past the Car-eires.
I, you spake in Latten then to: but 'tis no matter; Ile nere be drunk whilst I liue againe, but in honest, ciuill, godly company for this tricke: if I be drunke, Ile be drunke with those that haue the feare of God, and not with drunken knaues.
So got-udge me, that is a vertuousminde.
You heare all these matters deni'd, Gentlemen; you heare it.
Nay daughter, carry the wine in, wee'll drinke within.
Oh heauen: This is Mistresse.
How now Mistris?
, by my troth you are very wel met: by your leaue good Mistris.
Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome: come, we haue a hot Venison pasty to dinner; Come gentlemen, I hope we shall drinke downe all vnkindnesse.
I had rather then forty shillings I had my booke of Songs and Sonnets heere: How now, where haue you beene? I must wait on my selfe, must I? you haue not the booke of Riddles about you, haue you?
Booke of Riddles? why did you not lend it tovpon Alhallowmas last, a fortnight afore Michaelmas.
Come Coz, come Coz, we stay for you: a word with you Coz: marry this, Coz: there is as 'twere a tender, a kinde of tender, made a farre-off by Sirhere: doe you vnderstand me?
I Sir, you shall finde me reasonable; if it be so, I shall doe that that is reason.
Nay, but vnderstand me.
So I doe Sir.
Giue eare to his motions; (M=r=.) I will description the matter to you, if you be capacity of it.
Nay, I will doe as my Cozensaies: I pray you pardon me, he's a Iustice of Peace in his Countrie, simple though I stand here.
But that is not the question: the question is concerning your marriage.
I, there's the point Sir.
Marry is it: the very point of it, to Mi..
Why if it be so; I will marry her vpon any reasonable demands.
But can you affection the 'o-man, let vs command to know that of your mouth, or of your lips: for diuers Philosophers hold, that the lips is parcell of the mouth: therfore precisely, ca~ you carry your good wil to y=e= maid?
Cosen, can you loue her?
I hope sir, I will do as it shall become one that would doe reason.
Nay, got's Lords, and his Ladies, you must speake possitable, if you can carry-her your desires towards her.
That you must: Will you, (vpon good dowry) marry her?
I will doe a greater thing then that, vpon your request (Cosen) in any reason.
Nay conceiue me, conceiue mee, (sweet Coz): what I doe is to pleasure you (Coz:) can you loue the maid?
I will marry her (Sir) at your request; but if there bee no great loue in the beginning, yet Heauen may decrease it vpon better acquaintance, when wee are married, and haue more occasion to know one another: I hope vpon familiarity will grow more content: but if you say mary-her, I will mary-her, that I am freely dissolued, and dissolutely.
It is a fery discetion-answere; saue the fall is in the'ord, dissolutely; the ort is (according to our meaning) resolutely: his meaning is good.
I: I thinke my Cosen meant well.
I, or else I would I might be hang'd (la.)
Here comes faire Mistris; would I were yong for your sake, Mistris.
The dinner is on the Table, my Father desires your worships company.
I will wait on him, (faire Mistris.)
Od's plessed-wil: I wil not be abse~ce at the grace.
Wil't please your worship to come in, Sir?
No, I thank you forsooth, hartely; I am very well.
The dinner attends you, Sir.
I am not a-hungry, I thanke you, forsooth: goe, Sirha, for all you are my man, goe wait vpon my Cosen: a Iustice of peace sometime may be beholding to his friend, for a Man; I keepe but three Men, and a Boy yet, till my Mother be dead: but what though, yet I liue like a poore Gentleman borne.
I may not goe in without your worship: they will not sit till you come.
I'faith, ile eate nothing: I thanke you as much as though I did.
I pray you Sir walke in.
I had rather walke here (I thanke you) I bruiz'd my shin th'other day, with playing at Sword and Dagger with a Master of Fence (three veneys for a dish of stew'd Prunes) and by my troth, I cannot abide the smell of hot meate since. Why doe your dogs barke so? be there Beares ith' Towne?
I thinke there are, Sir, I heard them talk'd of.
I loue the sport well, but I shall as soone quarrell at it, as any man in: you are afraid if you see the Beare loose, are you not?
I indeede Sir.
That's meate and drinke to me now: I haue seeneloose, twenty times, and haue taken him by the Chaine: but (I warrant you) the women haue so cride and shrekt at it, that it past: But women indeede, cannot abide'em, they are very ill-fauour'd rough things.
Come, gentle M., come; we stay for you.
Ile eate nothing, I thanke you Sir.
By cocke and pie, you shall not choose, Sir: come, come.
Nay, pray you lead the way.
Come on, Sir.
Mistris: your selfe shall goe first.
Not I Sir, pray you keepe on.
Truely I will not goe first: truely-la: I will not doe you that wrong.
I pray you Sir.
Ile rather be vnmannerly, then troublesome: you doe your selfe wrong indeede-la.
Go your waies, and aske of Doctorhouse, which is the way; and there dwels one Mistris; which is in the manner of his Nurse; or his dry-Nurse; or his Cooke; or his Laundry; his Washer, and his Ringer.
Well Sir.
Nay, it is petter yet: giue her this letter; for it is a'oman that altogeathers acquainta~ce with Mistris; and the Letter is to desire, and require her to solicite your Masters desires, to Mistris: I pray you be gon: I will make an end of my dinner; ther's Pippins and Cheese to come.
Mineof the?
What saies my Bully Rooke? speake schollerly, and wisely.
Truely mine; I must turne away some of my followers.
Discard, (bully) casheere; let them wag; trot, trot.
I sit at ten pounds a weeke.
Thou'rt an Emperor (and) I will entertaine: he shall draw; he shall tap; said I well (bully?)
Doe so (good mine.
I haue spoke: let him follow: let me see thee froth, and hue: I am at a word: follow.
, follow him: ais a good trade: an old Cloake, makes a new Ierkin: a wither'd Seruingman, a fresh Tapster: goe, adew.
It is a life that I haue desir'd: I will thriue.
O base hungarian wight: wilt y=u= the spigot wield.
He was gotten in drink: is not the humor co~ceited?
I am glad I am so acquit of this Tinderbox: his Thefts were too open: his filching was like an vnskilfull Singer, he kept not time.
The good humor is to steale at a minutes rest.
Conuay: the wife it call: Steale? foh: a fico for the phrase.
Well sirs, I am almost out at heeles.
Why then let Kibes ensue.
There is no remedy: I must conicatch, I must shift.
Yong Rauens must haue foode.
Which of you knowof this Towne?
I ken the wight: he is of substance good.
My honest Lads, I will tell you what I am about.
Two yards, and more.
No quips now: (Indeede I am in the waste two yards about: but I am now about no waste: I am about thrift) briefely: I doe meane to make loue towife: I spie entertainment in her: shee discourses: shee carues: she giues the leere of inuitation: I can construe the action of her familier stile, & the hardest voice of her behauior (to be english'd rightly) is,.
He hath studied her will; and translated her will: out of honesty, into English.
The Anchor is deepe: will that humor passe?
Now, the report goes, she has all the rule of her husbands Purse: he hath a legend of Angels.
As many diuels entertaine: and to her Boy say I.
The humor rises: it is good: humor me the angels.
I haue writ me here a letter to her: & here another towife, who euen now gaue mee good eyes too; examind my parts with most iudicious illiads: sometimes the beame of her view, guilded my foote: sometimes my portly belly.
Then did the Sun on dung-hill shine.
I thanke thee for that humour.
O she did so course o're my exteriors with such a greedy intention, that the appetite of her eye, did seeme to scorch me vp like a burning-glasse: here's another letter to her: She beares the Purse too: She is a Region in: all gold, and bountie: I will be Cheaters to them both, and they shall be Exchequers to mee: they shall be my East and West Indies, and I will trade to them both: Goe, beare thou this Letter to Mistris; and thou this to Mistris: we will thriue (Lads) we will thriue.
Shall I Sirofbecome, And by my side weare Steele? then Lucifer take all.
I will run no base humor: here take the humor-Letter; I will keepe the hauior of reputation.
Hold Sirha, beare you these Letters tightly, Saile like my Pinnasse to these golden shores. Rogues, hence, auaunt, vanish like haile-stones; goe, Trudge; plod away ith'hoofe: seeke shelter, packe:will learne the honor of the age, French-thrift, you Rogues, my selfe, and skirted.
Let Vultures gripe thy guts: for gourd, and Fullam holds: & high and low beguiles the rich & poore, Tester ile haue in pouch when thou shalt lacke, BaseTurke.
I haue opperations, Which be humors of reuenge.
Wilt thou reuenge?
By Welkin, and her Star.
With wit, or Steele?
With both the humors, I: I will discusse the humour of this Loue to.
And I toshall eke vnfold How(varlet vile) His Doue will proue; his gold will hold, And his soft couch defile.
My humour shall not coole: I will incenseto deale with poyson: I will possesse him with yallownesse, for the reuolt of mine is dangerous: that is my true humour.
Thou art theof: I second thee: troope on.
What,, I pray thee goe to the Casement, and see if you can see my Master, Master Doctercomming: if he doe (I'faith) and finde any body in the house; here will be an old abusing of Gods patience, and the Kings English.
Ile goe watch.
Goe, and we'll haue a posset for't soone at night, (in faith) at the latter end of a Sea-cole-fire: An honest, willing, kinde fellow, as euer seruant shall come in house withall: and I warrant you, no tel-tale, nor no breede-bate: his worst fault is, that he is giuen to prayer; hee is something peeuish that way: but no body but has his fault: but let that passe., you say your name is?
I: for fault of a better.
And Masteryour Master?
I forsooth.
Do's he not weare a great round Beard, like a Glouers pairing-knife?
No forsooth: he hath but a little wee-face; with a little yellow Beard: a Caine colourd Beard.
A softly-sprighted man, is he not?
I forsooth: but he is as tall a man of his hands, as any is betweene this and his head: he hath fought with a Warrener.
How say you: oh, I should remember him: do's he not hold vp his head (as it were?) and strut in his gate?
Yes indeede do's he.
Well, heauen send, no worse fortune: Tell Master Parson, I will doe what I can for your Master:is a good girle, and I wish --
Out alas: here comes my Master.
We shall all be shent: Run in here, good young man: goe into this Closset: he will not stay long: what?: whatI say? goe, goe enquire for my Master, I doubt he be not well, that hee comes not home:
Vat is you sing? I doe not like des-toyes: pray you goe and vetch me in my Closset, vnboyteene verd; a Box, a greene-a-Box: do intend vat I speake? a greene-a-Box.
I forsooth ile fetch it you: I am glad hee went not in himselfe: if he had found the yong man he would haue bin horne-mad.
Is it this Sir?
: Vere is dat knaue?
What?
Here Sir.
You are, andyou are: Come, take-a-your Rapier, and come after my heele to the Court.
'Tis ready Sir, here in the Porch.
By my trot: I tarry too long: od's-me:: dere is some Simples in my Closset, dat I vill not for the varld I shall leaue behinde.
Ay-me, he'll finde the yong man there, & be mad.
O: vat is in my Closset? Villanie, La-roone:, my Rapier.
Good Master be content.
Wherefore shall I be content-a?
The yong man is an honest man.
What shall de honest man do in my Closset: dere is no honest man dat shall come in my Closset.
I beseech you be not so flegmaticke: heare the truth of it. He came of an errand to mee, from Parson.
Vell.
I forsooth: to desire her to --.
Peace, I pray you.
Peace-a-your tongue: speake-a-your Tale.
To desire this honest Gentlewoman (your Maid) to speake a good word to Mistris, for my Master in the way of Marriage.
This is all indeede-la: but ile nere put my finger in the fire, and neede not.
Sirsend-a you?, ballow mee some paper: tarry you a littell-a-while.
I am glad he is so quiet: if he had bin throughly moued, you should haue heard him so loud, and so melancholly: but notwithstanding man, Ile doe yoe your Master what good I can: and the very yea, & the no is, y=e= French Doctor my Master, (I may call him my Master, looke you, for I keepe his house; and I wash, ring, brew, bake, scowre, dresse meat and drinke, make the beds, and doe all my selfe.)
'Tis a great charge to come vnder one bodies hand.
Are you a-uis'd o'that? you shall finde it a great charge: and to be vp early, and down late: but notwithstanding, (to tell you in your eare, I wold haue no words of it) my Master himselfe is in loue with Mistris: but notwithstanding that I knowmind, that's neither heere nor there.
You, Iack'Nape: giue-'a this Letter to Sir, by gar it is a shallenge: I will cut his troat in de Parke, and I will teach a scuruy Iack-a-nape Priest to meddle, or make: -- you may be gon: it is not good you tarry here: by gar I will cut all his two stones: by gar, he shall not haue a stone to throw at his dogge.
Alas: he speakes but for his friend.
It is no matter'a ver dat: do not you tell-a-me dat I shall hauefor my selfe? by gar, I vill kill de Iack-Priest: and I haue appointed mine Host of de Iarteer to measure our weapon: by gar, I wil my selfe haue.
Sir, the maid loues you, and all shall bee well: We must giue folkes leaue to prate: what the good-ier.
, come to the Court with me: by gar, if I haue not, I shall turne your head out of my dore: follow my heeles,.
You shall hauehead of your owne; No, I knowmind for that: neuer a woman inknowes more ofminde then I doe, nor can doe more then I doe with her, I thanke heauen.
Who's with in there, hoa?
Who's there, I troa? Come neere the house I pray you.
How now (good woman) how dost thou?
The better that it pleases your good Worship to aske?
What newes? how do's pretty Mistris?
In truth Sir, and shee is pretty, and honest, and gentle, and one that is your friend, I can tell you that by the way, I praise heauen for it.
Shall I doe any good thinkst thou? shall I not loose my suit?
Troth Sir, all is in his hands aboue: but notwithstanding (Master)Ile be sworne on a booke shee loues you: haue not your Worship a wart aboue your eye?
Yes marry haue I, what of that?
Wel, thereby hangs a tale: good faith, it is such another; (but (I detest) an honest maid as euer broke bread: wee had an howres talke of that wart; I shall neuer laugh but in that maids company: but (indeed) shee is giuen too much to Allicholy and musing; but for you -- well -- goe too --
Well: I shall see her to day: hold, there's money for thee: Let mee haue thy voice in my behalfe: if thou seest her before me, commend me. --
Will I? I faith that wee will: And I will tell your Worship more of the Wart, the next time we haue confidence, and of other wooers.
Well, fare-well, I am in great haste now.
Fare-well to your Worship: truely an honest Gentleman: butloues himnot: for I knowminde as well as another do's: out vpon't: what haue I forgot.
What, haue scap'd Loue-letters in the holly-day-time of my beauty, and am I now a subiect for them? let me see?What aofis this? O wicked, wicked world: One that is well-nye worne to peeces with age To show himselfe a yong Gallant? What an vnwaied Behauiour hath this Flemish drunkard pickt (with The Deuills name) out of my conuersation, that he dares In this manner assay me? why, hee hath not beene thrice In my Company: what should I say to him? I was then Frugall of my mirth: (heauen forgiue mee:) why Ile Exhibit a Bill in the Parliament for the putting downe of men: how shall I be reueng'd on him? for reueng'd I will be? as sure as his guts are made of puddings.
, trust me, I was going to your house.
And trust me, I was comming to you: you looke very ill.
Nay, Ile nere beleeuethat; I haue to shew to the contrary.
'Faith but you doe in my minde.
Well: I doe then: yet I say, I could shew you to the contrary: O Mistris, giue mee some counsaile.
What's the matter, woman?
O woman: if it were not for one trifling respect, I could come to such honour.
Hang the trifle (woman) take the honour: what is it? dispence with trifles: what is it?
If I would but goe to hell, for an eternall moment, or so: I could be knighted.
What thou liest? Sir? these Knights will hacke, and so thou shouldst not alter the article of thy Gentry.
Wee burne day-light: heere, read, read: perceiue how I might bee knighted, I shall thinke the worse of fat men, as long as I haue an eye to make difference of mens liking: and yet hee would not sweare:praise womens modesty: and gaue such orderly and welbehaued reproofe to al vncomelinesse, that I would haue sworne his disposition would haue gone to the truth of his words: but they doe no more adhere and keep place together, then the hundred Psalms to the tune of Greensleeues: What tempest (I troa) threw this Whale, (with so many Tuns of oyle in his belly) a'shoare at Windsor? How shall I bee reuenged on him? I thinke the best way were, to entertaine him with hope, till the wicked fire of lust haue melted him in his owne greace: Did you euer heare the like?
Letter for letter; but that the name ofanddiffers: to thy great comfort in this mystery of ill opinions, heere's the twyn-brother of thy Letter: but let thine inherit first, for I protest mine neuer shall: I warrant he hath a thousand of these Letters, writ with blancke-space for different names (sure more): and these are of the second edition: hee will print them out of doubt: for he cares not what hee puts into the presse, when he would put vs two: I had rather be a Giantesse, and lye vnder Mount: Well; I will find you twentie lasciuious Turtles ere one chaste man.
Why this is the very same: the very hand: the very words: what doth he thinke of vs?
Nay I know not: it makes me almost readie to wrangle with mine owne honesty: Ile entertaine my selfe like one that I am not acquainted withall: for sure vnlesse hee know some straine in mee, that I know not my selfe, hee would neuer haue boorded me in this furie.
Boording, call you it? Ile bee sure to keepe him aboue decke.
So will I: if hee come vnder my hatches, Ile neuer to Sea againe: Let's bee reueng'd on him: let's appoint him a meeting: giue him a show of comfort in his Suit, and lead him on with a fine baited delay, till hee hath pawn'd his horses to mine Host of the Garter.
Nay, I wil consent to act any villany against him, that may not sully the charinesse of our honesty: oh that my husband saw this Letter: it would giue eternall food to his iealousie.
Why look where he comes; and my good man too: hee's as farre from iealousie, as I am from giuing him cause, and that (I hope) is an vnmeasurable distance.
You are the happier woman.
Let's consult together against this greasie Knight: Come hither.
Well: I hope, it be not so.
Hope is a curtall-dog in some affaires: Siraffects thy wife.
Why sir, my wife is not young.
He wooes both high and low, both rich & poor, both yong and old, one with anotherhe loues the Gally-mawfryperpend.
Loue my wife?
With liuer, burning hot: preuent: Or goe thou like Sirhe, with Ring-wood at thy heeles: O, odious is the name.
What name Sir?
The horne I say: Farewell: Take heed, haue open eye, for theeues doe foot by night. Take heed, ere sommer comes, or Cuckoo-birds do sing. Away sir Corporall: Beleeue ithe speakes sence.
I will be patient: I will find out this.
And this is true: I like not the humor of lying: hee hath wronged mee in some humors: I should haue borne the humour'd Letter to her: but I haue a sword: and it shall bite vpon my necessitie: he loues your wife; There's the short and the long: My name is Corporall: I speak, and I auouch; 'tis true: my name is: andloues your wife: adieu, I loue not the humour of bread and cheese: adieu.
The humour of it (quoth'a?) heere's a fellow frights English out of his wits.
I will seeke out.
I neuer heard such a drawling-affecting rogue.
If I doe finde it: well.
I will not beleeue such a, though the Priest o' th'Towne commended him for a true man.
'Twas a good sensible fellow: well.
How now?
Whether goe youharke you.
How now (sweet) why art thou melancholy?
I melancholy? I am not melancholy: Get you home: goe.
Faith, thou hast some crochets in thy head, Now: will you goe,?
Haue with you: you'll come to dinner? Looke who comes yonder: shee shall bee our Messenger to this paltrie Knight.
Trust me, I thought on her: shee'll fit it.
You are come to see my daughter?
I forsooth: and I pray how do's good Mistresse?
Go in with vs and see: we haue an houres talke with you.
How now Master Ford?
You heard what this knaue told me, did you not?
Yes, and you heard what the other told me?
Doe you thinke there is truth in them?
Hang 'em slaues: I doe not thinke the Knight would offer it: But these that accuse him in his intent towards our wiues, are a yoake of his discarded men: very rogues, now they be out of seruice.
Were they his men?
Marry were they.
I like it neuer the beter for that, Do's he lye at the Garter?
I marry do's he: if hee should intend this voyage toward my wife, I would turne her loose to him; and what hee gets more of her, then sharpe words, let it lye on my head.
I doe not misdoubt my wife: but I would bee loath to turne them together: a man may be too confident: I would haue nothing lye on my head: I cannot be thus satisfied.
Looke where my ranting-Host of the Garter comes: there is eyther liquor in his pate, or mony in his purse, when hee lookes so merrily: How now mine Host?
How now Bully-Rooke: thou'rt a Gentleman Caueleiro Iustice, I say.
I follow, (mine Host) I follow: Good-euen, and twenty (good Master.) Master, wil you go with vs? we haue sport in hand.
Tell him Caueleiro-Iustice: tell him Bully-Rooke.
Sir, there is a fray to be fought, betweene Sirthe Welch Priest, andthe French Doctor.
Good mine Host o'th'Garter: a word with you.
What saist thou, my Bully-Rooke?
Will you goe with vs to behold it? My merry Host hath had the measuring of their weapons; and (I thinke) hath appointed them contrary places: for (beleeue mee) I heare the Parson is no Iester: harke, I will tell you what our sport shall be.
Hast thou no suit against my Knight? my guest-Caualeire?
None, I protest: but Ile giue you a pottle of burn'd sacke, to giue me recourse to him, and tell him my name is: onely for a iest.
My hand, (Bully:) thou shalt haue egresse and regresse, (said I well?) and thy name shall be. It is a merry Knight: will you goe An-heires?
Haue with you mine Host.
I haue heard the French-man hath good skill in his Rapier.
Tut sir: I could haue told you more: In these times you stand on distance: your Passes, Stoccado's, and I know not what: 'tis the heart (Master) 'tis heere, 'tis heere: I haue seene the time with my long-sword, I would haue made you fowre tall fellowes skippe like Rattes.
Heere boyes, heere, heere: shall we wag?
Haue with you: I had rather heare them scold, then fight.
Thoughbe a secure foole, and stands so firmely on his wiues frailty; yet, I cannot put-off my opinion so easily: she was in his company athouse: and what they made there, I know not. Well, I wil looke further into't, and I haue a disguise, to sound; if I finde her honest, I loose not my labor: if she be otherwise, 'tis labour well bestowed.
I will not lend thee a penny.
Why then the world's mine Oyster, which I, with sword will open.
Not a penny: I haue beene content (Sir,) you should lay my countenance to pawne: I haue grated vpon my good friends for three Repreeues for you, and your Coach-fellow; or else you had look'd through the grate, like a Geminy of Baboones: I am damn'd in hell, for swearing to Gentlemen my friends, you were good Souldiers, and tall-fellowes. And when Mistresselost the handle of her Fan, I took't vpon mine honour thou hadst it not.
Didst not thou share? hadst thou not fifteene pence?
Reason, you roague, reason: thinkst thou Ile endanger my soule,? at a word, hang no more about mee, I am no gibbet for you: goe, a short knife, and a throng, to your Mannor of: goe, you'll not beare a Letter for mee you roague? you stand vpon your honor: why, (thou vnconfinable basenesse) it is as much as I can doe to keepe the termes of my hononor precise: I, I, I my selfe sometimes, leauing the feare of heauen onthe left hand, and hiding mine honor in my necessity, am faine to shuffle: to hedge, and to lurch, and yet, you Rogue, will en-sconce your raggs; your Cat-a-Mountaine-lookes, your red-lattice phrases, and your bold-beating-oathes, vnder the shelter of your honor? you will not doe it? you?
I doe relent: what would thou more of man?
Sir, here's a woman would speake with you.
Let her approach.
Giue your worship good morrow.
Good-morrow, good-wife.
Not so and't please your worship.
Good maid then.
Ile be sworne, As my mother was the first houre I was borne.
I doe beleeue the swearer; what with me?
Shall I vouch-safe your worship a word, or two?
Two thousand (faire woman) and ile vouchsafe thee the hearing.
There is one Mistresse, (Sir) I pray come a little neerer this waies: I my selfe dwell with M. Doctor:
Well, on; Mistresse, you say.
Your worship saies very true: I pray your worship come a little neerer this waies.
I warrant thee, no-bodie heares: mine owne people, mine owne people.
Are they so? heauen-blesse them, and make them his Seruants.
Well; Mistresse, what of her?
Why, Sir; shee's a good-creature; Lord, Lord, your Worship's a wanton: well: heauen forgiue you, and all of vs, I pray --.
Mistresse: come, Mistresse.
Marry this is the short, and the long of it: you haue brought her into such a Canaries, as 'tis wonderfull: the best Courtier of them all (when the Court lay at) could neuer haue brought her to such a Canarie: yet there has beene Knights, and Lords, and Gentlemen, with their Coaches; I warrant you Coach after Coach, letter after letter, gift after gift, smelling so sweetly; all Muske, and so rushling, I warrant you, in silke and golde, and in such alligant termes, and in such wine and suger of the best, and the fairest, that would haue wonne any womans heart: and I warrant you, they could neuer get an eye-winke of her: I had my selfe twentie Angels giuen me this morning, but I defie all Angels (in any such sort, as they say) but in the way of honesty: and I warrant you, they could neuer get her so much as sippe on a cup with the prowdest of them all, and yet there has beene Earles: nay, (which is more) Pentioners, but I warrant you all is one with her.
But what saies shee to mee? be briefe my good.
Marry, she hath receiu'd your Letter: for the which she thankes you a thousand times; and she giues you to notifie, that her husband will be absence from his house, betweene ten and eleuen.
Ten, and eleuen.
I, forsooth: and then you may come and see the picture (she sayes) that you wot of: Masterher husband will be from home: alas, the sweet woman leades an ill life with him: hee's a very iealousie-man; she leads a very frampold life with him, (good hart.)
Ten, and eleuen.Woman, commend me to her, I will not faile her.
Why, you say well: But I haue another messenger to your worship: Mistressehath her heartie commendations to you to: and let mee tell you in your eare, shee's as fartuous a ciuill modest wife, and one (I tell you) that will not misse you morning nor euening prayer, as any is in, who ere bee the other: and shee bade me tell your worship, that her husband is seldome from home, but she hopes there will come a time. I neuer knew a woman so doate vpon a man; surely I thinke you haue charmes, la: yes in truth.
Not I, I assure thee; setting the attraction of my good parts aside, I haue no other charmes.
Blessing on your heart for't.
But I pray thee tell me this: haswife, andwife acquainted each other, how they loue me?
That were a iest indeed: they haue not so little grace I hope, that were a tricke indeed: But Mistriswould desire you to send her your little Page of al loues: her husband has a maruellous infectio~ to the little Page: and truely Masteris an honest man: neuer a wife inleades a better life then she do's: doe what shee will, say what she will, take all, pay all, goe to bed when she list, rise when she list, all is as she will: and truly she deserues it; for if there be a kinde woman in, she is one: you must send her your Page, no remedie.
Why, I will.
Nay, but doe so then, and looke you, hee may come and goe betweene you both: and in any case haue a nay-word, that you may know one anothers minde, and the Boy neuer neede to vnderstand any thing; for 'tis not good that children should know any wickednes: olde folkes you know, haue discretion, as they say, and know the world.
Farethee-well, commend mee to them both: there's my purse, I am yet thy debter: Boy, goe along with this woman, this newes distracts me.
This Puncke is one ofCarriers, Clap on more sailes, pursue: vp with your fights: Giue fire: she is my prize, or Ocean whelme them all.
Saist thou so (old) go thy waies: Ile make more of thy olde body then I haue done: will they yet looke after thee? wilt thou after the expence of so much money, be now a gainer? good Body, I thanke thee: let them say 'tis grossely done, so it bee fairely done, no matter.
Sir, there's one Masterbelow would faine speake with you, and be acquainted with you; and hath sent your worship a mornings draught of Sacke.
is his name?
I Sir.
Call him in: suchare welcome to mee, that ore'flowes such liquor: ah ha, Mistresseand Mistresse, haue I encompass'd you? goe to,.
'Blesse you sir.
And you sir: would you speake with me?
I make bold, to presse, with so little preparation vpon you.
You'r welcome, what's your will? giue vs leaue Drawer.
Sir, I am a Gentleman that haue spent much, my name is.
Good Master, I desire more acquaintance of you.
Good Sir, I sue for yours: not to charge you, for I must let you vnderstand, I thinke my selfe inbetter plight for a Lender, then you are: the which hath something emboldned me to this vnseason'd intrusion: for they say, if money goe before, all waies doe lye open.
Money is a good Souldier (Sir) and will on.
Troth, and I haue a bag of money heere troubles me: if you will helpe to beare it (Sir) take all, or halfe, for easing me of the carriage.
Sir, I know not how I may deserue to bee your Porter.
I will tell you sir, if you will giue mee the hearing.
Speake (good Master) I shall be glad to be your Seruant.
Sir, I heare you are a Scholler: (I will be briefe with you) and you haue been a man long knowne to me, though I had neuer so good means as desire, to make my selfe acquainted with you. I shall discouer a thing to you, wherein I must very much lay open mine owne imperfection: but (good Sir) as you haue one eye vpon my follies, as you heare them vnfolded, turne another into the Register of your owne, that I may passe with a reproofe the easier, sith you your selfe know how easie it is to be such an offender.
Very well Sir, proceed.
There is a Gentlewoman in this Towne, her husbands name is.
Well Sir.
I haue long lou'd her, and I protest to you, bestowed much on her: followed her with a doating obseruance: Ingross'd opportunities to meete her: fee'd euery slight occasion that could but nigardly giue mee sight of her: not only bought many presents to giue her, but haue giuen largely to many, to know what shee would haue giuen: briefly, I haue pursu'd her, as Loue hath pursued mee, which hath beene on the wing of all occasions: but whatsoeuer I haue merited, either in my minde, or in my meanes, meede I am sure I haue receiued none, vnlesse Experience be a Iewell, that I haue purchased at an infinite rate, and that hath taught mee to say this,
Haue you receiu'd no promise of satisfaction at her hands?
Neuer.
Haue you importun'd her to such a purpose?
Neuer.
Of what qualitie was your loue then?
Like a fair house, built on another mans ground, so that I haue lost my edifice, by mistaking the place, where I erected it.
To what purpose haue you vnfolded this to me?
When I haue told you that, I haue told you all: Some say, that though she appeare honest to mee, yet in other places shee enlargeth her mirth so farre, that there is shrewd construction made of her. Now (Sir) here is the heart of my purpose: you are a gentleman of excellent breeding, admirable discourse, of great admittance, authenticke in your place and person, generally allow'd for your many war-like, court-like, and learned preparations.
O Sir.
Beleeue it, for you know it: there is money, spend it, spend it, spend more; spend all I haue, onelygiue me so much of your time in enchange of it, as to lay an amiable siege to the honesty of thiswife: vse your Art of wooing; win her to consent to you: if any man may, you may as soone as any.
Would it apply well to the vehemency of your affection that I should win what you would enioy? Methinkes you prescribe to your selfe very preposterously.
O, vnderstand my drift: she dwells so securely on the excellency of her honor, that the folly of my soule dares not present it selfe: shee is too bright to be look'd against. Now, could I come to her with any detection in my hand; my desires had instance and argument to commend themselues, I could driue her then from the ward of her purity, her reputation, her marriage-vow, and a thousand other her defences, which now are too-too strongly embattaild against me: what say you too't, Sir?
Master, I will first make bold with your money: next, giue mee your hand: and last, as I am a gentleman, you shall, if you will, enioywife.
O good Sir.
I say you shall.
Want no money (Sir) you shall want none.
Want no(Master) you shall want none: I shall be with her (I may tell you) by her owne appointment, euen as you came in to me, her assistant, or goe-betweene, parted from me: I say I shall be with her betweene ten and eleuen: for at that time the iealious-rascally-knaue her husband will be forth: come you to me at night, you shall know how I speed.
I am blest in your acquaintance: do you knowSir?
Hang him (poore Cuckoldly knaue) I know him not: yet I wrong him to call him poore: They say the iealous wittolly-knaue hath masses of money, for the which his wife seemes to me well-fauourd: I will vse her as the key of the Cuckoldly-rogues Coffer, & ther's my haruest-home.
I would you knew, sir, that you might auoid him, if you saw him.
Hang him, mechanicall-salt-butter rogue; I wil stare him out of his wits: I will awe-him with my cudgell: it shall hang like a Meteor ore the Cuckolds horns: Master, thou shalt know, I will predominate ouer the pezant, and thou shalt lye with his wife. Come to me soone at night:a knaue, and I will aggrauate his stile: thou (Master) shalt know him for knaue, and Cuckold. Come to me soone at night.
What a damn'd Epicurian-Rascall is this? my heart is ready to cracke with impatience: who saies this is improuident iealousie? my wife hath sent to him, the howre is fixt, the match is made: would any man haue thought this? see the hell of hauing a false woman: my bed shall be abus'd, my Coffers ransack'd, my reputation gnawne at, and I shall not onely receiue this villanous wrong, but stand vnder the adoption of abhominable termes, and by him that does mee this wrong: Termes, names:sounds well:, well:, well: yet they are Diuels additions, the names of fiends: But Cuckold, Wittoll, Cuckold? The Diuell himselfe hath not such a name.is an Asse, a secure Asse; hee will trust his wife, hee will not be iealous: I will rather trust awith my butter, Parsonthewith my Cheese, anwith my Aqua-vitae-bottle, or a Theefe walke my ambling gelding, then my wife with her selfe. Then she plots, then sheeruminates, then shee deuises: and what they thinke in their hearts they may effect; they will breake their hearts but they will effect. Heauen bee prais'd for my iealousie: eleuen o'clocke the howre, I will preuent this, detect my wife, bee reueng'd on, and laugh at. I will about it, better three houres too soone, then a mynute too late: fie, fie, fie: Cuckold, Cuckold, Cuckold.
Sir.
Vat is the clocke,.
'Tis past the howre (Sir) that Sirpromis'd to meet.
By gar, he has saue his soule, dat he is no-come: hee has pray his Pible well, dat he is no-come: by garhe is dead already, if he be come.
Hee is wise Sir: hee knew your worship would kill him if he came.
By gar, de herring is no dead, so as I vill kill him: take your Rapier,I vill tell you how I vill kill him.
Alas sir, I cannot fence.
Villanie, take your Rapier.
Forbeare: heer's company.
'Blesse thee, bully-Doctor.
'Saue you M=r=. Doctor.
Now good M=r=. Doctor.
'Giue you good-morrow, sir.
Vat be all you one, two, tree, fowre, come for?
To see thee fight, to see thee foigne, to see thee trauerse, to see thee heere, to see thee there, to see thee passe thy puncto, thy stock, thy reuerse, thy distance, thy montant: Is he dead, my Ethiopian? Is he dead, my Francisco? ha Bully? what saies my? my? my heart of Elder? ha? is he dead bully-Stale? is he dead?
By gar, he is de Coward-Iack-Priest of de vorld: he is not show his face.
Thou art a Castalion-king-Vrinall:of(my Boy)
I pray you beare witnesse, that me haue stay, sixe or seuen, two tree howres for him, and hee is nocome.
He is the wiser man (M. Doctor) heis a curer of soules, and you a curer of bodies: if you should fight, you goe against the haire of your professions: is it not true, Master?
Master; you haue your selfe beene a great fighter, though now a man of peace.
Body-kins M., though I now be old, and of the peace; if I see a sword out, my finger itches to make one: though wee are Iustices, and Doctors, and Church-men (M.) wee haue some salt of our youth in vs, we are the sons of women (M..)
'Tis true, M=r=..
It wil be found so, (M.) M. Doctor, I am come to fetch you home: I am sworn of the peace: you haue show'd your selfe a wise Physician, and Sirhath showne himselfe a wise and patient Churchman: you must goe with me, M. Doctor.
Pardon, Guest-Iustice; a Mounseur Mocke-water.
Mock-vater? vat is dat?
Mock-water, in our English tongue, is Valour (Bully.)
By gar, then I haue as much Mock-vater as de Englishman: scuruy-Iack-dog-Priest: by gar, mee vill cut his eares.
He will Clapper-claw thee tightly (Bully.)
Clapper-de-claw? vat is dat?
That is, he will make thee amends.
By-gar, me doe looke hee shall clapper-de-claw me, for by-gar, me vill haue it.
And I will prouoke him to't, or let him wag.
Me tanck you for dat.
And moreouer, (Bully) but first, M=r=. Ghuest, and M., & eeke Caualeiro, goe you through the Towne to.
Siris there, is he?
He is there, see what humor he is in: and I will bring the Doctor about by the Fields: will it doe well?
We will doe it.
Adieu, good M. Doctor.
By-gar, me vill kill de Priest, for he speake for a Iack-an-Ape to.
Let him die: sheath thy impatience: throw cold water on thy Choller: goe about the fields with mee through, I will bring thee where Mistrisis, at a Farm-house a Feasting: and thou shalt wooe her: Cride-game, said I well?
By-gar, mee dancke you vor dat: by gar I loue you: and I shall procure 'a you de good Guest: de Earle, de Knight, de Lords, de Gentlemen, my patients.
For the which, I will be thy aduersary toward: said I well?
By-gar, 'tis good: vell said.
Let vs wag then.
Come at my heeles,.