Boy, bear the Torch faire: Now am I armd to fight with a Wind-mill, and to take the wall of an Emperor: Much drinke, no money: A heauyhead, and a light paire of heeles.
O, stand man?
I weare an excellent creature to make Punk of, I should downe with the least touch of a knaues finger, thou hast made a good night of this: What hast won Franke?
A matter of nothing, some hundred pounds.
This is the hel of al gamsters, I thinke when they are at play, the boord eates vp the money: For if there be fiue hundred pound lost, theres neuer but a hundred pounds wonne. Boy, takethe wall of any man, and yet by light, such deedes of darknes may not be.
What dost meane by that?
To saue charge, and walke like a Fury with a fire-brande in my hand, euery one goes by the light, & weel go by the smoke.
Boy, keepe the Wall: I will not budge for any man, by these Thumbs, and the paring of the Nayles shal stick in thy teeth not for a world.
Whose this, young Scarborrow?
The man that the Mare rid on.
Is this the reuerence that you owe to me?
You should haue brought me vp better.
That vice should thus transforme man to a beast.
Go to, your names Lorde, Ile talke with you when your out a debt and ha better cloaths.
I pitty thee euen with my very soule.
Pitty ith thy throat, I can drinke Muscadine and Egges, and Muld-sack, do you heare: you put a peece of turnd stuffe vpon me, but I wil --
What will you do Sir?
Pisse in thy way, and thats no slander.
Your sober blood wil teach you otherwise.
My honoured Lord, your happily wel met,
Ill met to see your Nephew in this case, More like a brute Beast, then a Gentleman.
Fie Nephew, shame you not thus to transform your self?
Can your nose smell a Torch.
Be not so wilde, it is thine Vnckle Scarborrow.
Why then tis the more likely tis my Fathers brother.
Shame to our name, to make thy selfe a Beast, Thy body worthy borne, and thy youths brest Tyld in due time for better discipline.
Thy selfe new married to a Noble house, Rich in possessions, and Posterity, Which should cal home thy vnstaid affections.
Where thou makst havock.
Ryot, spoyle, and wast.
Of what thy father left.
And liuest disgracst.
Ile send you shorter to heauen, then you came to the earth, do you Catechize? Do you Catechize?
Hold, hold, do you draw vpon your vnckle?
Pox of that Lord, Weele meet at Miter, where weele sup downe sorrow, We are drunke to night, and so weele be to morrow.
Why now I see: what I hard of, I beleeu'd not, Your kinsman liues.
Like to a swine.
A perfecthee feeds on draffe, And wallowes in the mire, to make men laugh, I pitty him.
No pitties fit for him.
Yet weele aduise him.
He is my kinsman.
Being in the pit where many do fall in, We wil both comfort him, and counsel him.
What shal we do now Butler?
A man had better lyne a good handsome payre of gallows before his time, then be born to do these sucklings good, their mothers milke not wrung out of their nose yet, they knowe no more how to behaue themselues in this honest and needeful calling of Purse-taking, then I do to peece stockings.
This way, This way, this way.
Sfut what shal we do now?
See if they do not quake like a trembling-Asp-leafe, and look more miserable then one of the wicked Elders picturd in the painted cloth, should they but come to the credit to be arraind for their valor, before a worshipfull bench, their very lookes woulde hang em, and they were indighted but for stealing of Egs.
Follow, follow, this way follow.
Butler.
Honest Butler.
Squat hart squat, creepe mee into these Bushes,lye me as close to the ground as you would do to a wench.
How good Butler, show vs how.
By the Moone patronesse of all purse-takers, who woulde be troubled with such Changelings, squat hart squat.
Thus Butler.
I so suckling, so, sturre not nowe, If the peering Rogues chance to goe ouer you, yet sturre not younger Brothers call you em, and haue no more forecast, I am ashamd of you, these are such whose fathers had neede leaue them money, euen to make them ready withall, for by this hiltes, they haue not wit to butten theyr sleeues without teaching, close, squat close. Now if the lot of hanging do fall to my share, so, then the Fathers old man drops for his young maisters. If it chance it chances, and when it chaunces, heauen and the Sheriffe send me a good rope, I wold not go vp the lather twice for any thing, in the meane time preuentions, honest preuentions do well, off with my skin, so you on the ground, and I to this tree to escape the Gallows.
Follow, follow, follow.
Do follow, if I do not deceiue you, Ile bid a poxe of this wit, and hang with a good grace.
Vp to this wood they tooke, search neare my friendes, I am this morne robd of three hundred pound.
I am sorry there was not foure to hae made euen money now by the Deuils hornes, tis Sir Iohn Harcop.
Leaue not a bush vnbeate, nor tree vnsearcht, as sure as I was robd the theeues went this way.
Theirs Nobody I perceiue but may lie at sometime for one of them climbd this wayes.
Stand, I heare a voice, and heres an Owle in an Iuy bush.
You lie, tis an old Seruingman in a Nut-tree.
Sirrah, sir, what make you in that tree.
Gathring of Nuts, that such fools as you are may cracke the shels, and I eat the kernels.
What fellowes that?
Sir Iohn Harcop, my Noble Knight, I am gladde of your good health, you beare your Age faier, you keep a good house, I ha fed at your boord, and bin drunke in your buttery.
But sirha: what made you in that tree? My man and I at foot of yonder hill Were by three knaues robd of three hundred pound.
A shrewd losse berlady sir, but your good worship may now see the fruit of being miserable: You will ride but with one man to saue hors-meat and mans meat at your Inne at night, & lose three hundred pound in a morning.
Sirha, I say I ha lost three hundred pound.
And I say sir, I wish all miserable knights might bee serued so: For had you kept halfe a dozen tall fellowes, as a man of your coat should do, they woulde haue helpt now to keep your money.
But tell me sir, why lurkt you in that tree?
Mary, I will tell you sir, Comming to the top of the hill where you (Right worshipfull) wer robd at the bottome, & seeing some a scuffling together, my mind strait gaue me ther were knaues abroad. Now sir, I knowing my selfe to be olde, tough, and vnwieldy, not being able to doe as I would, as muche as to say, Rescue you (right Worshipfull,) I like an honest man, one of the Kings liege people, and a good subiect
A sayes well Sir. Got me vp to the top of that tree: The tree (if it could speake) would beare me witnesse, that there I might see which way the knaues tooke, then to tell you of it, and you right worshipfullie to send hue to cry after em.
Was it so.
Nay twas so sir.
Nay then I tell thee they tooke into this wood.
And I tell thee (setting thy worsh. knighthood aside) he lyes in his throat that saies so: Had not one of them a white Frocke? Did they not bind your worships knighthoode by the thumbs? then fagoted you and the fool your man, back to back.
He sayes true.
Why then so truly, came not they into this wood, but tooke ouer the Lawnes, & left Winno steeple on the left hand.
It may be so, by this they are out of reach, Well, farewell it.
Ride with more men, good knight.
It shall teach me wit.
So, If this bee not playd a weapon beyonde a Schollers Prize, let me be hist at. Now to the next. Come out you Hedghogs?
O Butler, thou deserust to be chronicled for this.
Do not bely me, If I had my right I deserue to be hanged fort. But come, Downe with your dust, our mornings purchase.
Heer tis, Thou hast playd well, Thou deserust two shares in it.
Three hundred pound: A pretty breakfast: Many a ma~ workes harde all his daies and neuer sees halfe the money. But come, Tho it be badly got, it shalbe better bestowd. But do ye heare Galants, I ha not taught you this trade to get your liuings by. Vse it not, for if you doe, though I scapt by the Nut tree, be sure youle speed by the Rope: But for your paynes at this tyme, Theres a hundred pounds for you, how you shall bestow it, Ile giue you instructions. But do you heare, Looke you goe not to your Gilles, your Punkes, and your Cock-tricks with it, If I hear you do: as I am an honest theefe, tho I helpt you now out of the Bryers, Ile be a meanes yet to helpe you to the Gallowes. How the rest shall be employd I haue determined, and by the way Ile make you acquainted with it. To steale is bad, but taken where is store, The faults the lesse, being don to helpe the pore
Sure I ha sed my prayers, and liud vertuously a late, that this good fortunes befalne me. Looke Gallants: I am sent for to come downe to my Fathers buriall.
But dust meane to goe?
Troth no, Ile go down to take possession of his land, let the cu~try bury him & the wil: Ile stay here a while, to saue charg at his funerall.
And how dost feel thy selfe Franke, now thy father is dead?
As I did before, with my hands, how should I feel my selfe else? But Ile tell you newes Gallants.
Whats that? Dost meane now to serue God?
Faith partly, for I intend shortly to goe to Church, and from thence do faithfull seruice to one woman.
Good, I ha met my flesh-hooks together.
What, Dost meane to be marryed?
I Mungrell, Marryed.
Thats a bayt for me.
I will now be honestly marryed.
Its impossible, for thou hast bin a whoremayster this seauen yeare.
Tis no matter, I will now marry, And to som honest woman to, and so from hence her vertues shall be a countenance to my vices.
What shall she be, prethee?
No Lady, no widdow, nor no waiting gentlewoman, for vnder protection Ladyes may larde their husbands heads, Widdows will Woodcocks make, & chambermayds of serui~gme~ learn that, theyle ner forsake.
Who wilt thou wed then, prethe?
To any mayd, so she be fayr: To any mayd, so she be rich To any mayd so she be young: and to any mayde
So she be honest.
Faith, its no great matter for her honestye, for in these dayes, thats a Dowrie out of request.
From these Crabes will I gather sweetnesse: wherin Ile imitate the Bee, that sucks her hony, not from the sweetest flowers, but Timb the bitterest: So these hauing beene the meanes to begger my mayster, shalbe the helpes to releeue his brothers and sister.
To whom shall I now be a suter?
Faire fall ye Gallants.
Nay, and she be fayre she shall fall sure enough., how Ist good Butler.
Wil you be made gallants?
I, but not willingly Cuckolds, tho we are now talking about wiues.
Let your wiues agree of that after, will you first be richly married?
How Butler: richly married?
Rich in beauty, rich in purse, riche in vertue, riche in all things. But, Ile say nothing, I know of two or three rich heyres. But, my fiddlestick cannot play without Rozen: Auant.
Butler.
Dost not know me Butler?
For Kex, dryde Kex, that in summer ha bin so liberal to fodder other mens cattle, and scarce haue inough to keepe your owne in Winter. Mine are precious Cabinets, and must haue pretious Iewels put into them, and I know you to bemerchants of Stockfish, and not men for my market: Then vanish.
Come, ye old mad-cap you, what need all this? Cannot a man ha bin a little whoore-mayster in his youth, but you must vpbraide him with it, and tell him of his defects, which when he is maried, his wife shall finde in him? Why my fathers dead man now, who by his death has left me the better part of a thousand a yeare.
Tut, she of Lancashire has fifteen hundred.
Let me haue her then, good Butler.
And then shee the bright beauty of Leystershire, has a thousand, nay thirteen hundred a yeare, at least.
Or let me haue her, honest Butler.
Besides, she the most delicate, sweet countenanst, blacke browd gentlewoman in Northamptonshire, in substance equals the best of em.
Let me haue her then.
Or I.
Or I, good Butler.
You were best play the partes of right fooles, and most despera~te whore-maysters, and go together by the eares for the~ ere ye see them. But they are the moste rare featurd, well faced, excellent spoke, rare qualited, vertuous, and worthy to be admired gentlewoman,
And rich Butler?
(I that must be one, tho they want all the rest) And rich Gallants, as are from the vtmost parts of, to these present confines of Europe.
And wilt thou helpe vs to them Butler?
Faith, tis to be doubted, for pretious pearle will hardly be bought without pretiousstones, and I think theres scarse one indifferent one to be found, betwixt you three: yet since there is some hope ye may proue honest, as by the death of your fathersFathers youare proued rich, walke seuerally, for I knowing you all three to be couetous Tug-muttons will not trust you with the sight of each others beawty but will seuerally, talke with you, and since you haue deignd in this needfull portion of wedlocke to bee ruld by mee Butler, will most bountifully prouide wiues for you generally.
Why that honestly said.
Why so, and now first to your Sir Knight
Godamercy.
You see this couple of abhominable Woodcocks heare.
A pox on them, absolute Coxcomes.
You heard me tel them, I had Intelligence to giue of three Gentlewomen.
True.
Now indeed SirI ha but the performance of one.
Good.
And her I doe intende for you, onely for you.
Honest Butler.
Now sir, shee being but lately come to this towne, and so neerely watcht by the iealous eyes of her friends, she being a Rich heyre, least she should be stolne away by some disolute Prodigal, or desperat estated spend-thrift, as you ha bin Sir.
O but thats past Butler.
True I knowt, & intend now but to make vse of them, flatter with them with hopefull promises, and make them needefull instruments.
To helpe me to the wench,
You ha hit it which thus must be effected, first by keeping close your purpose.
Good.
Also concealing from them, the lodging beauty and riches of your new, but admirable Mistris.
Excellent.
Of which your following happines, if they should know either in enuy of your good, or hope of their owne aduancement theyd make our labours knowne to the gentlewomans Vncles, and so our benefit be frustrate.
Admirable Butler.
Which done, als but this, being as you shal be brought into hir company, and by mypraising your vertues you get possession of her Loue, one morning step to the tower, or to make al sure, hier some stipendary prieste for money: for Money in these dayes, what wil not be done, and what will not a man do for a rich wife, and with him make no more ado but marrie hir in hir lodging and being married, lie with her and spare not.
Do they not see vs, do they not see vs, let mee kisse thee, let me kisse thee Butler, let but this be done, and all the benefit requitall and happines I can promise thee fort, shall be this, Ile be thy rich maister, and thou shalt carry my purse.
Enough, meet me at her lodging some half an houre hence: harke she lies.
I hate.
Faile not.
Will I liue.
I wil but shift of these two Rhinoceros,
Wigens, wingens, a couple of guls.
With some discourse of hope to wiue them two, and be with you straight.
Blest day, my loue shal be thy cushion honest Butler.
So now to my tother Gallants.
O Butler, we ha bin in passion at thy tediousnes,
Why looke you. I had al this talke for your good.
Hadst.
For you know the knight is but a scuruy-proud-prating-Prodigall, licentious vnnecessary.
An Asse, an Asse, an Asse.
Now you heard me tel him I had three Wenches in store,
And he would ha had them al would he.
Heare me, tho he may liue to be an Oxe, he had not now so much of the Goat in him, but onely hopes for one of the three when indeed I ha but two, and knowing you to bee men of more vertue, and deerer in my respect intend them to be yours.
We shal honor thee.
But how Butler.
I am now going to their place of residence, scituate in the choisest place in the Citty, and at the signe of the Wolfe iust against Gold-smiths-rowwhere you shal meet me, but ask not for me, only walk too and fro and to auoid suspition you may spende some conference withthe Shop-keepers wiues, they haue seats built a purpose for such familiar entertainment, where froma bay window which is opposite, I wil make you knowne to your desired beauties, commende the good parts you haue.
Bith masse mine are very few.
And win a kind of desire, as women are soone wonne to make you bee beloued where you shall firste kisse, then Woe, at length Wed, and at last bed my Noble harts.
O Butler.
Wenches bona robes, blessed beauties, without colour or counterfet: Away, put on your best Cloaths, get you to the Barbers, Curle vp your haire, walke with the best strouts you can, you shal see more at the Window, and I ha vowd to make you.
Wilt thou.
Both Fooles, and Ile want of my wit but Ile doot.
We wil liue together as felowes.
As Brothers.
As arrant knaues if I keepe you company, O, the most wretched season of this time, These men like Fish, do swim within one streame, Yet theyd eat one another, making no Conscience To drinke with them theyd poyson, no offence, Betwixt their thoughts and actions haue controle, But headlong run, like an vnbiacst Bowle, Yet I will throw them on, but like to him, At play knowes how to loose, and when to win.
Butler.
O, are you come. And fit as I appointed: so, tis wel, you knowe your kues, and haue instructions howe to beare your selues: Al, as is fit, play but your part, your states from hence are firme.
What shal I tearme this creature not a man.
Hees not of mortals temper but hees one, Made all of goodnes, tho of flesh and bone, O Brother, brother, but for that honest man, As neere to misery had bin our breath, As where the thundring pellet strikes is death,
I, my shift of shirts and change of cloths knowt.
Well tel of him, like bels whose musick rings One Coronation day for ioy of Kings, That hath preseru'd their steeples not like towles, That summons liuing tears for the dead soules.
Gods preciousSir, the hel Sir, euen as you had new kist, and were about to court her, if her Vncles be not come.
A plague on thee, spit out.
But tis no matter Sir, stay you heere in this vpper chamber, & Ile stay beneath with her, tis ten to one you shal hear them talke now, of the greatnes of her possessions, the care they haue to see her well bestowed, the admirablenes of her vertues, all which for all their comming, shall be but happines ordained for you, & by my meanes be your inheritance.
Then thou't shift them away, and keepe from the sighte of them.
Haue I not promist to make you.
Thou hast.
Go to then, rest heere with patience, and be confident in my trust, onely in my absence, you may praise God for the blessednes you haue to come, and say your prayers if you will, Ile but prepare her hart for entertainement of your loue, dismisse them, for your free accesse, and returne straight.
Honest-blest-natural-friend, thou dealest with mee like a Brother: Butler,
Sure heauen hath reserued this man to weare Grey-hairs to do me good, now wil I listen, listen close, and sucke in her Vncles words with a reioycing eare,
As we were saying Brother, Where shal we find a husband for my Neece.
Marry she shal find one heere tho you little knowt, thanks,Thankes honest Butler.
She is left rich in Money, Plate, and Iewels.
Comfort, comfort to my soule.
Hath all her manner houses richly furnished.
Good, good, Ile find imployment for them.
Speake loud enough that he may heare you.
I take her state to be about a thousand pound a yeare,
And that which my father, hath left me, will make it about fifteene, hundred admirable.
In debtto no man, then must our natural care be, As she is wealthy to see her married well.
And that she shall be as well as the priest can, hee shall not, Leaue out a word ont.
I thinke she has.
What a Gods name.
About foure thousand pound in her great chest.
And Ile find a vent fort I hope.
Shee is vertuous, and she is faire.
And she were foule, being rich, I would be glad of her.
Pisht, pisht.
Come, weele go visit her, but with this care, That to no spend-thrift we do marry her.
You may chance be deceiued old gray-beardes, heares hee will spend some of it, thankes, thankes, honest Butler, now doe I see the happines of my future estate, I walke me as to morrow, being the day after my marriage, with my fourteene men in Liuerie cloakes after me, and step to the wall in some cheefe streete of the Citty, tho I ha no occasion to vse it, that the Shop-keepers may take notice how many followers stand bare to mee, and yet in thys latter age, the keeping of men being not in request, I will turne my aforesaid fourteen into two Pages and two Coaches, I wil get me selfe into grace at Court, runne head-long into debt, and then looke scuruily vpon the Citty, I wil walke you into the presence in the afternoone hauing put on a richer sute, then I wore in the morning, and call boy or sirrah, I wil ha the grace of some great Lady though I pay fort, and at the next Triumphes runne a Tilte, that when I runne my course, though I breake not my launce: she may whisper to her selfe, looking vppon my Iewel, wel run my knightI will now keepe great horses, scorning to haue a Queane to keep me, indeede I will practise all the Gallantry in vse, for by a Wyfe comes all my happines.
Now sir, you ha heard her Vnckles, and how do you lyke them.
O But. they ha made good thy words, & I am rauisht with the~.
And hauing seen & kist the gentlewo. how do you like hir?
O Butler beyonde discourse, shee's a Paragon for a Prince, then a fit Implement for a Gentleman, beyond my Element.
Well then, since you like her, and by my meanes, she shall like you, nothing rests now but to haue you married.
True Butler, but withall to haue her portion.
Tut, thats sure yours when you are maried once, for tis hirs by Inheritance, but do you loue her?
O, with my soule.
Ha you sworne as much.
To thee, to her, and ha cald heauen to witnes.
How shall I know that.
Butler, heere I protest, make vowes Irreuocable.
Vpon your knees.
Vpon my knees, with my hart, and soule I loue her.
Will liue with her.
Will liue with her.
Marry her and maintaine her.
Marry her and maintaine hir.
For her forsake al other women.
Nay for her forsweare all other women.
In al degrees of Loue.
In all degrees of Loue, either to Court, kisse, giue priuate fauours, or vse priuate meanes, Ile doe nothing that married men being close whoremaisters do, so I may haue her.
And yet you hauing bin an open whoremaister, I will not beleeue you til I hear you sweare as much in the way of contract to her selfe, and call me to bee a witnesse.
By heauen, by earth, by Hell, by all that man can sweare, I will, so I may haue her.
Enough. Thus at first sight, rash men to women sweare, When such oaths broke, heauen greeues and sheds a teare: But shees come, ply her, ply her.
Kind Mistres, as I protested, so againe I vow. Ifaith I loue you.
And I am not Sir so vncharitable, To hate the man that loues me.
Loue me then, The which loues you as Angels loues good men, Who wish them to liue with them euer, In that high blisse whom hell cannot disseuer.
Ile steale away and leaue them, so wise men do, Whom they would match, let them ha leaue to wo.
Mistris I knowyour worth is beyond my desert, yet by my praising of your virtues, I woulde not haue you as women vse to do, become proud.
None of my affections are prides children, nor a kin to them
Can you loue me then?
I can, for I loue al the world, but am in loue with none.
Yet be in loue with me, let your affections Combine with mine, and let our soules Like Turtles haue a mutual Simpathy, Who loue so well, that they together die, Such is my life, who couets to expire, If it should loose your loue.
May I beleeue you?
Introth you may, Your lifes my life, your death my dying day.
Sir the commendations I haue receiued from Butler of your byrth and worth, together with the Iudgement of mine owne eie, bids me beleeue and loue you.
O seale it with a kisse, Blest hower my life had neuer ioy till this.
Here about is the house sure.
We cannot mistake it, for heres the signe of the Wolfe and the Bay-window.
What so close? Tis well, I ha shifted away your Vncles Mistris, but see the spight Sir Francis, if yon same couple of Smel-smockes, Wentloe and Bartley, ha not sented after vs.
A poxe on em, what shall we do then Butler?
What but be married straight man.
I but how Butler.
Tut, I neuer faile at a dead lift, for to perfect your blisse, I haue prouided you a Priest.
Where, prethe Butler where?
Where? But beneath in her Chamber. I ha fild his hands with Coine, and he shall tye you fast with wordes, he shall close your hands in one, and then doe clap your selfe into her sheetes and spare not.
O sweete.
Downe, downe, tis the onely way for you to get vp. Thus in this taske, for others good I toyle, And she kinde Gentlewoman weds her selfe, Hauing bin scarcely woed, and ere her thoughts, Haue learnd to loue him, that being her husband, She may releeue her, brothers in their wantes, She marries him to helpe her nearest kin, I make the match, and hope it is no sinne.
Sfut it is scuruy Walking, for vs so neare the two Counters, would he would come once?
Masse hees yonder: Now Butler.
O Gallants are you here, I ha done wonders for you commended you to the Gentlewomen, who hauing taken note of your good legs, and good faces, haue a liking to you, meet me beneath.
Happy Butler.
They are yours, and you are theirs, meet me beneath I say. By this they are wed, I and perhaps haue bedded.
Now followes whether knowing shee is poore, Heele swear he lou'd her as he swore before.
Ho Sirrha, who would ha thought it, I perceiue now a woman may be a maid, be married, and loose her maiden-head, and all in halfe and an hower, and how doest like me now wench.
As doth befit your seruant and your wife, That owe you loue and duty al my life.
And there shal be no Loue lost, nor seruice neither, Ile do thee seruice at boord, and thou shalt do me seruice a bed: Nowe must I as youngmarried men vse to do, kisse my portion out of my yong wife. Thou art my sweet Rogue, my Lambe, my Pigsny, my play-fellow, my pretty pretty any thing, come a busse prethee, so tis my kind hart, and wats thou what now?
Not till you tel me Sir,
I ha got thee with Childe in my Conscience, and lyke a kind Husbande, methinkes I breede it for thee. For I am alreadie sicke at my stomacke and long extremely. Now must thou bee my helpful Physition, and prouide for me.
Euen to my blood, Whats mine is yours, to gaine your peace or good.
What a kind soule is this, could a man haue found a greater content in a wife, if he should ha sought thorough the worlde for her: Prethy hart as I said, I long, and in good troth I do, and methinkes thy first childe wil bee borne without a nose, if I loose my longing, tis but for a trifle too, yet methinkes it wil do me no good vnlesse thou effect it for me. I could take thy keyes my selfe, go into thy Closet, and read ouer the deeds and euidences of thy Land, & in reading ouer them, reioice I had such blest fortune to haue so fayre a wife with so much endowment, and then open thy Chests, and suruey thy Plate, Iewels, Treasure. But a pox ont, al will doe me no good, vnlesse thou effect it for me.
Sir I wil shew you al the wealth I haue, Of Coyne, of Iewels, or Possessions,
Good gentle hart, Ile giue thee another busse for that, for that giue thee a new gowne to morrow morning, by this hand do thou but dreame what stuffe and what Fashion thou wilt haue it on to night.
The land I can endow you with, is my Loue, The riches I possesse for you is loue, A Treasure greater then is Land or Gold, It cannot be forfeited, and it shal neare be sold.
Loue I know that, and Ile answer thee loue for. Loue in abundance: but come prethee come, lets see these deedes andeuidences, this Mony, Plate, and Iewels, wilt ha thy Childe borne without a nose, if thou beest so carelesse, spare not, why my little frappet you, I heard thy Vnckles talk of thy riches, that thou hadst hundreds a yeare, seuerall Lord-ships, Mannours Houses, Thousands of poundes in your great Chests, Iewels, Plate, and Ringes in your little Box.
And for that riches you did marry me.
Troth I did, as now adaies Batchelers do sware I lou'd thee but indeed married thee for thy wealth.
Sir I beseech you, say not your oths were such, So like falce coyne, being put vnto the touch, Who beare a flourish in the outward show, Of a true stampe, but truely are not so, You swore me loue, I gaue the like to you, Then as a ship being wedded to the sea, Dus either sayle or sinke, euen so must I, You being the hauen to which my hopes must flie.
True Chucke I am thy hauen, and harbor too, And like a ship I took thee, who brings home Treasure As thou to me, the Marchant-venturer.
What riches I am ballast with are yours.
Thats kindly saide now,
If but with sand, as I am but with earth, Being your right of right, you must receiue me, I ha no other lading but my Loue, Which in abundance I willrender you, If other fraught you do expect my store, Ile pay you teares, my riches, are no more.
Howes this? howes this? I hope you do but Iest,
I am Sister to decaied Scarborrow.
Ha.
Whose substance your Inticements did consume.
Worse then an Ague.
Which as you did beleeue so they supposed, Twas fitter for your selfe then for another, To keepe the sister, had vndone the brother.
I am guld by this hand. An old Coni catcher, and beguild; where the pox now are my two Coaches, choise of houses, seuerallsutes, a plague on them, and I knowe not what: Doe you heare Puppet, do you thinke you shal not be damned for this, to Cosen a Gentleman of his hopes, and compell your selfe into Matrimony with a man, whether hee wil or no with you, I ha made a fayre match yfaith, wil any man buy my commodity out of my hand, as God saue me he shall haue her for halfe the money she cost me.
O, ha we met you Sir.
What, turnd Micher, steale a wife, and not make your old friends acquainted with it.
A pox on her, I would you had her.
Wel, God giue you Ioy, we can heare of your good fortune, now tis done, tho we could not be acquainted with it aforehand.
As that you haue two thousand pound a yeare.
Two or three mannor houses.
A wife, faire, rich, and vertuous.
Pretty infaith, very pretty.
Store of Gold.
Plate in abundance.
Better, better, better.
And so many Oxen, that their hornes are able to store al the Cuckolds in your Country.
Do not make me mad good Gentlemen, do not make me mad, I could be made a Cuckold with more patience, then indure this.
Foe we shal haue you turne proud now, grow respectles of your Ancient acquaintance, why Butler told vs of it: Who was the maker of the match for you?
A pox of his furtheraunce, Gentlemen as you are Christians, vex me no more, that I am married I confesse, a plague of the Fates, that wedding and hanging comes by desteny, but for the riches she has brought, beare witnes how Ile rewarde her.
Sir.
Whore, I and Iade, Witch, Ilfacst, stinking-breath, crooked-nose, worse then the Deuill, and a plague on thee that euer I saw thee.
A Comedy, a Comedy.
Whats the meaning of all this, is this the maske after thy marriage.
O Gentlemen, I am vndone, I am vndone, for I am marryed, I that could not abide a Woman, but to make her a whore, hated all Shee-creatures, fayre and poore, swore I would neuer marry but to one that was rich, and to be thus cunnicacht. Who do you thinke this is Gentlemen?
Why your wife, Who should it be else?
Thats my misfortune, that marrying her in hope she was rich, she prooues to be the beggerly Sister to the more beggerly Scarborrow.
How?
Ha, ha, ha.
I, you may laugh, but she shall cry as well as I for't,
Nay, do not weepe.
He dus but counterfeit now to delude vs, he has all her portion of Land, Coyne, Plate, Iewels: and now dissembles thus least we should borrow some Mony of him.
And you be kinde Gentlemen lend me some, for hauing payd the Priest, I ha not so much left in the world, as will higher me a horse to carry me away from her.
But art thou thus guld infaith.
Are you sure you ha eyes in your head.
Why then, By her brothers setting one in my conscience, who knowing thee now to ha somewhat to take to, by the death of thy father, and that hee hath spent her portion, and his owne possessions, hath laid this plot, for thee to marry her, and so he to be rid of her himselfe.
Nay, thats without question, but Ile be reuenged of em both, for you Minxe. Nay Sfut, giue em me, or Ile kicke else.
Good, sweete.
Sweete with a poxe, you stinke in my nose, giue me your Iewels? Nay Bracelets too.
O me, most miserable.
Out of my sight, I and out of my doores, for now, whats within this house is mine, and for your brother He made this match, in hope to do you good, And I weare this for which, shall draw his bloud.
A braue resolution.
In which wele second thee.
Away, whore, Out of my doores whore.
O greefe, that pouerty should ha that power to teare Men from themselues, tho they wed, bed, and sweare.
How now sister.
Vndone, vndone.
Why Mistris, how ist? how ist?
My husband has forsooke me.
O periury.
Has taine my Iewels, and my Bracelets from me.
Vengeance, I playd the theefe for the mony that bought em.
Left me distrest, and thrust mee forth a doores.
Damnation on him, I will heere no more, But for his wrong reuenge me on my brother, Degenerate, and was the cause of all, He spent our portion, and Ile see his fall.
O but Brother.
Perswade me not. All hopes are shipwract, miserie comes on, The comfort we did looke from him is frustrate, All meanes, all maintenance, but griefe is gone. And all shall end by his destruction.
Ile follow and preuent, what in this heat may happen, His want makes sharpe his sword, to greates the ill, If that one brother should another kill.
And what will you do Mistris?
Ile sit me downe, sigh loude in stead of wordes, And wound my selfe with griefe as they with swords. And for the sustenance that I should eate, Ile feed on griefe, tis woes best rellisht meate.
Good hart I pitty you, You shall not be so cruell to your selfe, I haue the poore Seruingmans allowance, Twelue pence adaye to buy me sustenance, One meale aday Ile eate, the totherfast, To giue your wantes reliefe. And Mistris Be this some comfort to your miseries, Ile ha thin cheekes, eare you shall ha wet eyes.
What is prodigallity? Faith like a Brush That weares himselfe to florish others cloathes, And hauing worne his hart euen to the stump, Hees throwne away like a deformed lump. Oh such am I, I ha spent all the wealth My ancestors did purchase, made others braue In shape and riches, and my selfe a knaue. For tho my wealth raisd some to paint their doore, Tis shut against me, saying I am but poore: Nay, euen the greatest arme, whose hand hath grast, My presence to the eye of Maiesty, shrinkes back, His fingers cluch, and like to lead, They are heauy to raise vp my state, being dead. By which I find, spendthriftes, and such am I, Like strumpets florish, but are foule within, And they like Snakes, know when to cast their skin.
Turne, draw, and dye, I come to kill thee.
Whats he that speakes? Like sicknesse: Oh ist you, Sleepe still, you cannot mooue me, fare you well.
Thinke not my fury slakes so, or my bloud Can coole it selfe to temper by refusall, Turne or thou dyest.
Away.
I do not wish to kill thee like a slaue, That taps men in their cups, and broch their harts, Eare with a warning peece they haue wakt their eares, I would not like to powder shoote thee downe, To a flat graue, ere thou hast thought to frowne: I am no Coward, but in manly tearmes, And fayrest oppositions vow to kill thee.
From whence proceedes this heat.
From sparkles bred by thee, that like a villain.
Ha.
Ile hallow it in thine eares till thy soule quake to heare it, That like a villain hast vndone thy brothers.
Would thou wert not so neere me: yet farewell.
By nature, and her lawes make vs a kinne,As neere as are these hands, or sin to sinne. Draw and defend thy selfe, or Ile forget Thou art a man.
Would thou were not my Brother?
I disclaime them.
Are wee not off-spring of one parent wretch.
I do forget it, pardon me the dead, I should deny the paines you bid for me. My blood growes hot for vengeance, thou hast spent My liues reuenewes that our parents purchast.
O do not wracke me with remembrance ont.
Thou hast made my life a Begger in this world, And I will make thee bankrout of thy breath: Thou hast bin so bad, the best I can giue, Thou art a Deuill, not with men to liue.
Then take a Deuils payment.
Hees here, draw Gentlemen.
Die Scarborrow.
Girt round with death.
How set vpon by three, Sfut feare not Brother, you Cowards, three to one, slaues, worse then Fensers that wear long weapons. You shall be fought withall, you shall be fought withall.
Brother I thanke you, for you now haue bin A patron of my life, forget the sinne I pray you, which my loose and wastfull houres, Hath made against your Fortunes, I repent em, And wish I could new ioynt and strength your hopes, Tho with indifferent ruine of mine owne. I haue a many sinnes, the thought of which Like finisht Needles pricke me to the soule, But find your wronges, to haue the sharpest point. If penitence your losses might repayre, You should be rich in wealth, and I in care.
I do beleeue you Sir, but I must tell you,Euils the which are gainst an other done, Repentance makes no satisfaction To him that feeles the smart. Our father sir, Left in your trust my portion: you ha spent it, And suffered me (whilst you in ryots house, A drunken Tauerne, spild my maintainance Perhaps vpon the ground with ouerflowne cups, Like birds in hardest winter halfe starud, to flie) And picke vp any food, least I should die.
I prethee let vs be at peace together.
At peace for what? For spending my inheritance, By yonder sun that euery soule has life by, As sure as thou hast life Ile fight with thee.
Ide not be moou'd vntoot.
Ile kill thee then, wert thou now claspt Within thy mother, wife, or childrens armes.
Wouldst homicide? art so degenerat? Then let my blood grow hot.
For it shall coole.
To kill rather then bee kild is manhoods rule.
Stay let not your wraths meet.
Hart, what makst thou here?
Say who are you, or you, are you not one, That scarce can make a fit distinction Betwixt each other. Are you not Brothers?
I renounce him.
Shalt not need.
Giue way.
Haue at thee,
Who sturs, which of you both hath strength within his arm To wound his owne brest, whose so desperate, To dam himselfe by killing of himselfe, Are you not both one flesh?
Hart, giue me way.
Be not a bar betwixt vs, or by my sword Ile mete thy graue out.
O do, for Gods sake do?Tis happy death, if I may die and you Not murther one another. O do but harken, When dus the Sunne and Moone borne in one frame Contend, but they breed Earthquakes in mens harts: When any starre prodigiously appeares, Tels it not fall of kings or fatall yeares. And then if Brothers fight, what may men thinke, Sinne growes so high, tis time the world should sinke.
My hart growes coole againe, I wish it not.
Stop not my fury, or by my life I sweare, I will reueale the robbery we ha done, And take reuenge on thee, That hinders me to take reuenge on him.
I yeild to that, but neare consent to this, I shall then die as mine owne sinne affords, Fall by the law, not by my Brothers swords.
Then by that light that guids me here I vow, Ile straight to Sir Iohn Harcop, and make knowne We were the two that robd him.
Prethy do.
Sin has his shame, and thou shalt ha thy due.
Thus haue I shewne the nature of a Brother, Tho you haue prou'd vnnaturall to me. Hees gone in heate to publish out the theft, Which want and your vnkindnes forcst vs to, If now I die that death and publicke shame, Is a Corsiue to your soule, blot to your name.
O tis too true, theres not a thought I thinke, But must pertake thy greefes, and drinke A rellish of thy sorrow and misfortune. With waight of others teares I am ore borne, That scarse amto hold vp mine owne, And al to good for me. A happy Creature In my Cradle, and haue made my selfe The common curse of mankind by my life, Vndone my Brothers, made them theeues for bread, And begot pretty children to liue beggers, O Conscience, how thou are stung to thinke vpont,My Brothers vnto shame must yeeld their blood, My Babes at others stirrops beg their food, Or else turne theeuesto, and be choakt fort, Die a Dogs death, be percht vpon a tree, Hang betwixt heauen and earth, as fit for neither, The curse of heauen thats due to reprobates, Discends vpon my Brothers, and my children, And I am parent to it, I, I am parent to it.
Where are you Sir?
Why starest thou, whats thy hast?
Heeres felowes swarme like flies to speake with you.
What are they?
Snakes I thinke Sir, for they come with stinges in theyr mouths, and their tongues are turnd to teeth to: They claw Villanously, they haue eate vp your honest name, and honourable reputation by railing against you, and now they come to deuoure your possessions.
In playner Euargy, what are they, speake?
Mantichoras, monstrous beastes, enemies to mankinde, that ha double rowes of teeth in their mouthes. They are Vsurers, they come yawning for mony, & the Sheriffe with them, is come to serue an extent vppon your Lande, and then cease on your bodie by force of execution, they ha begirt the house round.
So that the roofe our Auncestors did build For their sonnes comfort, and their wiues for Charity, I dare not to looke out.
Besides Sir, heres your poore children.
Poore children they are indeede.
Come with fire and water: teares in their eies, and burning greefe in their harts, and desire to speake with you.
Heape sorrow vpon sorrow? Tell me, are My brothers gone to execution? For what I did, for euery haynous sin, Sits on his soule by whom it did begin. And so did theirs by me. Tell me withall, My children carry moysture in their eyes, Whose speaking drops, say father, thus must weAske our reliefe, or die with infamy, For you ha made vs beggers. Yet when thy tale has kild me to giue my passage comfort from this stage, Say all was done by inforst marriage: My graue will then be welcome.
What shall we do sir?
Do as the deuill dus, hate panther-mankind, And yet I lie: for deuils sinners loue, When men hate men, tho good like some aboue.
Your wifes come in sir.
Thou lyest, I ha not a wife. None can be cald, True man and wife, but those whom heauen instald. Say,
O my deere husband?
You are very welcome, peace: wele ha complement. Who are you Gentlewoman.
Sir your distressed wife, and these your children.
Mine? Where, how begot: Proue me by certaine instance thats deuine, That I should call them lawful, or thee mine.
Were we not marryed sir?
No, tho we heard the words of Ceremonie, But had hands knit as fellons that weare fetters Forst vpon them. For tell me woman, Did ere my Loue with sighs intreat thee mine, Did euer I in willing conference, Speake words, made halfe with teares that I did loue thee. Or was I euer But glad to see thee as al Louers are. No, no, thou knowst I was not.
O me.
The mores the pitty.
But when I came to Church, I did there stand All water, whose forcst breach had drownd my Land, Are you my wife, or these my children? Why tis impossible, for like the skies, Without the sunnes light, so looke al your eies, Darke, Clowdy, thicke, and ful of heauines,Within my Country there was hope to see Me and my yssue to be like our fathers, Vpholders of our Country, al our life, Which should ha bin, if I had wed a wife. Where now, As dropping leaues in Autume you looke al, And I that should vphold you like to fal,
Twas, nor, shal be my fault, Heauen bear me witnes.
Thou lyest? strumpet thou lyest?
O Sir.
Peace sawcie Iacke, strumpet I say thou lyest, For wife of mine thou art not, and these thy Basterds Whom I begot of thee, with this vnrest, That Bastards borne, are borne not to be Blest
One me poure al your wrath, but not on them.
On thee, and them, fortis the end of lust, To scourge it selfe, heauen lingring to be iust: Harlot.
Husband.
Bastardes.
Father.
What hart not pitties this?
Euen in your Cradle, you were accurst of heauen, Thou an Adulteresse in thy married armes. And they that made the match, bawds to thy lust: I, now you hang the heade, shouldst ha done so before, Then these had not bin Bastards, thou a whore.
I cannot brookt no longer, Sir you doe not well in this?
Ha slaue.
Tis not the aime of gentry to bring forth, Such harsh vnrellisht fruit vnto their wiues, And to their pretty pretty children by my troth.
How rascall.
Sir I must tel you, your progenitors Two of the which these yeares were seruant to, Had not such mists before their vnderstanding, Thus to behaue themselues.
And youle controule me sir.
I, I, will.
You rogue.
I, tis I, will tel you tis vngently done Thus to defame your wife, abuse your children, Wrong them, you wrong your selfe, are they not yours?
Pretty, pretty Impudence infaith.
Her whom your are bound to loue, to raile against, These whom you are bound to keepe, to spurne like dogs, And you were not my maister, I would tell you.
What slaue.
Put vp your Bird-spit, tut I feare it not, In doing deeds so base, so vild as these, Tis but a Kna, kna, kna.
Roge.
Tut howsoeuer, tis a dishonest part, And in defence of these I throwoff duty
Good Butler.
Peace honest Mistris, I will say you are wronged, Proue it vpon him euen in his blood, his bones, His guts, his Maw, his Throat, his Intrals.
You runnagate of threescore,
Tis better then a knaue of three and twenty.
Patience be my Buckler, As not to file my hands in villaines blood, You knaue Slaue-trencher-groome Who is your maister?
You if you were a maister.
Off with your coate then, get you forth a dores.
My cote sir.
I your coat slaue?
Sfut when you hate, tis but a thred-bare coat, And there tis for you: know that I scorne To weare his Liuery is so worthy borne, And liue so base a life, old as I am, Ile rather be a begger then your man, And theres your seruice for you.
Away, out of my doore: Away. So, now your Champions gone, Minx thou hadst better ha gone quick vnto thy graue.
O me, that am no cause of it.
Then haue subornd that slaue to lift his hands against me.
O me, what shall become of me?
Ile teach you tricks for this, ha you a companion.
My hart not suffer me to leaue my honest Mistris and hir pretty children.
Ile marke thee for a strumpet, and thy Bastards.
What will you do to them Sir.
The Deuill in thy shape come backe againe.
No, but an honest seruant Sir wil take this cote, And weare it with this sword to sauegard these, And pitty them, and I am wo for you, But will not suffer The husband Viper-like to pray on them That loue him, and haue cherisht him as these, As they haue you.
Slaue.
I will not humour you, Fight with you, and loose my life or these Shal tast your wrong whom you are bound to loue.
Out of my doores slaue.
I will not, but wil stay and weare this coat, And do you seruice whether you will or no. Ile weare this sword to, and be Champion, To fight for her in spight of any man.
You shall. You shall be my maister Sir.
No, I desire it not, Ile pay you duty euen vpon my knee, But loose my life, ere these opprest Ile see.
Yes goodman slaue, you shal be master, Lie with my wife, and get more Bastards, do, do ,do.
O me.
Turnes the world vpside downe, that men orebeare theyr Maisters, It dus, it dus. For euen as Iudas sold his Maister Christ, Men buy and sell their wiues at highest price, What wil you giue me? what wil you giue me? what wil you giue me?O, Mistris, My soule weeps, tho mine eyes be dry, To see his fall and your aduersity, Some meanes I haue left, which Ile releeue you with, Into your chamber, and if comfort be a kin To such great greefe, comfort your children.
I thanke thee Butler, heauen when he please, Send death vnto the troubled a blest ease.