What, is it so broad day? God send vs the light of Heauen.Hoe! who is in the inner Chamber? how now Maidens, heere you not? are you deafe?
I am heere Madam.
Why doe you suffer me to sleepe so long? I am ashamed of my selfe truely,
I came heather soft and faire, once or twice, to see if you were awaked, and seeing you a sleepe I durst not awake you, but it is not so late as you thinke.
What is it a clocke?
it is but halfe an houre past seauen.
what is it so farre day? Oh God! I went to bed yesternight so timely, thinking to rise this morning, at y=e= farthest at 6. a clock: now I verifie in me the graue speeches of that great Philosopher the Emperorspeaking of the vnsatiablenes of mankinde, when he said (among other things) the more I sleep, the more I would sleep. Go too go too, draw the windowe Curtaines: call my Page, let him bring some wood to my Chamber doore, make a fier quickly that I may rise.
Page where are you? what are you not readye? I thinke you must hauea Chamberlaine.
How now? what haue you seene this morning? hath your Louer broken promise with you? how sharp you are! how wel you play the Mistresse? my Lady could not chide better, what ayleth you?
I crye you mercye sir, haue I offended you? one may not speake to you, but with reuerence, you haue forgotten your last beating, you haue great need that my Lady remember you, it is so long since shee made you be whipped: will it please you to fetch some wood? bring some faggots and billets, forget not a bauen, and see that it be drye, for the faggots are too greene, lay them at the Chamber doore, & come not in the chamber vntil my Lady be vp, or that you be called, hasten you.
O God! how long you make me tarrye! kindle the fire quickly, warme my smocke, and giue it me. Where is Ioly? call her:
she commeth Madame Mistresse Iolye, My Ladye calleth you in great hast:
Good Lord! what shall I doe? she will chide me, I pray thee sweet heart, help me a little to put on my gowne, giue me that Rebato as it is, I will pin it anone, I haue not leysure to doe it now: I cannotfinde my Kertle nor my aprone, I giue you great thankes, I will an other time, doe so much for you.
Mend that same a little, that hangeth behinde you.
I am well enough I will dresse my selfe better anone. let me goe, I heare my Ladye call.
Will you keepe me heere all the day? where be all my thinges? goe fetch my cloathes: bring my petty-coate bodyes: I meane my damask quilt bodies with whale bones, what lace doe you giue me heere? this lace is too shorte, the tagges are broken, I cannot lace my selfe with it, take it away, I will haue that of greene silke: when shall I haue my vnder coate? giue me my peticoate of wroughtCrimson veluet with siluer fringe: why doe you not giue me my night gowne? for I take colde: where be my stockens? giue me some cleane sockes, I will haue no woorsted hosen, showe me my Carnation silke stockins: where laide you last night my garters? take away these slippers, giue me my veluet pantofles; send for the shoomaker that he may haue againe these turn-ouer shooes, for they be too high Put on my white pumpes: let them vp I will none of them: Giue me rather my Spanish leather shooes, for I will walketo day, This shooing-horne hurteth me, Can you not put them on with the furre? Tye the strings with a strong double knot, for feare they vntye them-selues: Iolye, come dresse my head, set the Table further from the fire, it is too neere. Put my chayre in his place, Why doe you not set my great looking glasse on the table? It is too high, set the supporter lower, Vndoe my night attire: Why doe you not call the Page to warme the rubbers? let him be called: heere sirra warme that, and take heed you burne it not. I praye you Iolye rubbe well my head, for it is very full of dandrife, are not my combes in the case? Where is my Iuorye combe? Combe mee with the boren combe: Giue me first my combing cloth, otherwise you will fill me full of haires, the haires will fall vpon my cloathes, Combe backe-ward, O God! you combe too harde, you scratch me, you pull out my hayres, can you not vntangle them softly with your handes before you put the combe to it?
will it please you to rise vp a little Madame? For your haires are so long, that they trayle on the ground
My daughter Fleurimonde is like me in that,hath she not faire haires, what say you of it?
Truly Madame she hath the fayrest, the longest flaxen-couler haires that one can see, there needeth no curling of them, for they are curled of themselues, In truth she hath the fayrest head of haires that euer I sawe.
I like her the better for it, it is a thing verye comely for a woman, and assaith, It is an Ornament vnto her, but whilst we prattle, we forget that the time goeth away: go too, I am combed enough. Page, take the combe-brushes, and make cleane my combes, take heed you doe not make them cleane with those that I vse to my head: take a quill to take away the filth from them, and then put them in the case, that none be missing: go too, make an end of dressing my head.
What doth it please you to weare to day Madame? will it please you to weare your haires onely, or els to haue your French whood?
giue me my whood, for me thinketh it is some-what colde, and I haue a rewme which is falne on the left side of my head, But tarrye, what weather is it?
Truely Madame it seemeth that this day will be the fayrest day that hath bene this great while.
I perceiue that you would haue me to take another attyre, and for to please you, I am content of it, but if I be sicke thereby, I will laye the blame on you.
Noe with the grace of God Madame.
Set vp then my French whood and my Border of Rubies, giue me an other head attyre: take the key of my closet, and goe fetch my long boxe where I set my Iewels (for to haue them out) that I vse to weare on my head, what is become of my wyer? where is the haire cap? haue you any ribans to make knots? where be the laces for to binde my haires? go too Page giue me some water to wash, where's my muske ball? giue me rather my paste of Almonds, for it scoureth better: where is my piece of Scarlet to wipe my face? giue me that napkin: now set on my Carkenet of precious stones: call my Taylor to bring my gowne, not the close one, but my open gowne of white Sattin layd on with buttons of Pearle. Prudence, giue me my bracelets of Aggathes Shall I haue no vardingale? you remember nothing, you haue a Coneyes memorye, you lose it in running, go too you head-braine fellowe, Page hear you? you doe but playe the foole, doe you not see that I want my buske? what is become of the buske-poynt?
what dooth itplease you to haue Madame, a ruffe band or a Rebato?
Let me see that ruffe, How is it that the supporter is so soyled? I knowe not for what you are fit, that you cannot so much as to keep my cloathes cleane: I beleeue that the meanest woman in this towne, hath her apparel in better order then I haue: take it away giue me my Rebato of cut-worke edged, is not the wyer after the same sorte as the other? It is great wonder if it be any thing better, Me think it is now time that you should knowe how to serue. Is there no small pinnes for my Cuffes? Looke in the pinne-cushen. Pinne that with a blacke pinne, giue me my girdle and see that all the furniture be at it: looke if my Cizers, the pincers, the pen-knife, the knife to close Letters, with the bodkin, the ear-picker and my Seale, be in the case: where is my pursse to weare vpon my gowne? and see that my siluer Comfet box be full of Comfets: haue I a cleane handkercher? I will haue no Muffe, for it is not colde, but shall I haue no gloues? Bring my maske and my fanne, Help me to put on my Chayne of pearles. Page come hether, goe to my Ladye of, haue me most humblye commended vnto her, & tell her that if she haueno greater busines, if it pleaseth her to take the paines to come & dyne with vs, & bring with her, her Sister Mistresse, they shall be most hartilie welcome, and whome so euer it shall please them to bring w=t=them, & we will do something this after noone for to recreate vs and passe the time: goe your wayes, bring me an answer forth-with: and you Prudence set vp all my night-geare, put them in the cushen cloath dresse my chamber, & then goe aske Mistresse(my Daughters Mistresse) if they be readye? Bid her bring with her to me in the gallerie,&with their worke. Iolye come with me, carye with you my prayer-booke and my Psalter, first goe to the boyes chamber, see if they be readie: come againe by and by, to the end that I be not alone, you shall finde me in the gallerie.
Who knocketh there?
It is I M. Clemence,
Come in, the doore is not locked nor bolted.
God giue you good morrowe Gentle-women: good morrowe Mistresse Clemence:
And to you also Prudence, what newes? doe you bring vs anye newes? is my Mother vp?
Vp! she is alreadie in the gallery, she hath sent me to knowe if you were readie, She biddeth you you three to come to her, and that yo bring your worke with you
Did not I tell you so? in truth it grieueth me verye much to see you so sluggish. I haue called you an houre before you began to rise, you will force me in the end to complaine to my Ladye your mother: it is a thing vndecent and vnwholsome, for young people to lye a bed so long: go too mistresse Charlot, your eldest sister is readie, are not you so yet?
I pray youdoe not tell my mother and you shall see that heer-after we shalbe more dilligent, not-with-standing I am readie doe you not remember the Prouerbe which my Brother tolde vs the other day, that to rise early is not the best chance but to breake-fast is the surest thing? Sister where be our workes? I forgot my needle case, take the silke, the bottome of threed, the cruel is not vntwyned it is all one, let vs goe when you please, but tary a little, I haue not my siluer thimble, it is within my worke-boxe.
I Beseech you Mother pray to God to blesse me and giue me your blessing, if it pleaseth you.
I pray the strong Almightie God to increase his graces in you, and to blesse you. I meruaile verie much that French-men (which bring vp and teach their Children so well) doe not make them to aske their parentes blessing (I meane their fathers and mothers) seeing that it is a thing that hathhath bene vsed by the holy Patriarches,And also thatsaith, that the blessing of the father, doth strengthen the houses of the children, and that the mothers cursse doth roote out the foundation thereof: What say you to it mistresse Clemence?
Madame, y=e= fathers & mothers in France doe not neglect to pray to God for their Children, and although they vse not the outward Cerimonie, yet they doe blesse them, and without doubt, God heareth their Prayers, and maketh the children to prosper.
But yet a thing is of small value, if it be not worth the asking: And although it is the part of fathers & mothers (truely Christians) to haue care of their childrens education, and to pray zealously for them, and also to prouide them necessary thinges for this temporall life, (Otherwise they should be worse then Infidels and the fowles of the ayre) Yet it is the childrens duetye to require it in all humblenes: but enough of that. If French-men doe amisse therein, we neglect (it may be) manye other good customes w=c=they do obserue. Now Fleurimond, haue you prayed to God to day?
Yes forsooth mother.
It is well done, for (assaith in the first verse of the first of his Quadrins)God first of all, then honour father and mother: which agreethvery well with this sentence: Set God before, then let vs care for our selues. which is as much to say, that the first care we ought to haue, is to serue God, and then after to care for transitorie thinges, but note well that which I tell you: Go too Charlote, where is your minde? fixe my Instruction in your memorye. I say that so soone as one doth awake, yea euen at the breake of day, we must praise God, according to an other Quadrin of that honorable and learned personage before-named: which followeth. At peepe of day, rise and praise God, Let this first worke appeere: At night leaue worke, and praise God to, And thus spend all the yeere. So that we ought to begin and end the day, yea our yeeres, by one same thing: that is, to serue and praise God. When you haue some more knowledge in the french tongue, I will that your Master make you to learne by heart,Quadrins, for they be full of erudition and rich sentences. I pray you Mist. Clemence, and I doe charge you, aboue allthings, that you stir them to the seruice of God. Youth is bound to haue in reuerence their Maisters.and all those which teach them to good, for they are to them as second fathers and mothers: yeathe great did preferre his Maisterto his Father Phillip, in as much that he had receiued but life of his father, & of, he had the meanes and knowledge to liue wel, for there is one same resemblance betweene the not being, & the euill being, sauing that, that which is not, getteth no euill fame, and is not in danger of eternall torment, but he which hath a bad being, or is wicked, is subiect to both:Therefore it is a good conclusion, that it were better to be vnborne then vntaught vertuously and Christianly. I put to your iudgement how much they shall haue one day to answere that haue charge of those young impes, which in steed to prop them & keep straight, leaue them to take such foldes as they list, so that when they haue taken growth, it is easier to breake them, or vnroot them altogether, then to redresse the~: I say not this for you, mistresse Clemence, for we haue made choise of you, as of one which hath both sufficiencie and will, to discharge faithfully your duetie.And I hope that we shall not be found faultie for our Iudgement therein. Fleurimond, showe me your worke: is this your Cut-work? me thinketh that there is somewhat amisse: I espie a fault in it, the edge is reasonablie well made: is this your net-worke? see how she frowneth! if I begin with you I will make you leaue that frowning: & you Charlote where is your work? are your tapistrie cushens ended?
I haue but one cushen to do. I lacke silke, I know not what is become of y=e= cushen canuas all my golde and siluer is done, I want more blacke yarne, I haue not enough of blewe cruell.
Aske some of the Steward or of the purs-bearer: but you mistres Clemence buye some your selfe, for you knowe better the price of such things then they: I pray you let the~ haue what is fit for them, to the end they lose no time, for time lost is neuer recouered. At what houres do your Maisters come?
Our dauncing Maister commeth about nine a clocke: our singing Master, and he that teacheth vs to play on the virginalles, at tenne: he that teacheth vs on the Lute and the Violl de Gambo, at foure a clocke in the after noone: and our French Mastercommeth commonly betweene seauen and eight a clocke in the morning.
It is then time that you goe studie your lessons, to the end you may say them well when he commeth: haue you broken your fast to day?
Yes Mother.
Now goe in Gods name, whome I praye to fill you with his graces. I goe to the Nurces chamber, to see your brethren.
God giue you good morrowe Gentlewomen.
And to you also Sir, How doe you to day?
Well at your commaundement: And you, how is it with you this morning?
Very well thanks be to God: What is it a clocke? it seemeth that you come some what later then you were wont:
Pardon me Mistresse, it is but halfe an houre past seauen: Now can you say your lessons?
Truly Sir without lying,we cannot say them verye well, it is best to speake the truth, for though we should say otherwise, you will see the contrarye, and then we should commit a double faulte.
Go too, let vs see what you can doe: where be your bookes?
Sister Charlote, I pray you goe fetch our bookes, bring our French Garden, and all our other bookes.
I cannot finde them, where did you set them yesterday?
Good God! what a short memorie you haue? did you not carye them your selfe into our Closet?
You say true, they are vpon the table, I will goe fetch them: holde, heere they be all. Sir will it please you sit downe at the tables end? my Sister shall sit on the other side, and I heere, to th'end you may heare vs the better: heere is a Chayre and a cushen, giue me a stoole:
God be with you then my good faire Cosins, seeing that you goe to excercise your French, I will be gone, for feare I hinder you.
No forsooth you shall not let vs at all, goe not awaye for that, the Gentle-women are glad of your companye, you shall help them to say their lessons, at least you may iudge how well they pronounce and learne:Will it please you to take your place by them? now in the name of God let vs begin. Mistres Fleurimond read first, speake somewhat lowder, to th'end I may heare if you pronounce well: say that worde againe. Wherefore do you sound that? Doe you not knowe that it must be left? well, it is well said, read with more facilitie, without taking such paines: doe not haste so much: do you not hurt your stomacke against the boord? Holde your booke higher, or els set it on a cushen: well, you haue read enough, Construe me that, what is that? do you vnderstand that? tell me the signification in English,
Truly Sir I cannot tell it, I vnderstand it not, I beseech you tell it me, and I will remember it against an other time.
Giueme your paper and I will write it, to th'end you forget it not. This paper sinckes: The Incke is too white: your penne is naught.
I pray you Sir mend it me.
Giue me then your penknife, for I cannot cut it with my fingers.
You cannot doe it without your fingers.
You say true, nor without penknife neither. This penknife cutteth nothing, I goe to whet it: now I finde the penne good,trye if it be good for you.
It is too small: it writes somewhat too bigge,
Truly Cousin, you tryumph: In hearing you speake, one would take you for a French-woman, you speake it so well. Go too little Cousin Charlet, let vs heare how daintily you speake: can you speake French?
Not yet verye well:
How call you in french, my great gra~father my great gra~mother, My granfather, my granmother, my grandchilde (both man & woman) my father, my mother, my sonne, my daughter, my brother, my Sister, my vnkle, my aunt, my nephew, My neese, my cousin germaine, my she cousin germaine, my gossip, my she gossip, My Godson my Goddaughter, my Godfather, My Godmother, my cousin germaine remooued, My she cousin germaine remoued, my sonne in law (that hath maried my daught.) my daughter in lawe (y=t= hath maried my sonne) My father in lawe, my mother in lawe, My stepfather, my stepmother. My sonne in law (that is my wifes or husbands sonne), My daughter in lawe (of the same degree,) My brother in lawe, my sister in lawe, My kinsmen, my kinswomen, my friendes, My she friends, my friend, my she friend, My allyedsme~, my allyeds-wome~, my neighbor, my she neighbor, my neighbors, my she neighborsa Midwife, a woman keeper, A man seruant, A woman seruant, The seruing men, the seruing women:
Truly I knowe not, I pray you speake English, for truely I vnderstand you not, I haue not practised it so long as my Sister, I doe but begin to learne.
Ther is beginning in all thinges: You cannot goe vp to your chamber but you must passe the first step, and so from step to step, you come in the end to the height of it.
mistres Charlote, will it please you to read?
When it pleaseth you Sir, I am readie to read.
And I to heare you: begin, for the time tarieth not for vs, Say that againe: doe not force your voyce, onely obserue your rules, and read as though you should read english: doe you not see that this worde endeth byfeminine? & th'other word following beginneth by a vowell? why doe you sound that, then? Mistres Fleurimond, heare her read, and tell her when she misseth, that will proffit you as much as if you should read your selfe, for by the teaching of an other, one doth instruct himselfe. I shall see also thereby, how youremember your rules: doe you not see that she hath missed there?
Sister, doe not pronounce, in this worde, not, in this worde, but rather as if it were written, and,
You did note that very well.
God giue you good morowe MasterDoe not stirre, keepe your place, How doe your Scholers learne? All by leisure, not making ouer-much haste, They be full of conscience, They will not take too much for their money, But we knowe you are an honest man, and therefore our trust is, that you will set them forward, as much as you can.
Verily Madame, You haue no cause to reprooue them of negligence, for (though I speake it before them) it is no flattery to say the truth: yea it is as badly done to neglect prayse where it is due (seeing it is to a good spirit, a sting to pricke him forward to doe good) as shame to praise where praise is not deserued, They take as much paine as any other Gentlewomen that I know, and therfore I assure you (and beseech you to beleeue me, for I would tell you if it were otherwise) that there wanteth no diligence in them.
So it is for all that, that I was not so long a learning as Fleurimonde, and yet I speake it reasonably well, It might serue my turne at need.
Madame you speake it naturally well, and truly I reioyce my selfe very much also, for that Mistres Fleurimond speaks it so well, although that the prayses therof ought to be attributed rather to her good spirite, then to my sufficiencie in teaching.
You would praise him that hath taught me.
Both you and he deserue great prayses.
Well, good MasterI goe where I thought before to goe.
Gentlewomen, haue I giuen you newe lessons?
Yea sir.
And you Mistris Fleurimonde, Haue I showed you that which you haue to write out of English into French?
Yea sir.
Mistris Charlotte, haue you declined your verbes?
Yea sir.
Then we haue done all for this day, and so I will take my leaue from you, and bid you farewell vntill we meete againe.
God be with you sir vntil to morow, But I pray you to come to morowe, somwhat timelyer (if you can) because I beleeue that my mother will goe forth,and we shall goe with her.
Well Gentlewomen, I will come as soone as I may.
Is this he which teacheth you to speake French?
Yes, doe you not see it? how doe you like him? is he not sufficient to teach?
I can finde no faulte in it.
I beleeue you, but yet what say you of him?
I beleeue he did neuer Traffike in the East countries, nor was euer a silke Merchant.
I vnderstand you well, it is because he is so plainely cloathed:
Doth he not feare that your cloathes should marre his? Me thinketh that some gallant fellowe and braue withall, would be fitter to teach Gentlewomen of so good a house, and of such qualityes as you are.
Cousen, you deceiue your selfe, It is not the weed y=t=maketh the monke, all they that are clothed with silke and are braue, are not alwaies the most sufficient; often-times more learning is found in one meanely apparailed, then in them that haue but an outward brauerie: would to God you would speak to him, he wold tel you wel enough that though he be in Canuas, yet he is no Sonne to a wind-mil. My mother hath folowed the counsaile of Esope, she hath not so much regarded the outward showe, asthe spirit, and hath chosen vs, rather, a Man of vnderstanding without silke, then a silken man without vnderstanding: otherwise, some horse-keeper that neuer did any thing els then dresse his horses, might haue bene sufficient to teach vs. Truly tis a vice which beareth to much sway in our time, that one doth respect more the gilding of the body, then the riches of the minde. So that one be brauely apparailed, it booteth not: one passeth euery where. Indeed I held you for a man of better iudgement, But what? you followe the vulgar.
Truely Cousin you are well worthy to haue a good and sufficient Master, He which you haue, is infinitely beholding vnto you, for the good opinio~ you haue of him, but I hope you will not take in euill parte that which I haue said.
Wel, wel, I forgiue you, condicionally that heerafter you beare more respect to the vertue of the persons (if you can iudge therof) the~ to their magnifical swagering.
Will it please you to co~maund me any seruice?
No Cousin, I will not presume to commaund, but I pray you that we may haue your Company at dinner.
You shall excuse me for this day, therefore I bid you farwell.
I am sureyou will not goe before you take your leaue of my mother.
where is my Lady? I know not where to goe finde her.
Sister Charlote, I pray you goe tell my mother that my Cousin of Petit-sence, will be gone, you shall finde her in the Nurces chamber, or with my bretheren.
Well Sister I goe, but keepe him then vntill I come againe, I will not tarye.
You are come againe very soone, what saith she?
Cousin, she hath charged me not onely to pray you, but also to lay her commaundement, that you goe not vntill she hath spoken with you.
Well, then I dare not disobey, Seeing that it is her pleasure.
Good morrowe Nurce.
God giue you good morrowe Madame.
How now, how doth the childe?
He is fayre and plumpe, and doth very wel thanks be to God, sauing y=t=he hath bin somwhat waiward the last night.
Hath he so?what shold aile him? it may be he hath some tooth a growing, is he in his cradle? see if he sleepeth,
He is full awaken Madame.
He is not yet made readie is he?
No Madame, I haue let him sleepe all this morning.
Vnswaddle him, vndoe his swadling bands, giue him his breakefast whilst I am heere, make his pappe, take away that fierbrand w=c=smoketh for it will taste of the smoke, where is his little spoone? wash him before me, haue you cleane water?my little hart!God blesse thee, Rub the crowne of his head, wash his eares, and put some fine clout behinde them, to thend to keepe them drye and cleane, wash his face: Lift vp a little his haires, Is not that same durt that I see vpon his forehead? his browes are very round, What hath he vpon his ey-lids? me thinks that his eyes are some what watrish, make the~ cleane: how quick is his ey-ball, hath he not a pimple vpon his nose? his little cheekes are wet, I beleeue you did leaue him alone to crye and weepe: picke his nosthrils, wipe his mouth and his lips, How many teeth hath he? his gummes be sore, Showe me his tongue, let me see the pallet of his mouth, he hath a prettie chin, What a faire necke he hath! pull off his shirty=u=art prety & fat my litle darling, wash his armepits: what ayleth his elboe?what an arme he hath! his hand-wrist is very small: open his right hand: the palme of his left hand is all on water, did he sweat? how he spreadeth his small fingers! his thumbe and little finger are Flea-bitten, for the blacke spots are there yet, is there any Fleas in your Chamber? pare his nayles, for feare he scratch him selfe when his armes be free, put a linnen vpon his breast, His nauill is red, is it sore?let him pisse, ah little knaue, you will showe that you haue a yarde: his littlepurse is not flaggish, it is a signe that he is in health. His knees are very round, he hath a worme at the right knee, see if he hath none on the left, lay him on his belly, that I may see his backe. His shoulders are euen, I cannot see his ribbes, Turne him from the one side to the other, that I may see him on both sides, His little buttockes are fleshie, he is so well fed, that I can see no bones of his, his skin is so white and cleere, that the veynes are seene: Oh! what little mans thighes be these? he will haue good legges, wash the calues of his legges vpwards: wipe his shinnes, he hath rubbed one foote against the other,for his anckle bone is fleyed, See how he beateth with his heeles, doe you kicke sirha? you haue not washed the insides nor the soles of his feete, Forget not to make cleane his toes, the great toe and all, now swadle him againe,But first put on his biggin and his little band with an edge, where is his little petticote? giue him his coate of changeable taffata, and his sattin sleeues: Where is his bibbe? let him haue his gathered Aprone with stringes, and hang a Muckinder to it: you need not yet to giue him his Corall with the small golden chayne, for I beleeue it is better to let him sleepe vntill the after noone, giue him some sucke, I pray you take heed to wipe well the nipple of your dugge before you put it in his mouth, for feare that there be any haire or other thing which may hurt him. You mayd, goe fetch the childes cradle, make his bed, where is his pillowe? seeke a cleane pillow-bere, Set on the couerlet, now put him in his cradle and rocke him till he sleepe, but bring him to me first that I may kisse him: God send thee good rest my little boykin. I pray you good Nurce haue a care of him.
Dout not of it Madame with the grace of God.
Well then, God be with you till anon.
Open the doore here: How now Children what doe you? You holde your bookes, it is well done.
I beseech you Madame giue me your blessing if it pleaseth you:
My Children, Seeing it hath pleased God (the onely giuer of all good) who might haue made me some bace creature and of no dignitie, to call me to that degree: I am a Lady to all, but mother specially to my Children, therefore the sweetest and most pleasant name that they can giue me, is to call me Mother. I pray God to heap his blessings on you: haue you saluted your Father to day?
Yes Mother.
Where is your Master?
He is in his studie Mother.
Rene, goe tell him that I am heere.
Master my mother is in our chamber, and she would speake with you.
God giue you good morrowe Madame.
Good morrowe Master Champ-porte-aduis, I come to visit you this Morning, and am very glad to finde your Schollers so well employed as to their Bookes, as I perceiue you doe not keep them idle, wherefore I like you the better, For there is nothing more hurtfull, not onely to youth, but also to all sortes of persons, then idlenes, for it is the inuenter and mother of all euils. You knowe wherefore they are put to your charge, which is, not onely to teach them in the Grammer & the Latin tongue, but also to bring them vp in good maners, and to aduise them of their duties, and therefore I dout not but that the first thing you make them to do, is to pray to God: come hether Guy, haue you said your prayers this morning?
Yes Mother.
And you also Rene?
Yes Mother, so soone as we are risen and haue put on our cloathes, and that we haue washed, our Master maketh vs to say prayers, and to read a Chapter in the Bible, to repeat some Sentences out of Cicero or some other good Author, Then we goe to breake-fast, hauing broken fast we studie our lessons, as you haue found vs.
Go too, read me this Chapter: softe, read leysurely,You make too much haste: doe you not knowe that haste makes waste?
I haue done Mother, I am at the end of the Chapter.
You haue read, but it is not enough to read. They that be wise, doe read for their Instruction, & not for the sound of wordes onely, you are passed your A, B, C. that one giueth to little Children for to learne to pronounce and sound the wordes, You must be better then Parrots, which doe pronounce some wordes as well as we doe, and yet are neuer the wiser for want of intellgence: Haue you remembred and do you vnderstand y=t=which you haue read? Otherwise you are no better then a Parrot. I remember I haue heard your Master tell you once, this Latin Sentence:. Which is as much to say (as I take it) To read and not vnderstand, is an vnprofitable thing: therefore haue regarde when you read, to conceiue your reading, to make profit by it, otherwise you read in vaine and doe nothing but lose time.Master Champorte-aduis, it seemeth vnto me, that they which haue youth vnder their gouernment, ought to doe as the good Phisitions, that sound the bodies of their Pacients: and if they finde them in danger to fall into some sicknes, doeminister vnto them preseruatiues to preuent it. In like sorte the parents and masters ought to search diligently, if their Children be adicted to any vice, to free them fro~ the same, euen from their youth, before they be ouermuch rooted in them. I pray you to tell me the truth) for I am not any of those foolish mothers, which will neuer beleue any imperfections of children, but like the she Ape, It seems vnto them that they be aboue al other faire and perfect) doe you finde any bad inclination in mine?
In truth Madame, I see them not giuen to any lewd vice, somtimes there is a litle iealousie, specially when I praise one of them, for hauing said his lesson better then the other, but not that they enter into any variance for it.
O, if there be but an Emulation who shall doe best, it is not to be reproued, for it is generositie, but if one be enuious of the others good, that proceedeth from a bad nature, and therefor that spot is intollerable. Guy and Rene, come neere to me, which of you write best?
It is my brother Mother.
Holde then Guy, there is an Inke-horne gilt, furnished of all things necessarie, that I giue you, to thendto encourage you to learne the better.
I most humbly thanke you Mother, truely it is faire.
Rene what say you of your Brothers Inke-horne? are you sorye for it?
Truely mother I am not sorye that he hath it, neuertheles if I had the like I would be the gladder: beleue me that I enuye him not, but I hope that (euen as he excelleth me in writing) I will excell him shortly in some other matter, and then you will giue me also something as good as it or better.
Well, I shall see (God willing) how you will profit, notwithstanding you ought to be as glad of your brothers good, as of your owne, if I thought that you should enuie him for it, I would cause you to be whipt very soundly, for you must knowe, that there is nothing more absurd, nor blockish then enuye. Doe you lose any thing of the good that an other hath? it did not belong vnto you, nor you were not possesser of it, You haue then neuer a whit the lesse, wherfore should you grieue at it then? the enuious Man doth harme to none but himselfe, For (as the rust eateth yron, so) Enuie eateth the enuious men, and you shall neuer see any but fooles, that are enuious of an others happines.
But Madame,I had forgotten to tell you that your sonne Guy is somwhat slowe to rise in the morning, for one must call him three or foure times before he come out of his bed, I haue thought good to tell it you before his face, specially at this time, to the end it may please you to take the paine to tell him his lesson, as well as to his yonger brother.
Is it true? truly M. Champorte-aduis, the greatest faulte is in you, it is but a benumming of the limbes that he hath, which you ought to supply, in annointing him w=t= the iuice of Birch, which is excellent for such a cure, & if you apply it but twice or thrice, You shall see a meruailous operation, But if your medicine be not of force, let me knowe it, & I will make him such a morning song, y=t=it wil awake him in all diligence & hasten him more then a good pace. Come hether freind, I am ashamd to hear that w=c=I hear of you, that you are so childish as not to knowe yet, not only that which is dece~t for you, but also wholsom for the body & the mind. Ther is nothing y=t=drieth more the limbes, nor dulleth more the spirit, then ouermuch sleepe, besides the wrong that you doe to your reputation, if you continue in it, & that it comes to y=e=knowlege of others. The wisest that euer was of Kings, giueth small wormes to be masters of sluggards, sending them to the schooleof the Pismire. The Lacedemonians and Athenians, iudged idlenes and slugish rest, to be a thing worthy of punishment, as enormious vices: and said that it ought to be had in horror and shame:
Lady and Mother, I cannot but yeilde to your inuincible reasons, knowing that which you say proceedeth from a deere care that you haue of my good, and from a true motherly loue that you beare me: One thing I craue of you, that you be not offended with me, and heerafter I wil wholy submit my self to euery reasonable thing, so that with the grace of God, you will be contented therwith.
God graunt it: You haue almost attayned to the age of nyne yeeres, at least to eight and a halfe, and seing that you knowe your dutie, if you neglect it you deserue greater punishment then he which through ignorance doth it not. Think not that the nobilitie of your Ancesters doth free you to doe all that you list, contrarywise, it bindeth you more to followe vertue, for euen as there is no estimation made of a Iade, though he haue a couragious Gennet to his Sire, Euen so the nobilitie endeth in him which forsaketh her steppes. What is it that raysed vp in eminent honors, so manypersonages issued from meane Parents, as one Marcus Actilius Regulus, which was not borne of noble linage: Or as one Seruius Tullius, and many others, but vertue: which consisteth not in idlenes & sluggishnes, but in actiuity & vigila~cy: Contrarywise, what hath annihilated & spotted the memory of so many others, that tooke their being from generous and haughty spirits, whose memorie is, neuertheles perminent, for it is no reason that the vertue of the father, should be obscured by y=e=vnworthines of the sonne, but y=t=euery one be honored for his owne merrits) but to haue swarued from the actes of true noblenes As one Domitian (the memory of whome stinketh yet for his enormious vices) though he had for Father, Vespasian and Titus: For Brother, memoryes of vertue: I say then, That whosoeuer will participate of the honor and nobilitie of his Parents, he must Propagate the same by vertue, and not onely to followe the French Etimologie of this wordeorwhich commeth ofor, or of Curtesie and affable bountifulnes, but one must also abstaine himselfe from vices, to be the vtter ennimy thereof, & maintaine the right and Iustice (Queene of all vertues.)But alas! (for the most part of the nobilitieof this day, this worde, may well be turned intoorin stede of(hurt none)For we doe relye so much vpon a Title (all mustie) of ancientrye of our predecessors, that we haue no care to reuiue their memorye by our vertues, the which (rather) we darken and burye (as much as lyeth in vs) by our vices and tyrannies y=t=we vse towards those who we ought to defend and keep fro~ wrongs & iniuries. Euery one then of sound iudgement, may well knowe, that it is not enough to be issued from noble and vertuous predecessors: and also that he which buildeth, or is the beginner of his house, deserueth as much praise, as he which pulleth it downe doth shame: it seemed good vnto me my deere children (although that your great youth affoordeth you no Capacitie as yet, (wholy to comprehend my wordes) to giue you this instruction, trusting that heer-after, God will enable you with his grace, to conceiue and followe it, to his glory, to your praise, and ioy of vs all your parents and friendes. Come hether both of you, doe you weare your cloathes Gentle-men like? Where is your hat-band? And you, where is the cipres of yours? Haue you taken cleane shirts this morning?Your bands be not cleane. Why haue you taken your wast-coates? Is it so colde? button your Dublet, are you not ashamed to be so vntrussed? where is your Ierkin? for this morning is somewhat colde: And you also, take your coate. are you vngirt? Boy Neuf-a-bien, heare you? you do nothing but play tricks there, Goe fetch your Masters siluer hatched Daggers, you haue not brushed their breeches, Bring the brushes and brush them before me, Lord God how dustie they are! they are full of dust, what stockins haue you? your silke stockins or your wosted hose? put on your garters embroidred with siluer, for it may be that yee shall goe foorth with me, where are yourCuffes and your falles? haue you cleane handkerchers? Take your perfumed gloues that are lyned, Put on your gownes vntill we goe, and then you shall take your cloakes lyned with Taffata, and your Rapiers with siluer hiltes. Tye your shooe-stringes. Well, take your bootes, your boot-hosen, and your gilt spurres. Ri. Neuf-a-bien, haue you made cleane their shooes to day?
Yea Madame.
Truely so it seemes, come hether you brasen-facte lyer, art thou not ashamed to affirme so apparant a lye before me? The myre and durt sticke on them yet. Seest thou not that they are all durtie?Truely I will teach you how to lye, or rather how you should not lye. I will not leaue such a vice vnpunished. M. Cha~-port-aduis, I wil haue him to be whipt soundly before his Masters, And (as it is said) to beat the dog before the lyon for an example vnto them. There is nothing more bace then lying, and euery one that is wise will abhorre it. It is written in the Prouerbes of Salomo~, that the righteous man hateth lyes. The Sonne of Sirach saith also in these wordes, Vse not any lying at all, for the vse thereof commeth neuer to good.He which will be beleeued, ought neuer to lye, for a lyer is neuer beleeued, Yea, if it happen that sometimes he saith true, it shall be taken still for a lye. It behoueth then that euery one which will get a good reputation shun this vice as it were a mad dogge, For whosoeuer is once bitten with it, findeth it incurable. But I heare some body knocke at the doore, Rene, see who it is.
It is Mistris Ioly, mother, w=c=bringeth word, that my Lady of Beau-seiour and Mistris Du Pont-gaillard, and some others be come.
They are welcome, I must then be gone.
Madame de Beau-seiour, I thinke my selfe so much beholding vnto you, for the curtesie you haue done me, to haue taken such paine, as to come see vs, and which is more, to haue brought Mistris Du Pont-galliard your Sister (whose companye is as agreeable vnto me, as of any Gentlewoman that I know) that I know not how to be able to acknowledge it, but (without greater or more formall Cerimonies) you are most hartily welcome, and yee also Gentlemen.
We must humblie thanke you Madame, you haue more cause to finde vs faultie, forcomming so late, though we come timely enough for to dine.
How late? It is but tenne a clocke.
Pardon me Madame, It was halfe an houre past tenne, before we came out of our house.
For all that, it is not yet eleuen a clocke, nor dinner time, For the Butler hath not yet couered the table. and therefore if you think it good, we may make a turne in the Exchange, It is not farre hence, for I must buye a silke waste-coate which I haue lost in play to M. De sur-amont, against a veluet Muffe.
We are at your commaundement, let vs goe where it pleaseth you.
Page, bid the Coach-man put his horsses to the Carosse. Iolye, speake to the Butler to lay the table-cloath, and that all be readie when we come againe. Giue me my maske, and goe fetch my Fanne. Now let vs goe in Gods name. Who shall we haue to be our gentleman vsher? for mine is sicke.
My Neuewe Du vault-l'amour, Madame, if it pleaseth you to accept his seruice.
But if it pleaseth him to showe vs so much curtesie, as to take the paineto accompany vs, for we can haue no better. Go too Coach-man, why doe we tarrye? driue your horsses.
Madame, what doth it please you to haue? would ye haue any faire linnen cloath? Mistris, see what I haue, and I will showe you the fayrest linnen cloath in London, if you doe not like it, you may leaue it, You shall bestowe nothing but he looking on, The payne shall be ours to showe them you.
Into what Shop shall we goe?
Madame, will it please you to enter into this Shop? This Maid doth inuite vs to it by her tongue, which she hath as free, as any that euer I heard.
Yet she is scarce worthy your loue, though she be reasonable fine & prettie, but seeing that youaffect her, we will see with what she will furnish vs for your sake. Now my friend, haue you any faire holland?
Yes forsooth Madame, and the fairest lawne that euer you handled:
thou speakst a proud word, what knowest thou, what lawne I haue ha~dled? it may be that I haue had better then any that is in all thy shop.
I doe not say to the contrary Madame, but so it is notwithstanding, that I haue as good & as faire as euer was made.
Well, well, you doe but your duetie, but God knoweth how largely you will speake, when you shall be for your selfe, seeing that you praise so highly your masters Marchandise: otherwise Ciceroes saying in his Offices, is of no authoritie, but you learne your trade, for to liue thereby heerafter. How sell you the Ell of this Cambricke?
I knowe you haue so good Iudgement in linnen cloath, that I dare not showe you any for good, vnlesse it were so: there needes no replye to such a Lady as you are, you may say your pleasure, the Cambricke will cost you twentie shillings the Ell.
Truly it lacketh no price: And if thinges be so much worth as those whichsell them, doe make them to be: your Cambricke is very good, for you holde it at a good price, But yet I will not giue so much tho.
How much will it please you to giue then Madame? to the end that I may haue your Custome?
I will giue you fifteene shillings, If you will take my money make shorte, for I haue other busines then to tarye heere,
Truely Madame I would be verye sorie to denye you if I could giue it at that price, but in truth I cannot, vnles I should lose by it.
I will giue you sixteen, and not one halfepeny more. Mistris Du Pont-galliard, is it not enough?
Me thinketh it Madame that you offer too much, as for me, I would not giue so much.
Let vs goe then to the shop on the other side.
Shall we giue it her at that price Mistris?
Showe me the marke of it. Yes call them backe.
Madame, if you finde any better, I am content to giue you mine for nothing.
Let it be as good as it will, yet you shall not haue of me a penye more for it, for I haue offred too much alreadie.
Madame, I am content tolose in it, of the price that I sell it to others, in hope that you will buye of vs when you shall haue need: how many Elles will it please you to haue?
Halfe a dossen Elles.
Go too Attire-gaine, where is the Ells?
Make good measure. Master Du vault-l'amour, I pray you to buye for me yonder wastcoate that I see in that other shop, for if I cheapen it, they will ouer price it me by the halfe, As for you, they knowe you haue better skill in it. Ioly pay for this cloath. Now, are you payed and contented?
Yes Madame. I most humbly thanke you. Beleeue me you haue bestowed your money very well, and you haue good cheap Will you buye no shirts, ruffes, Falling bandes, handkerchers, night-coyfes, Falles, sockes, edged lace, Boote-hosen wrought, Or any other thing that we haue? All is at your commaundement.
Not for this time I thanke you, farewell my she friend.
Madame, God haue you in his keeping.
Page goe see if the Coach be ready,
Runne quickly. Coach-man we must alight
in Cheapside, at the Mercers and Gold-smiths.