What, honest! Welcome into. How fares the noble Knight, and all the true Trojans at home?
I thanke God Sir, all well. My Master remembers his loue to your Worship, to you Master Vicar, and to all his friends in these parts.
We are much bound to him for his kinde remembrance; but I wonder what winde driues youhither? we may strew greene rushes for you; I thinke you were neuer heere since Master Maior tooke his oath.
Sir, you are in the right, but such troublesome guests come soone enough, like foule weather, before they be sent for.
Nay say not so, the worst dogge in your masters house cannot come vnwelcome to.
That's more of your kindnesse then our merit; but I pray you what's the reason the bowling greene is so emptie vpon so faire a day?
Why man, there is a great Faire at, thither they are all gone, tag, rag and longtaile.
Then I feare I am come at an ill time.
Why so?
My master hath sent me for the pyde nagge, hee would haue him runne inparke, lest hee spoile himselfe this drie season: besides, I haue appointed the Smith to bee heere in the afternoone. Now if the Castle-keeper bee gone to buy Hobbyhorses too, I am in a faire case.
To put you out of doubt, vpon my knowledge he is ridde out, more then an houre and a halfe since.
Then it is likely to be darke night before he finde the way home.
Assure your selfe of that; it is a forfeit for a Sheppy-man to come from a Faire till Sunne set.
Sue the ill lucke; and the worst is, I knownot how to spend the time all this liue-long day.
As if I haue not a good dish of Oysters, and a cold pye at home to hold you tacke.
Many thankes good Master Maior: but in very deed I brake my fast so well with our old Gardiner atbefore I came out, that I shall haue little mawe to any meate till night.
Then what will you doe?
On my little honestie I know not, vnlesse some good bodie would lende mee a Play-booke to make my worship laugh.
FaithI doe not remember any such in my custodie, but our Searcher lent me a merry book which came to his hands the last weeke.
Sir, you meane that squibbing pamphlet against Sir, which I borrowed of you yesterday morning.
The very same: I would you would take the paines to fetch it.
That labour shall be saued, we neuer parted companies since we met.
Now if you bee kinde gentlemen, let vs sit downe yonder, vpon Pennylesse Bench, and suruey it.
Agreed; for I thinke wee shall haue no bodie in hast come to trouble vs.
What may the title of the booke bee? and who is the Author?
He may be, for ought I know, he discouers himselfe only by the marke of I. R.
I dare lay a good wager it is that, whom my Master so hampred in his: my minde giues me it is the same, whose late arriuall makes him so much merriment.
Not vnlike: hee hath wonne the spurres for an arch-rayler. The most rauing, and brauingthat euer I read. Had he gotten any prize by his last worke, you should haue now seene him out of his maskers sute: he stands close behinde his picture: if it passe currant, he will then peepe out, otherwise he will hide his head in a Bench-hole.
But is this the fashion of professed Diuines, to broach Positions which they dare not justifie with the subscription of their names, and being namelesse themselues, to perbreake persons of note.
Doe you wonder at that? As if old pursetakers will present themselues in their owne likenes without, and.
Indeede that were the next way to the Gallowes; but surely this kinde of cunning ioyned with so great scurrility (which in my little view I discouered) would make me shrewdly suspect their sinceritie, who are so intemperate in their owne affections, and regardlesse of better mens credits.
This is the Catholike charitie, and soulegaining patience practised now adayes; but he is not without his shifts. That he concealeth his name, it is his humilitie, as regardlesse of wordly respects. That hee is so tarte, it proceedeth from his zeale of the cause, not any hatred of the person.
In my opinion he needs not feare any great applause for the extraordinary skil of his work. T'iswell if he scape in this learned age without reproof. But to make zeale the Patron for his personall frumps, is intollerable hypocrisie.
Could he shew any such sparkes of personall disdaine, flying from Saintpenne, there were yet some little hope, that hee hath at least a dramme of that: but you shall heare how he contradicts himselfe. Saint(saith he).
Then is hee as like Saint, as an Owle to an Iuie bush.
And could hee single out no body but my Master to make the Anuill of his malice? I doubt hee hath taken a wrong Sowe by the eare; if his coate be not swingd' well and thriftily, let me bee held for a sowced Gurnet.
Indeede it had beene the wiser way, first to haue beleguered the Castle which he formerly lost; and had not either vaine hope of a second voluntarie lapse, or necessarie feare of some foule discouerie, diuerted his force, hee would rather haue followed the chase of his olde prey. Well, hee is not vnlike to haue some hornets about his eares: But for Sir, hee hath passed his word to answere him with comtempt.
Silence verily is fittest for a Gentleman of his place, vnlesse his aduersarie were of more worth then his Start-vp.
I wonder in my heart whatmeant to come vpon him with a fresh reply, hauing publike notice of his resolution.
This was it that animated him; the Knightssecur'd his pen free passage without controll.
Nay, then I would my girdle might breake; seeing he will wake a sleeping Lyon, as long as I can hold ain my hand, I will ferret his sides till he crie.
I perceiue thou art true bred; such a Whelp is fittest for this game: But how camest thou by thy Latin?
Faith, I waited on a yong Gentleman, at, some three, or foure yeares, where I got a few broken ends together, enough to patchhis Cox-combe with a.
On my soule thou art a merrie grigge. I would not for the price of a good Breake-fast haue wanted thy companie in the reuiew of this discourse.
Perhaps you will say so, by that time wee haue done; It shall goe hard if I find not Crotchets in this Beetle-head, to descant vpon his plaine song. But I long to heare the bookes name.
It is called.
What!the Conqueror? O victorious. In what pompe art thou led to the Capitoll?
Would you know how? his Charriot is drawne with foure grisly:,,, and, and attended with,,, and.
If he triumph after the old Roman maner, he must (for the gaining of applause) be very liberall in his gifts to the people.
Hee passeth for that of all that euer I knew. Here he flings a, there a; here hee bestowes aof his owne taking; there hee casts our.are his ordinarie fauours; and as for, and, you would admire his lubberalitie.
Stop there good,teeth will water, if you talke of any more such Iunckets.
No not if hee gaueinsteede of; these dainterils haue layen so long vpon his hands, that I feare me they are scarce sweete.
His last Treatise, (if I be well aduised) wherein hee began to fling at the Knight, was Christned,.
The?They must bee Bables indeed if he bee able to moue them. What a braue Lad is this, that dreames of nothing but Ouerthrowes, and Triumphs? No doubt hee rescued many Shauelings in this skirmish. Twas pittie hee was not inwhen my Lordvndertooke his voyage: Then should his Lordship haue had no neede to haue stood to the curtesie of the two Vniuersities.alone would haue soon brought those poore Sauages, vnder the belt of his Discipline. But had he not great lucke (trow you) to scapehis fanges, comming so neere the confines of Hell?
He complayneth that he met with a, meaning the Knights,.
And well worthie, for hee gaue the onset without a challenge, neither came he as a(according to his colourable pretence); but as a man of Warre with a flagge, to batter the invincible Fort of the Knights reputation.
Nay by your leaue, S=r=.cast out his Gloue to any.
What was that to? what needed hee haue fought as the Popes Voluntarie, vnder those colours? Had he such interest in the Title, that hee could not forbeare the Claime?
As for that, it had beene pardonable, if in the confidence of his cause, hee had endeauoured to disable the Knights refutation of, by the. but toto blemish his credit, to, nay to make him ato vent other mens patches, as it argueth rather an aking tooth, then a religious minde, so is it able to driueher selfe into an.
Had the, I meane Discretion, beene his guide in that journey;, beene superintendent in his thoughts, hee would haue found another way to the wood. 'Tis strangeto alienate his affections, whosewe labour to informe.
Will you haue the right? I haue gotten the length of his foote.sees thathath a Wind-mill in his head, therefore hee buzzeth in his eares to set the clapper a iogge, that so he may get a good Grist.
Had there not been some such pecuniary, or sinister ayme, I verily thinkehis pen had beene at a full period. Hee would haue accepted the Knights reasonable satisfaction, and endured a little showre, especially raised by the blustring windes of his owne distemper: hee would not haue prouoked the grimme Porter the second time, whom he found so fell at the first. Somewhat it is that makes him so bray in the eares of his supposed, who was well contented to haue taken a nappe, and to let him passe without regard.
Yet would he make the world beleeue hee is so desirous of peace, that hee hath now out of the aboundance of his charity brought him ato stop his mouth.
Trust mee truly, hee comes ouer him with kindnesse; this hony was not fetched from thehiue, but from thehole, more like to stir choller then to procure rest.
This tricke he learned in his passage ofthe Ferriman; to looke towardswith his face, and rowe towardswith his pen. He sets out thefor a signe, but his vessels are full of gall and wormewood within.
If we may take his owne word in his owne worke, it is the.
If hee had presented him with the iuice of, and, it had beene more proper for the dimnesse of his sight. It seemes he hath not been brought vp vnder an, but rather in ashop, he is so cunning in dishing out this saucy.
What will ye say then to this?I hope you will not taxe this to be broken-winded.
I promise you an excellent close. Had my master such ain his kitchin, that would quench the fire withand, theandwould soone share his lands: his patrimony would then be in a dangerous consumption indeed.
, you are somewhat too quicke, his honest meaning is to bee accepted: yet if I haue any iudgement, hee is more elegant in one leafe of this booke, then in all the other he wrote before.
Marry hee may thanke Sirfor that, whose phrases are so interlaced throughout the whole discourse, thathis stile may seeme to haue put on her holli-day coate.
This one thing I heard a Gentleman of good quality obserue, that hee hath an extraordinary gift in the retorting of conceipts: And withall protested that he thoughtwas begotten on the side of a hill, he so returns word for word like an Eccho.
The truth is, the poore man hath a very weake stomacke, hee casts vp whole periods as they went downe, without digestion or alteration.
If I were his Phisition, I would prescribe him a cup of wine and sugar next his heart, for what with his,and, he hath a very bad stomacke, and a worse braine.
He ill deserues it, who measures other mens liquor, by the shallow panne of his owne wheeling skonce. If hee breake his fast with nymble-brainedsomewhat more liberally, hee strait fumbles in the mouth, and tumbles out ain euery answere according to his.
He was not then mistaken that didhim by the name of, which vpo~ long search he hath found to signifie: as much to say, astothe, who hath in his time made more razling Indentures, then the best Scriuener inor S=t=..
Yet as flustred as hee was, when his wench told him that he kissed like a Clowter, hee could text her with. And when shee pleaded that it went against her heart, he could protest by the faith of a Catholique, not to come within a foote of her conscience.
It seemes indeed he speakes not by guesselike a, but as one beaten to the trade by experimentall proofe, when he saith,. Marke how feelingly he speakes euen of the thought.
Let him be what he will, this is no fit Court to draw his Inditement: hee will trauerse it with an; Let vs rather heare how he bestirs himselfe for Purgatory.
Nay by your leaue Sir, his Apology touching the exceptions in themust haue the precedence. This hath he cunningly in his first chapter prefixed to a worke; by good probability, long studied, against the Knights first letter, some sixe yeares since directed to M=r=.
Bee it as it list: seeing wee are come asto sitte vpon his account, let vs first see his charge, and then his discharge.
Indeed equity her selfe cannot prescribe a more indifferent course then this. There is great reason yourshould stand in these.
No doubt he hath placed a Lion in the forefront to make the better way, for the Marshalling of his weaker and more heartlesse troopes.
If he haue the least dramme of Rhetoricall Chiualry, he will be sure to put the best legge formost.
You are both wide; in stead of a Lion, hee hath committed the conduct of his forces tothe foxe, whom hee presents on his paper stage witha Target, to shield him from the imputation.
It must be a nimble Foxe that can shift off so many palpable wrongs; hee had neede haue his ioynts thoroughly annointed with the oyle of leazing.
Doubt you not that; his poynts are well tagg'd with. And first, as if hee (good man) meant nothing but pure deuotion, hee deplores the, wishing that the few lines which concerned the,.
Hee were a wise man would loose a good Breakfast, for better repast then I could euer discouer in his Larder. It seemes his booke is somewhat a kinne to andrugge, which requires the attendance of an houre-glasse, and a Spanish. Hee that dares not but allow a certaine number of Psalms in our Ladies Psalter to be read after supper, is angry if his owne lines bee perused when a man hath dined. If there bee any such danger in taking his receits vpon a full stomack, he should haue done well to prescribe both diet and time.
Vndoubtedly hee hath a reference to theand, mentioned in his Preface, which liquor he saith the Knight loues well. This holy water runnes from his pen in such aboundance as if he hadhis tunne for a Standish: hee dreames of no body but, who in his merry veyne wrote more wise sentences, then euer issued fromhis most sober thoughts; heerein he displayeth his folly, or rather his malice, in the highest degree. But the best is, he is like to purchase as much thanks of the iudicious Reader, by this his iniurious, ashis vngracious Sonnes got by traducing their old Father for a Dotard, and so vnfit for the management of his estate. The Knight is able to shew him more then ato wipe away this blurre: whereis the prompter, you must imaginewill deliuer a good euidence.
,are no new inuentions, nor grounded truths: as if a Gentleman cannot drinke a cup of wine but hee must instantly be as wise as staring. The Knight is of an affable, and pleasant disposition, yet hee comes not alwaies vp toTearme.was no Plough-man, though once for a priuate end he fained himselfe a Rusticke, and put his hands to the share.was vpbraided for being all night in a tauerne, but how did hee answere for himselfe?(quoth he).
cannot heare with that eare: Hee should haue shewed more discretion in shaping his credulous, according to the prescript of this direction; had hethe, as well as hee summed thewine, his intruding curiosity would haue passed with lesse blame.Hee that is lumpish at his meales, will proue but a slug in his more serious affaires.
I am sure the old Frier was of your mindein this; for handling those words, He made his diuision thus. Here is first. Secondly,.
Gra-mercy, I perceiue thou hast not left all thy Latine shreads at home. But I would gladly know what the Knight mistooke in the perusall of his discourse that he should be thus charged with an.
The Knight (if you be remembred) tooke it in ill part that hee was taxed by the, and, as also with the.
And can hee either blame the acceptance, or deny the cause, which is yet extant vnder his own hand?
Yes, hee forsooth doth not simply derogate from the Knight in any of these, but comparatiuely matching them together, giues the precedence, where he thinks he had most cause.(saith he).
Were there no more but this, it is more then common Ciuility can well warrant; had hee not bin ill tutord hee might haue learned that comparisonsare odious. Might not the Knights commendable qualities say vnto him,? The questionwas not allowable amongst the Disciples. In this case, shewes little care of the whole. The Poet might haue informed him,: he that hath but an vnce of each of those former properties, wants not a graine of a worthy man. So that by sundring them he labours to lessen their esteem, and by disparaging that which he seemes to hold in highest regard, hee plainly nullifies the repute of the rest.
Hee that hath but halfe an eye, may easily perceiue his comparatiue praises, to be indeede priuatiue disgraces: as you may see by his Comment vpon his owne text. For wheras he stiled the Knights booke an, he now explanes himselfe, that the want of.(saith hee). Is this the comparatiue degree wherewith hee dubs his pen?: seeingwill afford no more, tis well wee haue this. But such a Boone is not like long to be enioyed. I fearerepents himselfe already of his seeming bounty; For as if his pen had beene ouer lauish, hee doth interpret theformerly acknowledged, to signifie.
I promise you he hath mended the matter well, these milde censures are able to raise. Is this thewith which hee is content to crowne my Masters temples? Is this the tune which the? then may the gingling of mypasse currant for reasonable good melody. I easily beleeue hee went, who can no better iudge of those Christall streames.
If a man should giuethis attribute, that he is, which (bearing a double construction) may be warranted, albeit he haue beene scarce seasoned with the Principles of eyther Science, and so a Dullard in both: how could he but hold himselfe ill handled, if afterward the same party should tell him that he shewed morethen, morethen? But the best is, (as I heard the Knight once say) he makes no more reckoning of his praise, in giuing him that hee had not, then of his dispraise, in taking from him that he had; as hauing neither more nor lesse, for either of both.
Yet this comes short ofhis equiuocating straine. For did hee sincerely ayme at the Knights praise in his grant, why doth hee then gainelay it in those his contradictory imputations? or did his mentall entendment seeke the disparagement of the Knights learning (as now the euent hath made apparant) to what ende then doth he protest the sincerity of his good meaning? Why doth he labour to colour his former frumpe with a distinction of learning, yeilding the lesser arm of that tree to the Knight, and keeping the greater (as purchased by his long study and delight) to himselfe? whereas in fine he dispossesseth him of all, euen of the least leafe of the smallest branch.
Thus is the Foxe now vncased, hisof due respect, and, prooued to bee but the: but I would gladly see vpon what ground he buildeth those his derogatory and disgracefull termes.
Forsooth he hath gotten the wind of an opposition betweene the Knights, and his, and that in the first sentence of his, which he produceth as a.(saith hee).Thisreading without an Intergatory saith,, whereas the argument is drawnethat it cannot be thatshould be to seeke of cunning conueighance, then which nothing can bee more sutable to the purpose.But admit there were no dash visible to his squinting eyes, besides the full poynt, yet might his wisdome haue taken it for spoken, in which acceptation it is no lesse thento the.
Tut, this Make-bate hath no other proiect but to setagainst, andagainst, to cast a bone betweene the, and the, and to set them both together by the eares with the truth: but the best is, the least dash of a pen will easily reconcile them.
Nay this is not all, hee challengeth thealso, as, in auerring that the(saith he).
Then I am sure our Preacher deliuered false doctrine the last Sunday, for hee spake much of, and I remember hee had such a word as, which was frequent (as he said) in the mouth of theand. Hee spake somewhat also of the, who vouched nothing but Antiquity, and of thewho pleaded the authority ofandfor the passage of their heresie: the particulars are crept out of my slippery braine.
Hee might further haue informed you of the Heretique, who in the opendid vant of the Pedegree and descent of his doctrine, from all the ancient Fathers of the Church.(saith hee). Was notan Heretique? yet forsooth he did beleeue,;. If theofwere not a glistering varnish,would not haue gone so high to fetch the descent of hisgrounding their foundation vpon those words of,.
Hee might haue shewen himselfe a more skilfull Herauld, and gone neerer the sound, & sence, had he drawne their originall from these wordes of the Apostle:; but thesemust bee a day or two elder then the Moone, or else they will hold themselues no Gentlemen: their holy water must either flow from, or else it hath but a base current; and could they not fetch the authority of their Monasticke life from the sample of Christ himselfe, they would repute it, as of an vpstart family.
I applaud their witte; this is not the worst fetch to gaine esteeme. Were I a rich man it should cost me an hundred pound twice told, but I would haueorto stand on the top of my line. I would not sticke to alter two or three letters of my name, to make my selfe of kinne to. Me thinksis a statly, it runnes so full in the mouth.
The best iest (the liuelyof his malicious spirit) is this that hee playeth vpon theletters which fall in order, without any choice, as directs to the marginall notes. Hee had charged the Knight with an: heereupon Sir, discouering diuers his, (more then were named) to abridge the length of hisdid margent thus.(which word hee falsly cited). This falling vnder the letter, O,wittely tells him that,. In like manner he descants vpon the letter,, by which hee vnderstands.
Alas poore man, I beshrew my heart if I do not pitty the penury of his barren conceit. He was neere driuen, (God wot) when hee was faine to ransacke the Wardrope of his witte, for such thredbare shifts.
What thinke you of this? when the Knight tells him that, hee in the quaintnesse of his nimble Conceipt retorts it thus.Was not here anfarre fetch'd? When the Knight sayes,, he conceitedly answeres. For, he returnes: somewhat more Arte hee shewes in putting, for; for, he altering the person saith,. And as for the, the,and the, he bandies them vp and downe, as if thewould affoord him no other balls. Thus doth he play, reuerberating according to his Rhetoricall skill the same syllables without any variety of inuention.
Sir, It was well obserued. I now seereport was grounded vpon good warrant.is a perfect, there cannot apasse his fingers,. Sircites a part of twoout of a knowne, onely with alteration of one word,. Whereupontells his reader, that the Knight makes a verse that.
He hath not onely a quarrell to my Masters, but for want of better stuffe hee scannes hisalso vpon his fingers, and findes them too short by many feete. Yet I dare vndertake there areenough left standing to beare a millon of as stout Scar-crowes as.
That which galleth him is, that the Knight now.
Now you speak of that, you put me in mind of a merry answere which I heard my Master make touching that point. The Woods (quoth hee) standing vpon holy ground, he hath little reason to find fault if I gaue them; withall hee concluded, that he was not a little glad he had power so to order them; and the rather, for that suchmight be disappointed for building their nests there.
The felling of those Woods (as I haue heard) will be the raising of a more charitable work: But of what timber are those fellowes made, who with their goggle eyes prye into euery mans priuate affaires? Is this the next way to further? but amongest other things, I muse howscapes his fingers, seeing his reuolt first bredde this quarrell; tis a wonder hee doth so quietly part with his prey,.
Assure your selfe there is a pad in the straw. It is either for feare of some foule discouery, or for hope of his recouery: hee finds it his best course, to sooth him with the acknowledgement of a, and to free him from the vices of vulgar life.
We will not diue so deepe in his thoughts. I warrant the Knight laughes his heart sore at thewench, whichinuention hath lately landed on our English coast.
Laugh! I protest there comes not a friend to visit him, but hee tells him of the, & how friendlyhath promised to bring him to the house where shee is to bee found: onely hee feares shee is some cast wench; and if the Frier her Ghostly Father, by whom she was conuerted, haue blowne vpon her, hee hath passed his word to turne her ouer toGroome. And shall not I (thinke you) be well promoted with thereuersion? But the best is he coniures them all.
If the Knight should make vse ofhis curtesie in this, he shall haue good cause to confesse that there is aindeed. When he shall meet withvpon Earth, hee will giue the more credite to those singing flames, and ghastly Ghosts in the after World.
I haue heard goodaffirme, that dreames most commonly arise, either, so saies,; or, and then,; or else, and then. Now perhapshauing an ill braine, and worse bloud, had beene reading of, and his: or of, or else the Poet, who had both faire daughters ofor of& his, and so hauing a spleen at the Knight, doth with a strong imagination fasten the supposed crimes vpon him, as if hee had binin that kind.
in that kind; I heard him say one day in the Stable, hee would giue 20. poundhad said troth, wishing that all rich widdowes neere London might read his booke: for then they would hold him, and craue no other testimony for the approbation of his courage and virility.
The like fable thecoyneth to disgrace onewhom he describeth to be one of theKnights; who (saith the);:.
O notable figment! this is inuented to cry quittance for our, mentioned in the Letter to the.
As I am a true man, I cannot imagine that so impious an affection can harbor in any Protestant breast; but I remember I met not long since with a pretty, not altogether dissonant from this purpose, made vpon the credible relation of a Gentleman who had trauelled forraine parts: which as neere as I can hit it, runnes thus.
I promise you this is more then an inch beyond the reach of my Latin: I would it were Englished.
On the sudden I cannot render it better then thus.
If my doublet had no better buttons thenofhad, I should cracke them all with laughing at this conceipt. I trowdarknesse will bee sufficiently enlightned with this more passable probability. If hee haue any sparke of shame he will not heereafter seeke such, which show themselues in the blacknesse of vgly vntruth, when they are once brought to the light of Triall.
Surely his braine is very like the soyle of, which (assay) yeelds euery Moone, a new supply of strange Monsters, and deformed creatures, not to be paraleld by any former praesidents. But all this while wee haue ouerslipped his. What saies he to the Knights valour?
In my opinion he might well haue giuen ouer that chase, as hauing receiued a modest, short sufficient, and discreet answere. Yet saith he,.
It were better theshould picke out the eies of tenne thousand such, who are not onely as so many, but hugeblemishing the sight of the body polliticke. Though he think there is not such a, holding him no wiser then M=r=., yet it is well knowne his approued sufficiencies neede no such trumpet to commend him in the gates.
You haue no reason to take it in ill part, hee serues all Iustices of peace alike, glauncing at them as.
, passion hath almost drawne vs aside from the firstpretended against the, which was.
You say well; he builds vpon that,, which might bee easily salued with that,. It is an old saying and a true,? Hee that is regardlesse of his owne soule, life, and state, is no fit guardian for a Common-weale. But see how purblind thisis; when he hath a purpose to play the counterfet. Hee that was so quick-sighted to spye a marginall note ninty two pages off to serue his owne turne, will not now see that which is directly opposite, beeing directedthereunto with the letter, wherewith hee hath not beene vnacquainted since hee could number; for had he but cast his eye (O partiall eye) aside, hee might haue seenebedewing his cheekes with this lament,. So that if the question be how it could stand with the Knights valour to, he brings inepitomizing that, which himself thorow the amazement of a so monstrous proiect was vnable to particularize to the full: vizt..
This winde no doubt raised the storme of the Knights passion, wherof that the reader might entertaine more then a generall, or cursory apprehension, he giues him an hint by himselfe, and his owne friends, what euery trueshould haue either corporally or relatiuely felt.
Had he made an enumeration of the worthy Peeres, whose massacre was murtherously intended, then would he haue charged him (as I heare he doth for his Apology in the behalfe of the most renowmed, and euer memorable, and what not? Or else you should haue seene them all summed vp, with one and the same regardlesse account, that had the powder put out these.
It is very probable, howsoeuer he speake of some of his owne profession who detest that bloudy plot more, and for higher respects then the Knight, yet it seems this Libeller is none of that number: for albeit there was an impossibility that Sirshould haue gone to the pot alone, without the company of many noble Lords, and the rest his worthy associates there assembled, he sticks not to say,. Thus dothbewray his true intention in the particular, which pollicy aduiseth him to colour and conceale in the generall.
! here is a new, spick and spanne, from the mint: you haue on the sodaine giuen him as fit a name as the bestcould possibly haue inuented. These two wordes do import as much as,; the first of which hath no neerer affinity with his name, then the other with his nature, as being, so regardlesse of Kisse and Kinne, that he will be easily drawne, according to the Prouerb () to libell against his own Father and neerest of bloud.
As I am true Groome, I thought M=r=. Mayor had called him, which hee might well haue warranted; For whatsoeuercould inuent,suggest,pretend, ormaintaine, hishath raked together, out of the bogs of Hell, to cramme this his railing Pamphlet withall.
You haue not yet heard al he hath to say, for the degrading of the Knights valour, who (saith).
Were hee not past all shame, hee would haue swallowed downe that morsell with silence; The more he rubs that sore, the more he renewes the memory of that Tragicall ende of, whose princely breast carried to his graue the Characters of their gracelesse, and vngrateful disloyalty. Their murther of Kings, their garboyles raised in free States, and their alienating the hearts of subiects from their obliged obedience, must not in any hand in them bee held treason, but deuotion; wheras on the contrary it is not Courage, but Cowardise, to seeke by the execution of penall lawes (which are now grown rusty for want of vse) to free the country from such, who make themselues drunke with the bloud of the Saints, playing with imperiall Globes, as Whales do with barrels, which they tosse vp and downe at their pleasures.
Yet as if these things were nifles, no whit preiudiciall to a Common-weale, he complaineth of want of the Knights Charity,(saith hee).
An ouer-feruent desire indeede.Rather then faile, if there be any powder in a Country, they will send fiery Chariots to hoise vs vp into the Clouds.
It were better in my opinion to trauel thither on foot; hee shall bee sure to lose much lether who spurres Cut so fast: but by his leaue I will not hyre such a blind Guide at so deere a rate. When I come to S=t=,or, he will beare mee in hand, that I haue a little further to trauell, as being in the Suburbs of Paradise, whereas (God wot) I shall haue gone so farre out of my way, and then stand in need of a new helpe, to bring mee out of the Deuills mouth.
Wee shall heare anon what ghostly directions hee will giue vs to further vs in this voyage: In the meane season it is not amisse to obserue what skill hee vseth in peruerting the Knights meaning. The Knight indeed professeth irreconcilable detestation; but of whom?Hee proclaimes not warre against, and other poore seduced soules; his discretion hath taught him not to bind the nocent and innocent in one bundle. They arewhom hee brandeth as worthy perpetuall detestation., as long as they deserue that denomination, I cannot see how the mostdare bid them; neither doth he malitiously desire, but rather vpon more then probableconiecture by way of caution foretell the damnation of their soules who second those hellish Pyoners, in those diuellish courses, which are so odious in the sight of God and man. Reason he had to expresse his dislike asas he could; for that hee feared the like incouragements, and meritorious attributes, to such future attempts from the Papall Sea, by whose Agents that plot is now (in shew) disclaimed; though rather for the contrary successe, then the barbarous immanity thereof.
I am verily perswaded that most Christian Charity would not sticke to professe eternall opposition to that, whose hearts harbour dangerous factions, whose tongues are tip'd with malitious scandalls, whose hands are imbrued in a Sea of innocent bloud. If the greathaue shut the gates of heauen against such inueterate, and impenitent Murtherers, I cannot see how mercy can be hired by the Popesto lend them a key for their entrance into life.
It was no cruelty of yore to cast a poore harmlesse infant springing from the scorched womb of the mother, into the fiery flames, there to be consumed; but now the very speech ofagainst notorious traytours, and matchlesse Malefactors, argues: the truth is, our Iustices may be wel suspected for both, as being according toaccount. Did they imploy their authority in suppressing them in their particular Shires, as well as they vse their wits indecreeing against them in the, they should gaine more honour, and the Countrey reape farre more good.
I dare say you long till you heare how he laies about him in the defence of, but his meaning is to try your patience. The second part of histouching certaine exceptions against himselfe, taketh vp the remainder of his first Chapter. For the dispatch of these(so hee tearmes them) as if hee were challenging his Copes-mate at, hee doth methodically diuide this sequele into,and.
The rime may well beseemethe Poet, orthe Ballad-maker; but I would gladly see the reason; what meanes he by?
Sir(I remember) to abate the pride of his spurtling quill in blemishing the worth of other mens lines, giues him a tast of such an, wouen throughout that work, as would inforce trueto blush at the very first sight therof, there being very few leaues wherein the Reader shall not meet with a, aor a. Some of which he there paged to saue himselfe a labour in the discouery of those many other,, and, which any curious eye without the helpe of Spectacles might easily discerne.
And what flappe hath he gotten to free his paper from these magotting creatures, whose blowing hath made his periods so vnsauory?
He doth confesse, and auoid. He forsooth had rather vtter his minde in a; as being.
Hee that will take vpon him to Minorize the learning of Authors, and to dedicate his workes vnto persons of that extraordinary note, and superlatiue iudgement, must not onely weigh his positions in the ballance of the sanctuary, that they bee consonant to the truth, butthem also with a Rhetoricall, that they want not those comelywhich are requisite in the Professors of. The fabricke of Theologicall worke ought to bee raised. Ragged and rugged stones are fitter for the wild, then to stand in the. To runne a poore silly heartlesseout of breath, argues little variety of wit and lesse solidity of iudgement.
Will you seeplay her prize? then listen how pretilycan defend.(saith he).
Heere is a Ladde for the nonce to helpe a lame dogge ouer a stile. O thou rarely patronized, downe on thy marrow-bones, prostratethy selfe at the foote of this thy valorous Champion borne in, who hath stretched his fiue wits on the Tenter-hooks to maintaine thy worth. Tis great pitty that this lustycame so raw from the; had he continued a little longer at School by this time he would haue made theroare.
I know not how other men stand affected: for my owne part, I haue euer held that Fidler worthy to bee turned out of doores among the rascall company, (though he haue a badge on his sleeue as broad as my hand) who still harpes vpon one string, and dwells vpon one tune, be it the best horne-pipe, that eueraffoorded. Doth not one harsh bleating voice disgrace a whole quire? Doth not one vnsauory hearb giue a relish to the whole pot of pottage? A discord I grant may be admitted with some grace, but not continued without some intollerable disgust. In a word, if one flye mar a boxe of sweetest ointment, I cannot see what credit this multiplicity ofcan bring tobooke.
I hope we shall find better stuffe in the rest; how doth he shake off the? they sticke I feare so close to his skin, (maugre hisperfume) that they will hardly out of the bone.
He blusters mainly that the Knight shold crie,.
Is he so impudent as to stand in the defence of these vncouth and ridiculous fopperies, which can shew no other pedegree butto countenance them from exploding contempt.
As touching the first practise; he doth not say thatare Christned; but that the.
Whether it be a similitude, or anI am not so cunning a Logician to distinguish. It skils not much how they please to tearme it, who are driuen to their shifts in seeking some colourable mantle to shroud it from the inglorious note of. The question is,, what warrant he hath for this genericall similitude, (which he confesseth) betweene the, and the.
Nay there he leaues you to your own search. If you can neither findto warrant this practise, hee meanes not to be your Informer. It sufficeth him beeing betweene Hawke and Buzzard to turne it ouer with a witlesse and vnciuill iest, which he deuideth betweene his old familiars theand the.
I haue heard some say there was once much adoe about theof an: but there beeing store of that breed at,is now growne so nice, that he will not be seene vpon the backe of his olde, wherefore the poore weariedis faine to ride him.
Tis pitty they should part companies; yet did I neuer see man more troubled with thein his sleepe; thenis at mid-day with the,of whom he grones to be disburdened. Faine would he haue the Printer beare part of his luggage; but seeing it is now more then a yeere and a day since thewas found as a stray, and cryed in open Mart by, the custome of the Mannormakes it his owne, without cutting off either mane or tayle.
My masters I am glad to see your wits so frolicke; yet I must needes say it is but: besides, his reasoning approoues more then you say. For admit a, should put on the Popes robes, his, his, come with S., sit downe in theon the Chayre appropriated to his Holinesse: and that he should in his passage be saluted by the Vulgar as Pope (bearing those ensignes with which that Deity alone is dignified) Should he not be sure to be called, and pay deare for this his genericall, and accidentall resemblance? Will it serue his turne to say, Alas no man heard mee say that I was, I did but weare his vestiments, and a little counterfeit his state.
I will giue him my word hee shall finde it better to play the, then so to immitate the.
The case is of the same nature. The
blessing of Bells is no lesse presumptuously
accompanied with the sacred rites, and ceremonies of,
(yea with greater solemnities) then the Christning
of Children: so that the Laye people know not how
to distinguish them. Now marke howplayesthe, he doth not say thatare Christned,
onely this,. Neither is the Venetian, though habited like the: Shall he
not be sure to haue this pearle or the like rung in his
eares, by oneor other.I haue so
charitable an opinion of, that his reuerent
respect to theof the Romish Sea, would make
him say, Fye vpon such a Pope. Yet (see how blind
deuotion ouer-swaies th'equity of his iudgement in
the like) hee quarrells with the Knight for saying,.