Trulie Cousen I am sorie that you should thus vpo~ a pievish conceite of yours bring your self into this vn-necessarie trouble for a trifle and matter of nothing as it were.
If you be sorie indeed as you pretende, then you might haue let me alone, and not haue caused your Apparitor to serue me (as he did) with Citation, for assure your selfe if you had not troubled me, I would never haue troubled my selfe about this trifle you speake of.
Nay I must not do so, I must deale indifferentlie you know, and not be partiall though you be mykinswoman. Th'information being against you as well as others, & your name being prese~ted to me by the church Wardens with other women moe, if I should leaue you out and proceed against them, I should not doe that which were fitting for my place and office, you know I am sworne to doe iustice.
Indeed your office and place afoordes much iustice, if it be well observed, as ordinarie iustice as Billinsgate doeth loue & friendship for a boxe of th'eare: you are sworne you saye, and will not that oath of yours alow you to shew as much favor and kindnesse to your kinswoman in a trifle, as to a stranger that is no kinne to you in a matter of weight?
O I knowe where you are now, I thought where you would bee straight, I knew I should heare of it, you meane mistresBut in good faith your Minister did her wrong, neither had he anie law to warranthim to doe that he vrged her vnto: I co~fesse she made a fault before she was maried, but the man you know made her amendes, and I doe not heare but that they liue orderly and well nowe: notwithstandinge all which your hotte spirited Minister (of spight & malice as it is thought) would haue put them both to open penance, if I had not stucke close to them.
Mercifull Christ, what neede anie witnesse to be produced against you, when your owne mouth doeth so apparantlie co~demne you? The gentlewoman you confesse made a fault: and what was that fault but simple Fornicatio~ at the least? For the which our Minister would haue done that which belonged vnto him, if you would haue lett him, and that whiche I take it (by your leaue) the Booke of common Prayer it selfe doeth warrant him to doe, and you by your owne confession withstoode him in that good purpose of his. Nowe surely (my goodkinsman) this is a sinne amongest others that you must repent of, otherwise it wilbe woe with you. And I pray you tel me one thing: Mistres A. B. is a straunger to you and I am your kinswoman, her fault (cover it & shadow it as you will) was vncleannesse at the least, and that which you trouble mee for, is but a Ceremonie, & as your self confesse, a matter of no moment. What warrant haue you then so stiflie to stande with her in her sinne, and to deale thus sharplie with me and others in a thing indifferent, or a matter of nothing?
Well gentle kinswoman, seeing you are so snappish & over-busying your self in other folkes matters that apperteine not vnto you, I pray you let me heare now how handsomely you can answere for your selfe.
With whose matters did I medle I pray you, did not you first name mistresse A. B. your selfe?
All is one for that, I know you meant her when you said, that myoath might as well alow me to shew fauour to my kinswoman in a trifle, as to a stra~ger in a matter of weight.
Well be it so then: if your conscience did accuse you, looke you to that: But what haue you now to say to me, and what is the cause why you haue sent for me?
You neede not aske, you know it well enough I am sure. It is for your foolish nicenesse in this trifling matter of Churching. And I pray you in good sadnesse, what reason haue you why you refuse to be Churched?
If it be as you say a trifle, the more to blame you to trouble your friends in so trifling a cause: But what doe you meane by Churching? Doe you meane that which is sett downe in the Booke?
Iust, I meane that and none other: For law will not warrant vs to presse you to any other?
No. nor I thinke to that neither if it be well examined: But seeing you meanethat kinde of Churching, The reason in a woord why I refuse it is this: Because I would be loth to shew my selfe either Iew or Papist.
Why will thankesgiuing to God after Childbirth make you a Iew or a Papist?
No: Thankesgiuing will not: But this manner of thankesgiving that you would haue me to obserue is in trueth no thankesgiving at all, but a meere Iewish or Popish Purifying.
How doe you proove it to be no thankesgiuing?
By the verie first institution of it: For the Papistes that were the woorshipfull founders and devisers of it, and knew best their own meaning, did in the instituting of it, giue it this title:. Whereby it is manifest that their very drift and intent in th'institution was only for a Purification or Purging, and therefore no thankesgiving: Secondly, there is no onewoord, matter or forme of thankesgiuing in the whole order of it as it is set downe in the booke: and therefore it can not be that it was ordayned for Thankesgivinge, though in the title thereof it be absurdlie so called.
But why doe you tearme it a Iewish or a Popish Purifying?
It is Iewish in 2 respectes: First in that the woman after she hath brought foorth a childe, is held vncleane (as vnder the Law) till such time as she hath shewed her selfe in the Temple. Secondlie in that shee is commanded to offer her accustomed offeringes, which is drawen & deriued from the Lamb and young Pigeons vnder the Law. Popish it is in 3 respectes: First in that it was instituted and devised by the Papistes, apishlie imitating the Iewes, and bringing in one kinde of Purifying in steade of another. Secondly in that the woman is commaunded to come as neare the communion table, as in the time of popery they came to the high Altar. Lastlie, inregard of the Popish offeringe, to weete the Chrisome: For she is commaunded to offer th'accustomed offeringes, which is sett downe to be the Chrisome, In which regard you may as iustlie trouble me and cal me hither for not offering the Chrisome, as for not being purifyed, and as good law you haue for th'one as th'other, whiche makes me thinke (as I sayed before) that you haue no law amongest you (but onelie the lawlesse law of your will and pleasure) to compell any woman to be Churched.
Well, wee will talke of that another time: but I would to God, yee foolish women would medle with that whiche belongs vnto you, and which is within the co~passe of your owne element, and not take vppon you the decision and interpretation of the law, which ye vndersta~d not. But I pray you tell me one thinge, what if the Church now would institute and ordeyne a solemneof women, would you not beepurified?
No indeed would I not: For if I should, I should then either with the Iewes denie Christ to be come in the fleshe to giue an end to those shadowes which were figures of the purifying and washing away of our sinnes by his bloud, or els with the Papistes I must denie the bloudshead and sufferings of Christ to be th'only and alone sufficient purgation of sinne, and therefore it is that we must haue a supply and be farther holpen by some Church Ceremonie, or outward forme of Prayers out of the mouth of some shaveling or Priest.
Yea, but see now I pray you how you are deceyved in the heate of your zeale, looke in the booke there is no such matter ofas you speake of, but onelie of.
Trust me, you say true, I had almost forgotten that it speaketh not a woord indeed of Purifying. But what a iugling & blearing of th'eis of the simple is this amongstyou. May we not heerein say of you & your fellowes, that yee are the most perillous instrumentes, and dangerous impostors that euer Sathan raysed vp for th'advancement and restoring againe of Poperie.
Why so I pray you my good kinswoman? What neede all this heate among friendes? You imagine belike you are amo~g your scolding dames and pratling huswiues at home?
No good Maister Chauncelor, I know I thanke God where I am, neither am I any whitte distempered at all: But that whiche I haue sayed, I may truly and lawfullie say againe: In which regard well fare the Papistes say I, for they shall rise vp in iudgement against you, who like good fellowes yet in playne and open tearmes, euen bare faced, as it were, doe seeke to seduce vs, and to drawe vs to their false and idolatrous woorship and service in Poperie, as namelie by their Masse, Mattens, Ensong, Purification, and other such like:Whereas you much more dangerously and euen vnder a maske or visard as it were, and not vnlike to him that transformeth him selfe into an Angell of light, doe goe about to drawe and allure vs to the selfe same false worship & service but by cleanlier names and honester titles, as to their Purification by the title and name of Thankesgiving, that is, to a Iewish Ceremonie that should be abolished, vnder the pretence & colour of a seruice of God that should be continued.
But I pray you Cousen Puritane, is there no difference betwixt that in Poperie and ours?
The difference (as I haue bene tolde by learned men) is onely in this, That theirs is in Latin & yours in English, otherwise you proper Thankesgiuing which yee call Churching, is even the very same woord for woord (excepting only the Title, wherin (as I saye) yee iuggle and walke a little more covertly then they) with their Purification in Poperie. And can the changingof a name or title alter the thing it selfe or make it of another nature? If yee haue that gift and power amongst you, then yee may as well bring vs in the Masse vnder the name and title of a Communion: and so he that refuseth to goe to Masse, you may serue him with a Citatio~ for not comming to the Communion, as in the like case you doe now by vs, you trouble vs and call vs in questio~ for denying of Thankesgiuing, because we refuse to be Purified.
In good faith it is more the~ I haue considered of, whether that in Poperie be so neare agreeing to ours as you speak of, I beleeue your leaders haue mis-informed you. But howsoeuer it be and howsoeuer the Papistes doe holde and account of it, it makes no great matter. The Church you see now holdeth it for no other then a meere, which is very decentand requisite for euerie woman after so great deliuerance.
What if the Church should holde ourLadies Psalter to be Davids Psalter, or th'AueMarie for a Prayer? Should I therefore take and vse th'one for Davids Psalter, and th'other for a Prayer? I know the Lord is to be thanked for all his mercies, much more for so great a blessing as Childbirth is: But as we are to giue God thankes, and are therevnto tyed and bound in duetie and allegeance: so are we still to doe the same according to the pleasure of him that commaundeth, and after the square and rule of his ordinance, and not after the preceptes, phansies and inventions of men, especiallie after the prescription of the man of Synne, that is after the manner of the superstitious and idolatrous Papistes.
But in faith doe you not thinke it a decent thing, that after so great an escape, and for the birth of a babe into the worlde, there should bee Thanksgiving? or would you haue no differencebetwixt reasonable creatures and beastes, but that itshould bee left indifferent to vnrulie men to accompanie with their wives at their pleasures, without regard of their weaknes and vncleannesse?
You aske me wonderfull strange things: First, whether it be not a decent thing vpon such a deliuerance and the birth of a Babe into the worlde, there should not bee Thankesgiving. Secondlie, whether it should bee left indifferent for men to playe the beastes with their wives. Vnto which I aunswere, that the manner of Churching that you thus trouble vs for, doeth not redresse anie of these inconveniences: There being in it in trueth no maner of Thanksgiving at all, but onelie a speach or superscription of a Thankesgiving. Secondlie,whereas by the law of God, to touch a woman in the time of her separation and vncleanesse, should bee death, what punishment haue you prouided for this so great and haynous enormitie? Or howe doeth your Churching of women restrainea carnall and licentious appetite from executing his villenous and beastlie desire? Hath he not his full swindge and libertie to doe what he list for all that? So that yee complaine of dangers, disorders, & inconveniences, and yet leaue them still as you found them without cure or redresse, neuer caring for anie thing so your ydle Ceremonie may be kept.
A man may easelie smell (gentle Cousen) where you haue bene at schoole, yet I haue talked in my daies with some of your own crew, and they haue held it for a thing indifferent at the least, and haue not bene halfe so hotte in it as you, and therefore for the loue I beare you, I would wishe you to haue some regard of modestie and womanhood. For yea faith when you haue saide andwrangled all that you can, it will be found a most decent thing.
A decent thing? What talke you of decencie? I tell you I hold it for more then aDecent thing, even for a religious thing, and a part of my bounden duetie, if it bee (as you say) a Thankesgiving and a service of God. But I pray you tell me, because you wish me to haue a regard of modestie and womanhood, haue you had any information of any misbehaviour against me, either in my speach, company, or cariage of my selfe, if you haue, I shall thanke you as my good kinsman to admonish me of it.
By my trouth no: if it were not for this odde pievishnesse of yours, (whereby you trouble both your selfe and your friendes more then needs) I doe not (so God helpe me) knowe or heare any thinge by you that deserveth reproofe: and therefore I am the willinger to pull you out of it if I could.
It were well indeed if I could be pulled from my faultes and you from your swearing. But when your friend or kinsman doeth any thing or refrayneth from anie thing of conscience (as I may safelieprotest vnto you in this case I doe) Then the way and meanes to set me straight (if I be awry) is as I take it, the sacred Scripturs and woord of God, which if you bring, or any good reason out of it for proofe and warrant of this your Churching, woe and double woe to me if I subscribe not to it.
Whop: here is a revell and adoe with, my kinswoman you say, refrayneth of: But fro~ what doeth shee refrayne? forsooth from Thankesgiving to God: Is not this pretie stuffe, or is not this a warme Conscience?
Not so: Deceyue not your selfe, nor triumph not before the victorie, your kinswoman thanketh God she hath bene better taught then so. It is not from Thankesgiuing to God (as you would haue it) that she refrayneth of Conscience, but onely from Iewish or Popish Purifying shadowed and varnished over with a colour or shewe of Thankesgiving. Thus shee tolde you once before, and this shee telleth you againe andagaine. But I pray you let me aske you one thing.
What is that?
Is not Thankesgiving a service of God?
Yes: I hope no man doubtes of that.
What meane you then to harpe so much vpon Decencie and modestie? Would you haue vs serue God for Dece~cie? Sometimes againe you saye that Churching is a thing indifferent, a trifle, and a matter of nothing, and yet you will needes haue it to be a Thankesgiving to God. Howe can this hang togeather then, that one & the same thing should be a matter of Dece~cie, of indifferencie, or a trifle of no moment, & yet a seruice of God? Is the seruice of God come to that passe amongst you now?
I meane onely the Ceremonie of it, as the Tyme, and th'Attyre, the companie of women, the offerings, and the feasting of neighbours and friendes, to be as thinges indifferent & of no moment: But not theprayers and thanksgiuing in the church, that I holde to bee holy and not indifferent.
The trueth is yee holde yee can not tell what amongst you: The Ceremonie stickes so neare to your seruice, and your maner of seruice is so sutable and agreeing with your Ceremonie, that yee can not for your liues sever the one from th'other. Take away the Ceremonie, and there is no need of your seruice that I see. Therefore you may doe well in my conceite, to let them both henceforward sleepe and surcease. For lett the poore woman that hath escaped, bee never so thankfull, or let her husband (as maister of the familie) with his servantes and friends giue God thankes never so earnestlie and Christianlie for that deliverance, (and that euen then when the remembrance of that mercie of God is freashest in their memories) yet all this is nothinge to you, nor of no reckoning, vnlesse the Woman may haue her solemne Purification at her monethes end, with her white vayleor some such marke to be knowen by, which is a manifest signe that albeit yee pretende Thankesgiuing, yet in trueth yee care not for it, so your Popish custome and ceremonie of Purifying be not broken of.
Indeed it were fitt that ye women should appoint the service and ceremonies of the Church, and then belike we should be wel & handsomelie served. But I pray you tel me one thing: What if for the peace of the Church you should giue thankes after this maner as in the book is prescribed, what discredite, daunger or inconvenience would ensue to you vpon that?
That is as much to say in good English, as what if for the peace of the Church one should make shew to giue thankes, when in deed and in trueth there is no Thankesgiving at all? were not that a plaine mocking of God, a kinde of Hypocrisie, & Prophaning of the name & Religion of God?
Trust me I thinke you are one ofthe perversest creatures that ever anie man dealt with. I speake not one woord of a shew of Thankesgiving, but of giving thankes in deede, and looke now whither you be runne.
Why did you not speake of giving thanks after the maner as the Booke prescribeth: and that as I haue often tolde you, is but a shew or shadow and no trueth. How am I perverse then, when I ground vppon your owne speaches? Now because you aske me what inco~venience would ensue if I should for anie respect vse this prete~ded Thanksgiving, I will shew you (if you will giue me leaue, & that you will with patience heare me) how I shall therein offende many and sundrie wayes.
As how I pray you for my learning?
Two wayes I haue alreadie told you of: as first that in so doeing, I should therein shewe my selfe either Iewish or Popish. Secondlie, that in fayning to giue GODthankes, and to vse no one woord tendingto that ende, nor looking that way, is nothing els but in a sort to mocke God to his face.
Well what then?
Thirdlie in so doeing, I shall not onely nourish, foster and maintayne manie superstitious and erroneous opinions in the heartes of th'ignorant, and so strengthen the simple in their false woorship, but also fall into divers and sundrie most daungerous absurdities: as namelie, first of all that a woman after childbirth is vncleane and vnholy, co~trary to th'Apostles wordes, who teacheth vs that a Woman is sanctified by bearing of children. For what may Purifying I pray you presuppose, but some former vncleannesse? Likewise, that a woman is helde for the time as an excommunicate person, and therefore most solemnly be receyued agayn into the church. For what may Churching presuppose but some former excluding, shutting out and cutting off?
These then I perceyue are someof your supposed absurdities, haue you any more of them?
Well iest as you please, I haue more of them then you or any man of your place ca~ with anie conscience answere or avoyde.
Let vs heare them the~ I pray you, and dispatch that we may know all our payne at once.
Why then I say further that in yeelding to this Churchinge of yours, I should by myne example condemne the primitiue Church, and all the reformed Churches in other Countreyes at this day, who vse no such churchings: and withall iustifie and approoue the papists, and all other superstitious churches that ioine with them in the vse of it.
A great piece of woorke, as if it were such a matter to varie and dissent a little from Calvin or Beza, I tell you they may as well learne of vs, as we of them.
Who spake of Calvin or Beza? I promise you I did not so much as think of the~.I spake onely of the Primitiue and Reformed churches. And albeit those men you speak of were worthie instruments in Gods church, & such as we haue cause to thank God for: yet the Lord I know might haue spread foorth the light of his Gospell, and reformed his Church, had they neuer lived. But this is the manner of you all, you broode of Chauncelors & your Associates, when you can saye nothing, then you fall straight a girding & railing on Calvin or Beza, or some such worthie man.
Gentle Cousen, be not angrie, I meane you no hurt yea faith. What other inconveniences or absurdities doe you finde in this Churchinge, speake your minde freelie, for I am even bent to heare you.
I should therein either my self abuse, or yeeld to th'abusing of the woord of God.
How so I pray you?
I meane concerning the Psalme that is there appointed for that purpose, vz. the 121 Psalme, which being left to the churchby the holy Ghost for comfort and consolation in time of distresse, to applie it to Thankesgiving, contrarie to the purpose and meaning of the holy Ghost, must needes (as I say) be a playne abusing and prophaning of the woord. And if it bee well considered of, it will be founde to bee more fitte a great deale for a woman in the time of her travel, agonie & distresse, then afterward when she is of strength & in good estate.
Yea faith yea faith gossippe, I doubt not if any of your precise crew had sett down that Psalme for that purpose, but you would haue liked of it well enough for all the cavills and quarrells you make against it now.
Thinke you so S=r=: Well I see that men of your occupation may easilie bee deceyved. But to deale plainlie and not to dissemble with you, one especiall reason among others that draweth mee to dislike and refuse this Iuel of yours (I meane yourChurching) is, that in yeelding therevnto, I should iustifie you and your fellowes in your crooked and vnconscionable proceedings, that is in vrging and pressing your owne Traditions before the Commaundements of God.
And bee these the pretie reasons that mooue you thus to dislike the custome and reverent vsage of our Church? Now surely it sheweth the waywardnes of your conceyte, in that you preferre your owne will before the peace of the Church, which ought to be dearer vnto you then thus to stand out & endaunger your selfe about such trifles, & matters of nothing, that are not woorth a rush to speake of.
No are? Then I say still, The more shame for you to keepe such a revell and adoe, for such things as your selfe confesse are not woorth whisteling: and therin you shew your selues to bee right Scribes and Pharisees, that is, Hypocrites, tithingmint and cumine, and leaving iudgment and mercy, troubling the children of God and those that ye ca~ not iustlie charge with anie crime, for not obseruing your Traditions & beggerly Ceremonies, as Crossing, Kneeling, Churching, &c. and in the meane season suffring the breakers of Gods holy commandements (aske Mistres A. B. els, & a nombre of knowne Papistes, Atheistes, Charmers, Blasphemers, Prophaners of the Saboth, and such like) to goe scotfree and vnpunished, as if your whole delight, care and watchfulnesse were only for th'obseruation of these bables and fruitlesse Ceremonies of yours.
O M=rs=I perceiue is a great mote in your eye, wel I pray God that you of the holy brotherhood that make it so daintie, do (the best of you) liue no worse then she doeth now, what soever she hath bene heretofore.
Amen say I, and better to. Indeed to doe her no wrong as I heare no great exclamation of her, for any notorious crime, so onth'other side, wee that are her neighbours, may safely acquite her of any great co~mendation that shee hath for any holy and religious course thereby to draw on others by her example. Therfore praise her as much as you list, when you haue done the best you can, shee will bee founde but an ordinarie woman: and the special thing that you can co~mend in her (for any thing I see) is this: that she is as quietly churched whe~ her time comes, as any of the rest of her neighbours.
I would to God I could say so by you to Cousen, condition I had giuen twentie pound yea faith, & then you might haue eased vs of much of this trouble.
You may doe one day, when you ca~ bring me any sufficient reason and warrant for it out of the Scripture. And if you will but giue vs a tolleration and dispensation for it till then, we will aske no more.
You say well, I know your meaning. But in good truth I muze that the Peace of the Church doeth no more mooue you.
You muze you say, that the peace of the Church doeth nomore mooue me: And I muze likewise what you would haue saide if you had lived in the dayes of our Savi. Christ, who defended his Disciples against the Pharisees in a verier trifle & of farre lesse moment then this our refusall of your Churching.
Where I pray you, shew me that for my learning.
What say you to the refusall of washing of handes at meate? Is not that as small a matter as may be? And if you had bene by at that time, when our Savior so boldly defended his Disciples therein, it is like enough you would haue coumpted him for a verie Trifler, or some busie Troubler of the Peace of the Church, that would keepe such a doe for nothing. Sure by your dealing with vs we can coniecture none other.
Tush the Comparisons are not alike.
Trulie even as like as may be. The Pharisees founde fault with the Disciples forbreaking a Tradition of th'Elders, viz. washing of handes at meate: and you find fault with vs for breaking a much woorse Traditio~ of yours. You aske vs often whether Churching be not a Decent thing: We aske you againe, whether washing bee not both a Decent thing, a cleanly thing, and a wholesome thing? Our Savior (you see) defended his Disciplesin the breach of that Decencie of those Pharisees of that age: and his woord doth warrant and defende vs in the breach of this supposed Decencie of your Pharisees of this age.
Nay then yea faith, if yee goe to that, ye may take your selues by the nose Mistres Cousen: For who the Devill be the right Pharisees & Hypocrites if yee be not? Ye are so demure, and ye make it so nice and so holy amo~gst you, that by the Masse a dogge would not dwell with you.
I perceyue if a dogge dwelt with you, if you could but make him speake once, you would quicklie teach him to sweare.
O that is all your grace amongst you: you thinke your selues so pure over other men, because you can a litle bridle your selues from swearing, and yet ye wil doe tenne times woorse and make no bones at it. As couetous, as spitefull, and malicious yee are the most of you, as dogges. I knowe one of your crew who would not sweare for no good, and vsed ordinarilie to pray with his me~ in his chamber, and yet beeing at a Knights house, where hee had good entertayneme~t, they prayed so hartilie amongst them, that for conscience sake they faire thwited me of a valence of a bedde, and caried that & a piece of plate with them to the value of twentie nobles at the least.
Well though this peradventure may be one of your legend stories, for any thing I know, yet alow it to be true, what gette you by that? one sinne you know excuseth not another. These were hypocrites & theeves,therefore you to avoide this daunger, will needes be swearers & ruffeans: what physike or policie call you that to avoid Hypocrisie by plaine and open iniquitie?
Why I doe not defend swearing to bee good, woman: you doe not heare me say so, I wish I could leaue it with all my heart: It is but a foolish custome and comes from me at vnawares, and that many times whe~ I thinke no harme in the world.
Th'Apostle is against you in that: for he sayeth, Out of the aboundance of the heart the mouth speaketh: And our Saviour saieth, That out of the heart comes evill thoughts, and yet you can droppe vile oathes amongst you (such is your skill) & thinke no harme. I must needes commend you for this, by meanes whereof you haue brought one notable thing to passe in our Church, and I wish for my part yee were Chronicled for it.
What is that good gossippe?
Why, That albeit there be manyParishes amongest vs without a preaching Minister, yet to mende the matter, there bee few Dioces in the lande without a swearing Chauncelor.
That is more the~ you know, good huswife. But if it were so, I doe not thinke but the woorst Chauncelor amongst vs doeth more good then many of your vpstart and busie headed Preachers, pratlers I should say.
Well, to let that rest as it is (for if there be any thing amisse, wee should doe wrong to looke for amendes from you) you see evidentlie, that th'example which I alleadged of our Saviour Christ in reproving the Pharisees and defendinge his Disciples in their refusall of that trifle of washing of handes, is both a check to you, for thus troubling of vs without cause, & a good warrant for vs to doe as we doe.
Doe I see it? I promise you I must gette me better spectacles then, then ever I could yet light on.
Well, if you doe not see it, I must needesholde with you, that your spectacles are starke naught in deede: But whether you doe see it, or will not see it, it is and ought to be a lesson of instruction to vs whom you now thus trouble: That whensoeuer anie Pharisaicall hypocrites doe strictlie vrge and presse the keeping of their owne traditions (bee they neuer so small and trifling) with the neglect of the co~mandements of God, thenit is our partes by all lawfull & holy meanes to bende our selues against them, and not to yeelde to th'observation of the least of them: much lesse when the Traditions shalbe noisome, hurtfull and superstitious, and derogatorie to the glorie of God.
In good faith it was neuer merrie world since these twatling women became divines. I see I do but spend time with you. And yet when you haue sayd and done all that you can for your life, it will be founde (as I haue said) but a trifle that you stand vppon, whereas the peace of theChurch is, or ought to bee to you a matter of great moment, and a thing that you ought daily to pray for, if you haue (as you pretend) any conscience with you, or regard of brotherlie loue, with a desire to mainteine vnitie, and to avoyde iarres & dissentions.
We are I confesse to pray for the peace of Syon: For they shall prosper that loue her. But what? Is the Church now become a maynteiner of trifles? By your speaches so often iterated and redoubled (for you harpe still on that string) it should bee so: and what indignitie were that? But in deede as I haue told you the thing we stand vpon (if it be rightlie examined) is not in that nature of indifferencie as you would beare the world in hande it is, make of it what you will either Thankesgiving or Purifying: if it be Thankesgiving indeed, it is my bounden duetie (say I) to performe it, and a sinne to leaue it vndone: If it bee Purifying, it is my bounden duetie toavoyde it, and a sinne to practise it, because it treadeth vnder foote the sufficiencie of ofthe death and bloudsheading of IESVS Christ, which is th'onlie purgation of my sinne. So that turne it which way you will, it is no light matter or trifle of small regarde, as you would haue it, but a thinge that one way or other greatly concerneth the glorie of God, & therein also you seeme to me apparantlie to crosse, entangle & ensnare your selfe in your owne speaches.
How so I pray you?
I haue tolde you alreadie, and that so often, that I am halfe wearie of telling it. But sure your minde is so on your haulfpenie, that you neither remember what I say, nor thinke on that you say your selfe. Haue you not alwayes called this Churching of yours, a Thankesgiving? and haue you not laboured by the title of it in the Booke, to defende it to be a Thankesgiuing and no Purifying?
Yes that I haue, and so I say still.
Why then I saye for shame away withthis trifle and trifling of yours, and let vs beare no more of that: For Thankesgiving you know must needes be a part of Gods woorship and seruice. And what an impious & vngodly thing were it to make the holy woorship and seruice of God a trifle, a matter of nothing, not worth a rush, or a thing to bee done or not done at our pleasures? I protest vnto you, if it were a Thankesgiving in deede, that is such a part of Gods woorship as he hath comaunded and prescribed in his word, if I should wilfully refuse to doe it, I were not woorthie to bee coumpted a member of his Church.
Yet still me thinkes the peace of the Church doeth not poize and prevaile with you as it should doe.
Heere is a doe with the Peace of the Church, and yet when ye haue all done, a man may easilie see that though ye talke of it never so much, yee vse it for the most part but as a staulking horse amongst you.
What meane you by that?
Why, you know well enough, that the staulkinge horse is not to blame for the death of the foule, he doeth but onely shadowe and stand before the fouler while hee killeth him: Even so doe you. The Peace of the Church (as you handle it) is a notable vaile to shadowe all your deformities and corruptions. If a good Minister doe not yeelde to your lawlesse and vnconscionable subscription, or if he overskippe the Crosse in Baptisme, Ring in Mariage, or any such needles Ceremonie, then straight you choke him with the peace of the Church, the peace of the Church, and so you doe now by vs for our refusall of kneeling and Churching.
And I pray you in good earnest, why may not these and more then these be endured and yeelded vnto for the peace of the Church?
If the Peace of the Church were so deare vnto you as you pretende and make shew of, then would ye never for shame trouble either Ministers or people for such oddethings as those that rather hinder then further men in Religion. But your maner is whe~ you speake of one thing to meane another. You speake of the Peace of the Church, but you meane still the peace of your Hierarchie, the peace of your vnrulie places and offices, the Peace of all your Popish & beggerlie Ceremonies, so they may stande still vntouched, if yee Chauncelyers and your Officials may be at quiet in your roomes and iurisdictions: Litle (the Lord knowes) doe yee care for the peace of the Church: and that is seene not only by your troubling of vs now without cause, but by your ordinarie sile~cing, suspending & imprisoning of the best and holiest Preachers for these trifles, and your countenancing and allowing of dumme dogges, bee there liues and behaviour neuer so shamefull.
O (my good kinswoman) we haue heard enough of these matters long agoe. These supposed quarrells haue ben answered and answered againe, you come to late yea faith withyour baskett of Apples now. What a Devil should you medle with any of these matters? It were much fitter for such as you are, to medle with your spindle and your wheele, and soberlie to attend your trades & vocations, then thus in the pride of your heartes to controlle your betters, and to deale in Church causes which belong not vnto you.
I was I thank God busied in my vocatio~, and so I might haue ben still, had not you sommoned me the~ce by your officer. I know right well Church causes belo~g not to such as I am to deale in, neither doe I meddle withall farther then by way of sute or co~plainte to those that haue authoritie to redresse. And if the Peace of the Church can not mooue you to leaue cyting & troubling vs for trifles, whom otherwise you can not charge with anie crime, never blame vs if the bare sound and noyse of the Peace of the Church doe not at al mooue vs to yeeld to any of your trifling & fruitles Ceremonies against our consciences.
Well I am sorie you are so wilfull yea faith: I perceiue I shall doe no good of you.
I tell you you may easilie doe good of me, and easilie draw me to the bent of your bow, if you can produce and alleage vnto me but one only sentence and proofe out of the scriptures of God.
Scripture? there is nothing with you but Scriptures. No No. It is even the pride of your heart, and pievish singularity of your owne conceyte that doth thus draw you. Why doe you thinke no body seeth anie thing but your selfe? or doe you thinke there be not as sober & as honest wome~ as you Churched?
Then I perceyue you haue no Scripture in the worlde to perswade mee with, your onely scripture is the pride of my heart, the Singularitie of my conceite, and I can not tell what. But you aske me whether as honest women as I be not churched? I aske you againe, Whether as honest men as youhaue not denied Christ. Th'examples of the godlie (you know) are not to be followed but in godlines, whereas it is the common guise of you and your generation to make a solemne gathering and calling as it were of the scabbes, imperfections and bleamishes of the best men, and then to lay them in our dish straight as a choakepeare to vs: as for example, if ye find once that Father Latimer and Ridley, or anie such like reverend man, did weare square cappe and surplus, why then there is no remedie but this must bee proclaymed straight as an authenticall warrant to all the succeeding Ministers of the lande, that they may boldlie and safelie yeelde to the wearing of the like attire.
And I promise you, It is somthing I tell you as light as you make of it. Why is th'example of the godly Martyrs nothing with you, and your precise brotherhoode?
Yes it is something: but I doe not thinke it should waigh more with vs thenth'example of Abraham, David, or Peter, whose steppes you know we must not follow when they slippe or goe awry. But will you your selues I pray you (if a man may aske it) stande to the iudgement, and bee ruled by th'example of the godlie Martyrs?
I see no reason but wee may and ought.
Why then downe falles to the grounde straight your lawlesse oath of Inquisition, wherewith yee so plague the Church now a dayes, Iudge by Mai. Tindall els, Mai. La~bart, and others that suffered for the testimonie of Gods trueth.
Indeed Ma. Tindall and Ma. Lambart were somewhat wilfull.
Iust, how els? Thus yee marshall the Martyrs as it please your selues, when they may serue your turne (be it in neuer so great ignorance and weaknesse of theirs) then their names, their pietie, and their patience are layde before vs in great and capitall letters, as paternes to follow. But when they crosse you in any thing (bee thesame never so apparantlie warranted by the Scriptures) then alas, they were but men, yea and many times wilfull men, as you doe now most iniuriouslie slaunder M=r= Lambart and M=r= Tindall.
But to leaue these circumstances and by-matters, doe you thinke it is a sinne to be Churched? speak your conscience.
As I haue alreadie saied, if it be a sinne to make shew of Thankesgiving, and yet to giue no thankes at all: if it be a sinne to abuse and misapplie the sacred Scriptures of God to another ende and purpose then it was giuen by the holy Ghost: if it bee a sinne to strengthen and confirme the Papist in his superstition, and the simple and ignorant in their false & erroneous woorship: if all or any of these bee sinnes, then doe I not see how your Churching (as it is vsed amongst you) can escape the stampe and brandmarke of sinne. And howsoever it may bee to others, I doe well assure my selfe it were a sinne and wickednes in mee,because it is against the light of mine owne conscience grounded vpo~ the reasons that I haue alleaged vnto you.
Why, but if you like not the Psalme in the Booke whiche you keepe such adoe at, and be so coy & conceyted, that for feare of abusing it, forsooth you are loth to haue it read to you, yet your Minister may vse another if he will, and pray as he thinkes good. So you would decentlie & womanly come to church at your time, as other your neighbours doe, by my trouth for my part I could bee content to winke at manie things, and shew you any favour I could.
Then I perceyue you haue forgotten how in the beginning when I asked you what you meant by Churching, you tolde mee that which was prescribed in the booke: For law sayed you, would not warrant any other. And are you come now to giue vs libertie to vse another, so we wouldquietlie obserue your Ceremonie.
You say well, Is this the thankes I haue for my kindnesse and favor to you, in that I am contented to saue you from trouble and daunger, to yeeld a litle to your weaknesse, because you seeme to make co~science of I can not tell what? In good faith goship, you shall sitt till your heeles ake before I offer you this favour againe.
Nay, but for all your chafing, I would not haue you mistake me: What favour soeuer you shew me, I will not by Gods grace be vnthankfull for it to my power. But I vnderstood you that you gaue me euen now free libertie to speake my minde, and that you would willinglie heare what soeuer I should say: and I tooke it and doe still take it, that your Sommoning and sending for me hither, was rather in your loue to conferre with me and to satisfie me, then by anie rigour of your law to punish me.
By my trouth you hitte it right:For I was greatlie beholden to your Father, and therefore I haue reason to wishe you well, & in that respect I would gladlie doe you what good I may.
Why, then you continew this minde to giue me your free warrant to speake in this case what I thinke, and to cast all the doubtes and make all th'obiections I can against you, that so you may the better resolue me in th'end?
How els? In the name of God, speake your minde boldlie, neither shall you offend me with any thing you say: For I imagine you can say nothing in this cause, but I haue heard it alreadie.
Well then, doeth not this (I pray you) plainlie verifie and confirme that which I told you of before when I likened you to the Phariseis, vz. That your own foolish Traditions and fruitlesse Ceremonies were dearer to you and of more pretious accoumpt, then the Sacred ordinance of God?
How so, I conceyue not that?
No? Did not you say that for my sake you would be co~tent to winck at the breach of the Booke, and giue the Minister leaue to vse other prayers, so I would be content in any sort to be Churched, and keepe your monethlie and manerlie Ceremonie?
Why if I saied so, you are the more beholden to me for that I doe not meane (I tell you) to shew euery bodie that favour.
Well, howsoeuer I may in this regarde thanke you for your loue to me, yet to deale plainelie with you, I can not therein praise you for your loue to the Church, nor never shall till I see Preaching as much beholden to you as Churching is.
Why, doe you thinke I doe not preferre the preaching of the worde before anie other ceremonie of the Church, be it neuer so commendable?
It should appeare no by your dealinge with our Minister.
Your Minister! yea faith your Minister hath no more witte then hee occupies: He knowes not who is his friend nor who is his foe. I would to God he would be his owne friende once. Stand sticking and mincing it at these bables and trifles as he doth, when he might be quiet in his ministerie, if he would him selfe.
So might wee poore women (whom you thus trouble) be quiet too if we would bee Churched: Our Minister you know is an honest man of life, and a painfull Teacher in his place, you can not charge him with anie misdemeanour for your life. He preacheth amongest vs with great fruite, and hath wonne manie to the Gospell, and yet for refusall of your lawlesse subscriptio~ beside the Statute, and for not wearing of your surplus, & not Crossing in Baptisme, you neuer let him rest among you, but one while you are doeing with him in your Court: an other while the Pursevant from the High Commission trounceth him: Sothat yee make the poore man spend the better part of his poore living in iaunceling vp and down about the moon-shine in the Town-dich.
Why, who is this long of, gentle Cousen? Is not all this long of himselfe? There be as wise & as learned as he that yeeld to all this you speake of, and more then this for the peace of the Church.
But I pray you tell mee, Why may you not be as kinde to him in his Ministerie & Preaching, as you offer to bee to me in this Ceremonie of Churching? You saye you preferre the preaching of the Gospell before anie ceremonie what so ever: if you meane in deede as you say, then for Gods sake wincke a little at the breach of the Booke in him as well as you are contented to doe in me: let not your loue to me in private bee greater then your loue to the Church in publike. Looke a litle thorough your fingers, and passe by as if you saw not his refusall of the Crosse and Surplus.That so we may enioye the meanes of our salvation in peace. And if in anie case you will yeelde to the breach of the Booke, let it bee for the Gospell sake, and not for a Ceremonie.
In good faith, I can not tell what to say to you, with beeing among the perverse, you haue gotten as it were a kinde of habite of perversenesse. I had rather then any golde your husband and you had neuer planted your selues in that Parish: why you were well enough before, and well accoumpted of among your neighbours, and it must needs grieue many of your good friendes to see you in these tunes now.
I may truelie thanke God, as for many other his mercies, so especially for this that ever I came to this mans Ministery (whom yee so trouble amongest you). I was indeed a Protestant before, and thought well of my selfe, and yet (if I shall not lie to you) I had no more Religion then my horse. Butnow I may truly say, that as my knowledge is in some measure increased, so I neuer made conscience of sinning and offending God, till I came to the place where I nowe dwell. All which as I must and doe attribute to God, as th'Author and Founteine, so to our Minister as the meanes and instrument.
Indeede you haue made a very woorthie increase, and mended the matter wonderous wel. And all this is for nothing els but because you are come from Churching to No Churching: what a wonderful cure and charge your Minister hath wrought in you. I beleeue he vseth to Catechize you in nothing els but only in Churching, you seeme to be perfect in the point.
Well, I would you could tell how to discharge a good conscience in your places, (any of you Chancelours) aswell as our Minister doeth in his. His ordinarie teaching is (thankes be to God) in matters ofmore moment then you speake of, and if you heard him once your selfe, I make no question but you would say so. For mine owne part I never hearde him speake publikly of this particular custome of churching in my life, further then might bee gathered out of any generall doctrine of his. Indeed I confesse I haue had private conference with him about it, and hee hath fullie satisfied me.
In what sort (I pray you) hath he satisfiedyou? may I be so bold as to craue a copie, or to be pertaker with you of your ghostly fathers resolutions?
Why you haue heard the most of them alreadie, and I haue made knowne to you at large the reasons that haue mooued mee to shake off and abandon this foolishe and superstitious custome of yours, wherewith I had well hoped you had bene satisfied.
Indeede you haue told me many prety things, but yet they bee such as I haue hearde of before. Why,they be the common reasons of you all amongst you. I neuer had any of you before me, but they haue pleaded euen as you doe, or to the same effecte.
The more saye I (vnder correction) haue you to aunswere for, That havinge had so manifest reasons layed before you so long agoe, and the same so often iterated and repeated vnto you, there is yet no manner of relenting in you, but you doe still persist and goe on in your course, in troubling poore women without cause.
Why you know my Lord Bushop went farther with some of you not farre from your quarters, and made the proudest of them crouch, and come on their knees, enforcing the~ to be Churched in despite of them, and that two or three yeares after they were layed. You would thinke I deale hardlie with you, if I should vse any of you so.
Now sure it was Bushoplike done ofhim if he did so. But what warrant I pray you had my Lord to make them crouch in this maner as you speake of? Doeth the Booke or any Law of the lande authorize him to Church a woman 3 yeare after shee is brought to bedde? shew me that I pray you for my learning?
Well, you haue nothing to doe with that. Therefore it shall be good for you Cousen (as I haue told you) to medle with your own matters & to bee armed howe to aunswere for your selfe, and not to deale in things impertinent to your place.
Content then, you giue me good counsell: But remember your self, I pray you, that it was you that brought in the Bushop & not I. I medled not with him till you spake of him. But to desire to bee resolved in some things of you is not I hope impertinent to my place, is it?
No, god forbid, whatsoever you desire to be satisfied in, be bold I pray you to propound it, and I will thankyou and doe my best to resolue you as farre foorth as lieth in me.
Why then in this Thankesgiving you speake of, who is it that you would haue giue thankes?
Why, the woman that hath bene deliuered.
When is it that you would haue her giue God thankes?
When shee is strong and able to goe to Church.
And not before? would you haue her forgett her self, and be vnthankfull till then?
Nay, God forbid, I hope shee hath more grace then so. But I speake of publike tha~ksgiving & not of private.
Why, but the blessing you see is private,
and what reason is it then, or what
warrant, or what example haue you out of the
Scripture, that there should be an
ordinarie sett seruice in Publike for euery priuate
and perticular blessing? I would faine you
resolved me in that. If the Minister
bee in duetie bounde to giue God thankesfor euery private and particular bleshing,
why not then as well for my husbands fall
of his horse, as for my deliverance? I tell
you I holde my husbande a farre more
woorthy member of the Church then my
selfe, and therefore I see no reason why yee
should not cause him to bee Churched as
well as me, and so all others in our parishe
that haue escaped either drowning or
danger of death.