Nay, come foorth, come forth I say, Ile giue thee a crowne, though it be but a crackt one: what wilt not? art so hard to be drawne forth?
S'foot thou shalt know thatdares enter: nay.
Whose this behinde me?
Tissir; what will you neuer leaue your quarrelling?
Well,hath defended you a good many times; but tis no matter, another time shall serue: shall I get you outalone, that I may haue you.
Yes if youle be singletoo.
Nay, put theofaside, that there were two of them, I hope you were able to buckle with them.
Ile tell you what, if I goe into the Field with him, hangvp if I doe not cutpoynts, and lash him when I haue done: nay, you shall findemettle to the very backe: 'sfoot, my teeth be an edge at him.
If you offer but to thrust towardshim, Ile strike you downe.
Hang him, I defie him base Spaniard.
Defie me? sirrha,spits i'thy face: dar'st meete mee i'the fields, crauenly Capon?
Capon?
I Capon, so I say sir.
Why any man may see that thou art well caru'd; and yet mee thinks thatshould not speake of that, for it's an hundred to one if he be not gilt too.
Well, if thou goest into the fields with me, Ile make a Capon of you before I haue done with you, you shall nere come home vncut Ile warrant you.
Nay, you shall findea notable Cutter.
He a Cutter? alas he nere went into the fields yet, but he was soundly hackt before he came out
Nere talke you of hacking, for it's a hundred to one if you haue not the.
'Sfoot if you be so,nere feares you: come a long.
Nay nere goe, for if you doe,Ile sende one after you, which shall scowre you both. Thecan doe it. I haue seene him handle you both brauely.
The, Alas wee are the best Friends hee has, and if it were not for vs, themight soone shut vp his shoppe.
Alas, you need not talke of his shutting vp of Shoppe, and if it had not beene for him, you had broken by this time, Nay, nere talke: For you know hee can holde your nose to the Grind-stone, when hee list. And as for you, you knowe hee brought you vp first, and if you had stayed with him still, it might haue bene better for you.
Better for mee? Alas hee knewe not how to vse mee.
Hee vsde you too well indeede: for when you were with him he furnisht you with Siler and euery thing, but now you are worne out of all fashion. You are euen like a Lapwing, you are no sooner Hatcht, but you runne abroade presently from him.
Yet I scorne to runne away from him.
But it were more wisedome then to stand: For theis a man as well Armed as any man I knowe, and has as good skill ins weapons.
Ha, is the winde in that Doore? Faith nowe I see which waye you stand bent, you had rather sleepe in a whole skinne, then goe into the Fields to trye your selfe.
Syr,has bene proou'd before now, and yet heele prooue himselfe againe with you, if you dare follow him.
Doe you heare? If you goe, looke forat your backs presentlie; For I am a Iustice of Peace, and am sworne to keepe and defend the Peace.
Syr, wee will fight, and doe you take it inif you please: if you once offer to hinder vs, Ile so Pummell you, that you were neuer better Pummeld in your life; And howsoeuer, I hope theres Lawe against you as well as others, andcan put vp aagainst you.
Alas I care not if you were both Plaintifes against mee, you shall findeyour Defendant Ile warrant you:I, and if neede bee, I could put vp an Action of Batterie against you.
What talke you of Law?scornes to haue any other Law thenlaw, and that vpon you.
Away, the Time was indeed when thou wast a notable Swash-buckler, but now thou art growne olde.
I, you doe well, to excuse his Cowardise.
Why Sir, tis well knowne thathas flourisht in his dayes.
Flourisht? yfaith Syr I, I haue seenehang with nothing but Scarffes ere now.
With Scarffes? with a Halter, if he had beene well seru'de, For hees a notable Theefe.
A Theefe?
I, a Thiefe. Did you nere heare of, this is the very same man.
Nay, nere hitith teeth with that: for you know you were both Indited for treason before now, and were in danger to be hangd, and drawn too, and had escapt well if you had not bene quarterd.
I hope knows how to keep his.
You are a craftie: Itwere well if you knewe howe to keepe your friendship too, for Gentlemen and Friendes should not fall out.
a Gentleman?
A Gentleman? and has Armes.
But mee thinkesby the very sounding of his Name should bee the better Gentleman, and has the better Armes too: for if the truth were well knowne,hath but one arme.
beare Armes? Hees a base companion. Alas I haue knowne you beare a Basket.
If you looke ith, Ile warrant you, you shall findeof more antiquitie then you: Hee deriues his Pedigree from; and that from S., that killd the Draggon.
I,, the other day: But Ile warrant youof as good a blood as hee for his hart.
Byth masse, I thinke indeed, you are both wel sanguind. Your both of one blood, only thers this difference, thatcoms of the elder brother,of the yo~ger.
And oftentimes the younger brother prooues the better Souldier.
Nay,will defende you both for good Souldiers.
a Souldier? When did you ere knowefight a Battell?
Yesis a Souldier, and a Man as well Armed at all poyntes as anie one.
No, no, itsthat's the notable Souldier; Why, theres none of all you Captaines could doe anie thing in Warre without him.
I hopehath not beene at Fencing-Schoole all this while for nothing.
Alas there's nonebut: But yet if you speake of Souldiers, the'rs Bow, Bill, and Gunne, worth twenty such as wee are.
Indeed they say that Bow has bin an olde Souldier.
Yet hees not fit for a Souldier, any man may bende him as hee list.
And as for Bow-string, I dare vndertake to whip him my selfe.
Then let mee alone to tickleownes nocke yfaith.
But what say you to? hees a notable sturdy villaine.
, Ile pay him soundly, if ere I reach him.
Its more then you can doe, Ime affraide; Fora Tall-fellow ons hands, and will quickly be Wood: and then theres, such another Bouncing-fellow too.
, Alas hees No-body: any little Boy will make him roare. I haue made him goe off 'oth Fieldes, a good many times my selfe.
Well, isNo-bodie? Ime sure heel giue some blowes sometimes.
Its' nere but whenouercharges him, then indeed heel be somewhat hote oth matter.
I think thatis a vile bragger, he doth nothing but cracke.
Faith I knowe not what Souldier hee is, but they say, Hees an excellent pollitician.
Hee a Pollitician?
Why, hee has an excellent wit?
Pish, Its nothing but a flash.
Ime sure I can remember since he was a Parlement-man.
Hee a Parlement-man: For what Shyre?
Nay ber-lady, it was for the whole Countrey.
I wonder they should chuse him: Why he does euery thing on the sudden.
Oh he plottes shrevvdly. If they had not look't too it, Hee had vndermined the vvhole parlement-house.
I but hees No-body now-adayes, Hees blovvne vp long agoe.
Well, if eyther you, or any body else shuld meete with Povvder, yet its a hundred to one, if he meete not vvith his match.
Nay, you should let him alone, and you should see thatas notable a bragger as Povvder. He thinks hee shall nere be matcht too: but hee shall, and ouer-matcht too, by; I vvarrant him. Come, after your long Parley, Dare you goe into the Fieldes?
Dare I? You shall soone see that: Goe, and Ile follovv you.
Well saide, desperate., You may be asham'd to offer it. You knovve you are tvvo-handed-Sworde, andhas but one hand (vnlesse I helpe him) to do any good vvithall, and yet youde haue him go into the Fieldes vvith you. Come, theres neyther of you shall goe. Doe not you knovvethat Duells are put downe? Youle bee bound to'th Peace euer heereafter, if you strike but one stroke. Therefore you had best let me decide your controuersie for you.
Why, you are a backe-Friend to vs both.
Nay, you knowe Ime equally allyed to you both, and therefore shall proue an impartiall Iudge: How say you, will you be rulde by me?
Nay let him choose,at a good poynt, whether he will or no.
Why areyou so longbefore you speake?
Are duells put downe? Then I am forc'de to be Friends: Speake then.
Then in briefe it shall bee thus., you shall beare Chiefe force ith Campe, and be made Generall of the Field, to beare sway euery where. As for you, since Duells are put downe, you shall liue quietly and peaceablie heere 'ith Court, and goe euery day in Veluet: You shall be Frendes with euerie one, and bee on euery ones side, that if occasion serue, andbe absent, so that matters are driue~ to a push,shall be the onely man to performe a Combate: And I my selfe will backe you both, as occasion shall serue. How say yee, are yee content?
Wee are.
Then goe before to my House, to thein: and there weele conclude all.
A.