I had thought Mr. Prynne had had no eares, but me thinkes hee hath eares;
My Lords, there is never a one of your Honours, but would be sorry to have your eares as mine are.
In good faith hee is somewhat sawcy.
J hope
your Honours will not be offended, I pray God give you eares to heare.
The busines of the day
is to proceed on the Prisoners at the Barr.
As for your crosse Bill, it is not the busines of the day; Hereafter if the Court shall see just cause, and that it favours not of Libelling, wee may accept of it; for my part I have not seene it, but have heard somewhat of it.
I hope your Honours will not refuse it, being it is on his Majesties behalfe; wee are his Majesties Subjects, and therefore require the Iustice of the Court.
But this is not the busines of the day.
VVhy then, My Lords, I have a second motion, which I humbly pray your Honours to graunt; which is, That your Lordships will be pleased to dismisse the Prelates, here now sitting from having any voyce in the censure of this cause, (being generally knowne to be Adversaries) as being no way agreeable with equity or reason, that they who are our Adversaries, should bee our Iudges: Therefore wee humbly crave they may be expunged out of the Court.
In good faith its a sweet motion, is't not? Herein you are become Libellous. And if you should thus Libell all the Lords and Reverend Iudges, as you doe the most Reverend Prelates, by this your Plea, you would have none to passe sentence upon you for your Libelling, because they are parties.
Under correction (My Lord) this doth not hold; Your Honour need not putt that for a certainty, which is an uncertainty; we have nothing to say to any of your Honours, but onely to the Prelates.
Well, proceed to the busines of the day; Read the Information.
You heare Gentlemen wherewith you are charged; and now, least you should say, you cannot have liberty to speake for your selves, the Court gives you leave to speake what you can, with these conditions: First, that you speake within the bounds of modesty. Secondly, that your speeches be not Libellous.
Then speake a Gods name, and shew cause why the Court should not proceed in Censure (as taking the cause) against you.
My Honourable good Lords, such a day of the moneth there came a Subpoena from your Honours, to enter my appearance in this Court; which being entred, I tooke forth a coppy of the Information, which being taken, J was to draw my Answer, which I endeavoured to doe, but being shutt up close prisoner, I was deserted of all meanes, by which I should have done it; for I was no sooner served with the Subpoena, but I was shortly after shutt up close prisoner, with suspention of pen, inke and paper; which close imprisonment did eate up such a deale of my time, that I was hindred the bringing in of my Answer: You did assigne me Counsell, 'tis true, but they neglected to come to me, and I could not come to them, being under lock and key: Then upon motion in Court, yee gave me liberty to goe to them; but then presently after that motion (J know not for what cause, nor upon whose commaund) I was shutt up againe: And then I could not compell my Counsell to come to me, and my time was short, and I had neither pen nor inke, nor Servant to do any thing for me, for my Servant was then also kept close prisoner under a Pursevants hands; This was to put impossibilities upon mee. Then upon a second motion for pen and inke (which was graunted me) I drew up some Instructions, and in a fortnight time sent 40 sheetes to my Counsell; suddainly after I drew up 40 sheetes more, and sent to them; My Lord, I did nothing but by the advise of my Counsell, by whom I was ruled in the drawing up of all my answer, and payd him twice for drawing it, and some of my Counsell would have set their hands to it. Here is my Answer, I tender it upon my oath, which your Lordships cannot deny with the Iustice of the Court.
Wee can give you a President, that this Court hath proceeded & undertake~ a causefor not putting in an Answer in six dayes; you have had a great deale of favour shewed in affording you longer time, and therefore the Court is free from all calumny or aspersion, for rejecting your Answer not signed with the Counsels hands.
But one word or two, my Lords, I desire your Honours to heare me; I put a case in law, that is often pleaded before your Lordships, one man is bound to bring in two witnesses; if both or one of them faile, that hee cannot bring them in, doth the Law (my Lords)make it the mans act? You assigned me two Counsellors; one of them fayled, I cannot compell him; Here he is now before you, let him speake, if I have not used all my endeavours to have had him signed it (which my other Counsell would have done, if this would have set his hand to it with him) and to have put in long since.
My Lord, there was so long time spent ere I could doe any thing, after I was assigned his Counsell, that it was impossible his Answer could be drawne up in so short a time as was allotted; for after long expectation, seeing he came not to mee, I went to him, where I found him shut up close prisoner, so that I could not have accesse to him; Whereupon I motioned to the Lieftenant of the Tower, to have free liberty of speech with him co~cerning his answer, vvhich being graunted me, I found him very vvilling and desirous to have it dravvne up, vvhereupon J did moove in this Court for pen & paper, vvhich vvas graunted, the vvhich he no sooner had gotte~, but he set himself to dravv up Instructions, and in a short time, sent me 40 sheetes; and soone after I received 40 more; but I found the Ansvver so long, and of such a nature, that J durst not set my hand to it, for feare of giving your Honours distast.
My Lords, I did nothing, but according to the direction of my Counsel, only I spake mine ovvne vvords; my ansvver vvas dravvne up by his consent, it vvas his ovvne act, and hee did approove of it; and if he vvill be so base a Covvard, to doe that in private vvhich he dares not acknovvledge in publick, I vvill not such a sinne lye on my conscience, let it rest vvith him. Here is my Ansvver, vvhich though it be not signed vvith their hands, yet here I tender it upon my oath, vvhich you cannot in Iustice deny.
But Mr. Prynne, the Court desires no such long Ansvver; Are you guilty or not guilty?
My good Lord, I am to ansvver in a defensive vvay, Is here any one, that can vvitnes any thing against me? Let him come in. The Law of God standeth thus; that a man is not to be condemned, but under the mouth of two or three witnesses. Here is no witnesse comes in against me, my Lord, neither is there in all the Informatio~ one clause that doth particularly fall on me, but onely in generall, there is no Booke laid to my charge. And shall I be condemnedfor a particular act, when no occusation of any particular act can be brought against me? This were most unjust and wicked. Here I tender my answere to the Information upon my oath; My Lord, you did impose impossibilities upon me, I could doe no more then I was able.
Well hold your peace, your answer comes too late. Speake you Dr. Bastwicke.
But this is not the busines of the day; VVhy brought you not in your Answer in due time?
My Lord, a long time since I tendred it to your Honour, I failed not in any one particular: And if my Counsell be so base and cowardly, that they dare not signe it for feare of the Prelates (as I can make it appeare) therefore have I no Answer? My Lord, here is my Answer, which though my Counsell out of a base spirit, dare not set their hands unto, yet J tender it upon my oath.
But Mr. Dr. you should have beene briefe; you tendred in too large an Answer, which (as J heard) is as Libellous as your Bookes.
No, my Lord, it is not Libellous though large, J have none to answer for me but my selfe, and being left to my selfe, I must plead my conscience in answer to every circumstance of the information.
What say you Mr. Dr. are you guilty, or not guilty? Answer yea or no, you needed not to have troubled your self so much about so large an Answer.
I know, none of your Honours have read my Booke; And can you with the Iustice of the court, condemne me before you know what is writen in my bookes?
What say you to that was read to you even now?
My Lord, he that read it did so murther the sence of it, that had I not knowne, whathad writen, I could not tell what to have made of it.
What say you to the other sentence read to you?
That was none of mine, I will not father that which was none of my owne.
Did not you send that booke, as now it is, to a Noble mans house together with a Letter directed to him?
Yea my Lord, I did so, but withall you may see in my Epistle set before the booke, I did at first disclaime what was not mine; I sent my Booke over by a Dutch Merchant, who it was that wrote the addition I doe not know, but my Epistle set to my Booke, made manifest what was mine, and what was not; and I cannot justly suffer for what was none of mine.
My Lord, you heare by his owne speech, the cause is taken.
Yea, you say true my Lord.
My noble Lord of Arundell, I know you are a noble Prince in Israel, & a great Peere of this Realme; There are some honourable Lords in this Court, that have beene forced out as combatants in a single duell; it is betweene the Prelates and us, at this time as betweene two that have appointed the feild. The one being a coward goes to the Magistrate, & by vertue of his Authority disarmes the other of his weapons, & gives him a Bullrush, and then challenges him to fight. If this be not base cowardice, I know not what belongs to a Souldier. This is the case betweene the Prelates and us, they take away our weapons (our Answers) by vertue of your Authority, by which we should defend our selves, and yet they bidd us fight. My Lord, doth not this savour of a base cowardly spirit? I know, my Lord, there is a Decree gone forth (for my Sentence was passed long since, to cut of our eares.
Who shall knovv our Censure, before the Court passe it? Doe you prophesy of your selves?
Mr. Dr. I thought you would be angrie.
No my Lord, you are mis-taken, I am not angrie nor passionate, all that I doe presse is, that you would be pleased to peruse my Answer.
Well, hold your peace. Mr. Burton, what say you?
My good Lords, your Honours (it should seeme) doe determine to Censure us, and take our cause, although we have laboured to give your Honours satisfaction in all things: My Lords, what you have to say against my Booke, I confesse I did write it, yet did I not any thing out of intent of Commotion or Sedition: I delivered nothing, but what my Text ledd me too, being chosen to suite with the day, namely the fifth of November; the words were these, &c.
Mr. Burton, I pray stand not naming Texts of Scripture now, we doe not send for you to preach, but to answer to those things that are objected against you.
My Lord, I have drawne up my Answer to my great paines and charges, which Answer was signed with my Counsels hands, and received into the Court, according to the rule and Order thereof. And I did not thinke to have beene called this day to a Censure, but have had a legall proceeding by way of Bill and Answer.
Your Answer was impertinent.
My Answer (after it was entred into the Court) was referred to the Judges, but by what meanes I doe not know, vvhither it be impertinent, and what cause your Lordships had to cast it out, I knovv not. But after it vvas approoved of, and received, it vvas cast out as an impertinent Ansvver.
The Judges did you a good turne to make it impertinent, for it was as Libellous as your Booke, so that your Answer deserved a Censure alone.
VVhat say you Mr. Burton, are you guilty, or not?
My Lord, I desire you not onely to peruse my Booke, here and there but every passage of it.
Mr. Burton, time is short, are you guilty, or not guilty? VVhat say you to that which was read? Doth it become a Minister to deliver himself in such a rayling and scandalous way?
In my judgement, and as I can proove it, it was neither rayling nor scandalous, J conceive that a Minister hath a larger liberty the~ alwayes to goe in a milde straine: I being the Pastor of my people, whom I had in charge, and was to instruct, J supposed it was my duety to informe them of those innovations that are crept into the Church, as likewise of the danger and ill consequence of them: As for my Answer, yee blotted out what yee would, and then the rest which made best for your owne ends, you would have to stand; And now for mee to tender onely what will serve for your owne turnes, and renounce the rest, were to desert my cause, which before I will doe, or desert my conscience, I will rather desert my body, and deliver it up to your Lordships to doe with it, what you will.
This is a place where you should crave mercy and favour, Mr. Burton, and not stand upon such termes as you doe.
There wherein I have offended through humane frailty, I crave of God and Man pardon: And I pray God, that in your Sentence, you may so Censure us, that you may not sinne against the Lord.