My Lord, the King hath understood both by report, and the verdict of divers Gentlemen of quality, that you stand impeached of divers great and haynous crimes; and to try if they be true, he brings you here this day to triall, doing like the Almighty King in the 18. of Genesis, that sent downe to see whether their sinnes were so grievous as the cry of them, and Kings on earth can have no better paterne to follow, then the Kings of heaven: the Soveraigne, Gods Vicegerent on earth, hath commanded that you should be tried this day: and the desire of his Majesty is your tryall should be as equall asequity it selfe. And because the crimes that come this day before you, may in some breed detestation, and the person in others compassion: first lay these two aside, and let your reason sway your judgement, and your head your heart. And therefore these Peeres, who are your Peeres, and who have as noble justice in their hearts, as noble blood in their veynes, are this day to try you; therefore if you be innocent, speake without feare, and bee sure those that accuse you shall not escape free. But if you be faulty, I advise you to give honour to God and the King, and confesse your fault, for it is no vaine confidence nor subtilty that can hide the truth; therefore if truth touch you at the heart, and your conscience is a thousand witnesses, and God is greater then both, stand not against it; and if you doe not, God will put into the hearts of those noble persons to finde it out, and doe that is just.
I have beene a close prisoner these six months, without friends, and without Counsell, and am but of a weak speech at the best, and therefore I desire to have the liberty of having a Counsell to speake for me.
For your imprisonment, to you it hath beene a speciall favour, for you have had time enough, more then ever any man had that hath beene committed for such offences, and more favour then ever any man that came to this bar, and you demand nothing that the law can allow you but you shall have it, but for your demand I must move it to the Judges and they shall satisfie you in it, or in any other thing you require.
not guilty;
how wilt thoube tried?
by God and my Peers:
the prisoner is indicted of rape and sodomy, by two indictments, and hathpleaded not guilty, and it is my duty to charge you to stand to the triall of it, and you are to judge of it, as they are to be proved by evidence, and you are to ballance it. This cause may cary in it, in some pity, in others detestation, both of which ought to be put into the ballance, for a graine on either side may sway the scale, but reason must rule your affections, and your heads, your hearts: you are to give an attentive eare, and then weigh equally, that the scale may leane the right way, and the Judges will assist you in point of law, which if you doubt, one may propound it to me, and I to them, or of the prisoner, this your Lordships are to doe without corporall oath: The law conceiveth you of such, that you will do that for justice, which others doe for their oath, and therefore admits of no challenge, God direct you to it.
my Lord high Steward, and it please your Grace, there are two Indictments againstLord, the first for Rape, the second for Sodomy, the prisoner is honourable, the crimes dishonorable of whichhee is indicted (if it falls out to be true) which is to be left to triall; I dare be bold to say, never Poet invented, nor Historiographer writ of any so foule, thoughhath curiously set out the vices of some of the Emperors, which had absolute power, and that might make them fearelesse of any maner of punishment, and besides were heathens and knew not God, yet none of them came neere this Lords crime; this is a crime of that rarity in our nation, that wee seldome know of the like, and the other that we scarse heare of it, but they are of that pestilential nature that if they be not punished they will draw from heaven heauy judgements upon this Kingdome: I can speake with comfortthat all my time, both in his Majesties royall Fathers life, and since he came to his Crowne, I never had occasion to speake in this place against any Peere of the Realme before now, and God knowes I doe it now with sorrow, and I hope I shall not have occasion to doe so much againe; but his Majesty who is the patterne of vertue, not onely as King, but in his person also, in whom it is hard to judge whether hee excell most in Justice or Mercy, but I rather thinke in Mercy, for he would have my Lordthe prisoner at Barre heard with as much favour as such a crime as this can bee; when he first heard it, he gave strict accoumpt that the triall should bee searched, that his throne and people should be cleared from so grievous sins, and therefore he was indicted in his owne Countrey, according to the law, by Gentlemen of worth. The Bill is found, and now he is brought to this Barre to be tried by his honourable Peeres, such as of whose wisedome and sincerity there can bee no question, but to have an honourable hearing. And first, I shall beginne with the indictment of Rape,tells us of Kinglaw, before the conquest; if the party were of no chast life but a whore, yet there may bee a ravishment, but it is a good plea to say she was his concubine; In an indictment of Rape there is no time of prosecution necessary, for, but in case of an appeale of Rape, if the woman did not prosecute in convenient time, it will barre her for the, our law had no knowledge of it till 15.8. by which statute it was made fellony, and in this there is no more question, but onely whether it bee, and the law the 5. of, sets downe in generall words, and there the law doth not distingish, neither must we: I know you will bee curious how you give the least mitigation of so abhominable a sinne, which brought such plagues after it, as we may see in Gen. 18.Judges 14. Rom. I. But my Lords, it seemed to me strange at the first, how a noble man of his quality should lust to such abhominable sins, but when I found he had given himselfe over to lust, and find that, and that if men once habit themselves in ill, it is no marvell if they fall into any sinne, and that he was constant in no religion, but in the morning would be a Papist, in the afternoone a Protestant; I shall bee bold to give your Grace a reason why hee became so ill, he beleeved not God, then what may not a man runne into? but I find things beyond imagination, for I find his intentions bent to have his wife naught, which the wickedest man that ever I heard of before would have vertuous, and godly, how bad soever himselfe be, and him lewd to his owne wife, if she love him she must love, whom he loves above all, and not in any honest love, but in a dishonest; he gives his reason by Scripture, she was now subject to him, and therefore if she did ill at his command it was not her fault but his, and he would answer it; he lets thiswho he calls his favourite, spend of his purse 500. l'., and if his wife or daughter would have any thing, though necessary, they must lie withand have it from him, and not otherwise; also tellingand his daughter, that he had rather have a child by him then by any body else. But this thing I had rather should come out of the mouthes of the witnesses then from me. was a Page to Sir, and had no meanes when he came to my Lord: he entertained him for a Page eight yeares, and then let him keepe horses in his ground, by which I thinke he inriched himselfe 2000. l'. but he never sat at the table with him till he had married his daughter, then gave him to the value of 7000. l'., was sent from Ireland by my Lord, to be a Page to my Lady, his Father and Mother were very meane folkes, there he spent out of my Lords meanes 500. l'., and he gave him at one time 1000. l'. and hath made divers deeds of lands to him: My Lord was at first a Protestant, after the buying of Fountaine turn'd his religion.
I advise you not to deny those things which are cleerly proved, for then the Lords will give lesse credit to the rest you say. The first or second night after we were married,came to his bed side whilest we were in bed,
you have seene the cleernes of the cause proved, and I know your wisedomes to be such as you well know in so darke a businesse a clearer cannot be; for let a man be never so wicked, he will not call witnesses to see it.
Guilty;
Lord, you have beene indicted, and have pleaded not guilty, and put your selfe on God and your Peers, who have found you guilty of both, and therefore my heart grieveth that my tongue must utter, but justice is the way to cut off wickednesse. O thinke upon your offences, which a Christian ought scarce to name, and which the depraved nature of man, which carries us to all vice, yet hates this unnaturall sin; and you have not onely offended against the nature, but the rage of a man, jealousie; and though you dye not for it, yet you have abused your daughter, and having honour and fortune to leave behinde, you would have had the spurious seed of a varlet to inherit both.But my Lord it grieves me to see you stand against a truth apparant and concluded upon, how God might have taken you away in your sinnes, and therefore I hope he hath reserved you as a subject of mercy, when you were blinded in your sins he sends you to see this day of shame, to turne you to him; and seeing hee doth in a manner draw you, spend the rest of your time in teares and repentance, and this dayes worke is a correction for many crimes corruption.
Forasmuch as thouLordhast been indicted
of divers fellonies, for which thou desiredst to be tryed by
God and thy Peeres, which tryall thou hast had, and they
have found thee guilty of them, thy sentence therefore is, that
thou returne to the place from whence thou camest, and from
thence to the place of execution, there to bee hanged by the
necke till thou be dead.
 And the Lord have mercy upon thee.