This horrible and detestible Traytor, this maine Traytor
this instigator and seducer to treasons, he that hath a spanish heart, you are an odious man, see with what a whorish forehead he defends his faults: this is he that would take away the King and his Cubbs, O abominable Traytor:
let me see the mony, and then I will answer you to thepurpose.
Oh Villaine! Oh vile Traytor! hath he used me thus? Nay then I will tell you all,
Siryou haveagainst you who carried the letter and toare out that sheet, which concerned the Lords of the Councell (for so was my Lordconfession) and he hath been offered the rack for it, but what he has confessed, I as yet know not:
well
the Rack-keeper was called for, was he not?
Nay
pardon me my Lord, for this, by your Lordships favour, I take to be the course of examination in this kinde. After that the examinate hath confessed, and his confession is written, it is all read over againe distinctly and deliberately to him, that he may be sure to say nothing but truth: and then in confirmation that it is undoubtedly true, and that he will stand thereunto, he is to subscribe the same. Now my Lords, if my L.did accuse me thus rashly out of his passion, and afterwards when he had read it againe, began to relent, and (with sorrow for the wrong he had done me) refuse to set his hand thereunto, then I say my Lords I have reason to take hold of it: And it is well knowne to you my Lord, and my Lord of, how he hath recanted his accusation, moreover he hath most penitently sorrowed for this injury he hath done me, and could never be quiet in his conscience till he had purged me.
Master Atturney, you must not thinke that all that maketh for me is policy, and all that maketh against me is plain, and God revealeth it. I were well fitted for justice, if you should come to be my Judg, what indifferency is therein this my Lord Chiefe Justice? Remember I beseech your Lordship the statute of the first ofthe Sixth hath this. That no person shall be condemned of treason unlesse he be accused by two lawfull accusers, and those to be brought before the party, if they belong to England. And remember too the statute of the 13 of the Queen. No man shall be arraigned of treason, without the oath of two sufficient and lawfull witnesses brought face to face.
But howsoever I am sure
the law of God liveth for ever. And you shall finde it inin the seventeenth Chapter.And in the nineteenth Chapter.Divers other places of the old Testament are to this purpose, confirmed by our Saviour too in the eighteenth of, and the eight of, and by Saint2. 13, And by the whole consent of the Scripture. And if the Common-law be assaith (who was a great Lawyer) then there ought to be two witnesses: For he saith a tryall is by verdict, and by witnesse,
But
you tell me of one witnesse, let me have him. Prove the practises by one witnesse, and I will confesse my selfe guilty to the King in a thousand treasons. I stand not upon the Law, I defie the law, if I have done these things I desire not to live: whether they be treasons by the law or no. Let me have my accuser brought to my face, and if he will maintaine it to my face, I will confesse my judgement.
Howsoever I do not expect it of duty: And yet I say you shoulddeale very severely with me if you should condemne me and not bring my accuser to my face. Remember a story ofa reverend Chief Justice in this Kingdome; Tells of a Judge in this Kingdome that condemned a woman for murthering her husband, upon the presumption or testimony of one witnesse (as it seemed) and after she was burned, a servant of the mans that was slaine (being executed for the same fault) confessed that he slew his Master himselfe, and that the woman was innocent. What did the Judge then say to, touching the remorse of his conscience for proceeding upon such slender proof,That he could never be at peace of conscience whilest he lived, although he but gave consent upon the verdict of the Jury. But my Lords for the matter which I desire, remember too the story of:thought the Judges fooles because they would condemn a daughter ofwithout asking the witnesse a question: Why then my Lords, let my accuser be brought, and let me aske him a question, and I have done: for it may be it will appeare out of his owne tale, that his accusation cannot be true, or he will be discovered by examination. But yet principally my Lords remember what is said in theof,. And I will tell you, Master Atturney, if you condemne me upon bare inferences, and will not bring my accuser to my face: you try me by no law but by the Spanish inquisition. If my accuser were dead, or not within the land, it were something. But my accuser lives, and is in the house, and yet you will not bring him to my face.
Sir, it cannot be granted you: you have heard your selfe that the Law will not dispense with it.
First,
that I should make choice of my Lordof any man living: A man of no following, nor of no force; that I should dreame of disturbing of the state, now every body was so glad of the Kings comming, and of unexpected peace: and now the state was greater, and stronger than ever it was. That I should be so simple to expect mony from Spaine: for I knew how much that Kings revenue was impared, and his treasure intercepted. I also knew well that where he had usually in his Havens, 6 or 7 score sayle of ships, now he had not six or seaven sayle of ships: I knew well too that his Jesuites begged from door to door in Spaine: and I knew well that the King of Spaine was bankrupt, as was protested by most of the Merchants of Christendome: And could I imagine then that in his poverty he could disburse six or seven hundred thousand Crowns? or if he had been in case, could I thinke it so easy a matter, to obtaine such a sum of mony of the Spaniard? do Princes so easily now a dayes part with such Masses of mony? I knew that the Queene of England disbursed no mony to the States of the Low-countryes (though it were partly for her owne security) before she had theandin pawne. I knewlikewise Shee disbursed no mony into(though for the like occasion) till shee hadin pawne, and afterwards more warme security: Nay, the Citizens ofwould not lend their Queene money, till they had her lands in pawne. What pawne had we to give the King of? What did we offer him? Or how could we invent to offer to him the letter of an, whom he could not chuse but know to be of no following, what a mockery is this? what would I make my selfe? A Cade? A Kett? A Jack-Straw?
All your suspitions, and inferences, are but to fortify my Lordaccusation; My Lordis the only man that doth accuse me. My Lordlives and is in the house, let him maintaine his accusation to my face. My Lordhath confessed himselfe guilty, he is meerly at his Majesties mercy: and without doubt shall highly offend the King, if he go back from his word, wherein he hath abused his Majesty, and so is to looke for no mercy, but shall surely dye. On the other side he hath accused me to instigate and draw him into these treasons, and if it be so, then I have been the overthrow of him, his honour, estate and all. He is a man of a most revengeful nature, as all the world knowes, who would he be more willingly revengedon, then on him vvho hath been his utter ovrethrovv? Why then my Lords if he vvill not displease the King in hope of mercy and compassion (vvhich is his onely plea) If he will be revenged on the man that brought him to all this, that hath ruinated him and his house, then will he justifie his accusation to my face, then good my Lords let us be brought face to face.
Siryou have heard it cannot be granted you, pray importune us no longer. No longer
it toucheth (my Lord) upon my life which I value at as high a rate as you do yours.
you have heard the proofs, I pray you consider that these men
do usually defend very bad causes every day in the Courts against men of their owne profession, as able as themselves: & if they can do so, what may they do with me, that never studied the law till I came into the Tower of: That have been practised in other affaires, and am weake of memory and feeble as you see,
But remember the godly saying of Saint,. If you would be content to be judged upon suspitions and inferences, if you would not have your accusation suscribed by your accuser. If you would not have your accuser brought to your face (being in the same house too) where you are arraigned, if you would be condemned by an accusation of one recanted and truly sorrowfull for it, if you in my case would yeeld your bodyes to torture, loose your lives, your wives, and children, and all your fortunes upon so slender proof. Then am I ready to suffer all these things.
Nay by your leave
he that speakes for his life shall speake last. Are you contented
that the Jury shall go together: yea, in Gods name
Nowshall be glorified,shall have a great victory this day, as great as when it was said. Now SirI will prove you to have a Spanish heart. See with what a vvhoorish forehead he hath defended his fault: he hath deceived my poore Lordaswas deceived with an apple, by a letter in an apple, and hath seduced this poor Lord to write I know not what to him against his conscience: But he could not sleepe quietly till he had revealed the truth of it to the Lords, and voluntarily of himself written the whole matter to them with his owne hand but yesterday, vvhich I vvill read vvith a loud voice though I be not able to speake this sennight after:
Novv it shall appeare that my Lord, is an unworthy, base, silly, simple poore soule.
Is my Lord so poore? Yea,
in Spirit. Would to God you were so
I will tell you the troth. It is true I got a poore fellow in the Tower, to cast up a letter tyed to an apple (for soletter was conveyed) in at my Lordwindow, when the Lievtenant was at supper, (which I was loath to have spoken of, least the Lieutenant should be blamed, but all the Lieutenants in the world could not have helpt it) wherein I intreated him for Gods sake to do me right, and to right the truth unto me: because I knew not whither I should be arraigned before him or no: and hereupon he writt to me how he had wronged me: and herein I did nothing that was dishonest for ought I know; but I sent him a letter againe, (because I heard he should be arraigned first) and desired him to publish my innocence at his arraignment; But that notwithstanding he writ unto me againe, which letter I have now about me (being all my hope) and I beseech your Lordships to peruse it.
My Lordmarre not a good cause,
Master Atturney, you are more peremptory then honest, you must not come heer to shew me what to do.
Nay
I dare say your Lordshipps would not offer it. But my Lordreceived a letter from his wife, that there was no way to save his life but to accuse me:
I protest to God
they are false like as the rest. Saving that this I do confesse; That my L.offered me a pension, and I (alas my Lords) loath to cast him away, and being confident that I had disswaded him from those humours, did conceale it. But that ever I dealt with him for any suchpension is most untrue.
Sir, you are to be conveied to the place from whence you came, and from thence to the place of execution, and there to bee hanged till you are halfe dead, your members to be cut off, your bowells to be taken out, and cast into the fire before your face (you being yet alive) your head to bee cut off, your quarters to be divided into foure parts, to be bestowed in foure severall places, and so
Lord have mercy upon your soule.
And I am glad
that you have given the world so good satisfaction of your Religion, as by some bookes published by you, you have.