All Cheape-side, and Lombard-streete Madam, could not have furnish'd you with a more compleat bargaine, you will find it in the wearing, and thanke me both for the goodnesse of the stuffe, and of the Manufacture.
But now the price Mistris. I grant your Commodity is good, The Gold and Silver Laces, and the Frienges are rich, and I hope well wrought. Has your Man made a note of the particulars, and their prices, atthe rate of ready-money (for I buy so) and not as you would booke 'em to an under-ag'd heire, or a Court-Cavalier to expect payment two or three yeares hence; and finde it perhaps never. I come with.
I know your Ladiships payment such; And they are priz'd so Madam to a farthing.
Let mee see, broad plate Silver and Gold-lace, 206 Ounces halfe, and a dram, at five and ten pence the Ounce. 60 l. 5 s. 3 d.4. five and ten pence an Ounce is deare.
I protest unto you Madam that parcell of Lace for a Bed as you intend it, was bespoken, and agreed for at six shillings the Ounce by a very great person: but because ready money came not to fetch it off, Fortune reserv'd it here for you, you could not have been so fitted on the sodaine else withinwalls; and I am glad the same fortune was so favourable to me, as by my hands to designe it for your Ladiships use and pleasure. I hope Madam we shal hear of a young heir a comming shortly, and that will make it a rich and fortunate Bed indeed; And then Sirwould thanke me too.
What a bold slut it is, well then the rest of the particulars here of Laces, and Frienges, Loopes, and Buttons, makes the sum of all an hundred pound eight shillings foure pence, halfe-penny. I am no good Arithmetician, but if any be overcast, and overpaid, you must allow restitution.
Yes, good Madam.
Is all put up into this Box?
All Madam.
Give mee my Purse. Take you home that while I make payment for it; your Gold-weights Mistris.
Here Madam all in readinesse.
You take no Gold but what is weight I presume.
'Tis but light paines to weigh it Madam. But let me save your Ladiship that labour.
Nor shall it be your trouble, command your Servant I pray for a glasse of your beere --
Some beere for my Lady presently.
That I may tell you in more privacy, what perhaps you would not have him heare: for Prentises though they are bound to keepe their Masters secrets, are not all privy to their Mistresses; that's more a Journeymans Office.
Your Ladiship is pleas'd.
Not very well with my selfe, for I have gone beyond my Commission in this bargaine, and exceeded my Husbands allowance. Here's one hundred pounds eight shillings 4 d.in the Bill, and he allowes me but the bare hundred pound.
The od money is but a small matter Madam.
A great matter in an honest poore Countrey Ladies purse, may serve her a whole Christmas at Post and Pare, or Farthing gleeke, when the gay Gamsters wives o' the City may command the hundreds, out of the purses of such poore Ladies Husbands. But here is the odd money, eight shillings foure pence, half penny, and so all's paid.
What meanes your Ladiship?
Doe you not understand mee then? I'le tell you that which I thought fit to conceale from your servant; And from your husband too had hee been here, perhaps he knowes not on't. My husband left with you, or lent you the last Terme a hundred pound, which hee assign'd to me; and now I have it in Commodity. Had you forgot it, when it was to do you a good turne, when your absent husband faild you, and you wanted it.
A good turne Madam?
Yes, was it not to have the free use of a hundred pound ready money, a whole quarter of a yeare, through a dead Vacation, and at last to take it out in wares? A good turne I thinke for a Trades-woman; take heed you do not by your sullennesse make me suspect another kind of good turne, or that you did my husband any to my injury, nor deny the receipt of his money, lest I take up a violence that will not become mee, nor you be able to beare. Be therefore well advis'd both in what you say, and who heares me. Somebody comes.
Madam your Beere.
I'le pledge you Mistris.
I shall presume then Madam --
This was right cast, was it not friend?
Your Ladyship will finde it so --
And I hope you will finde your money so well bestowd Madam, that you will vouchsafe always to know the Shop.
Ever upon the like occasion, Mistris, so most kindly farwell sweet Mistris.
The humblest of your servants Madam. Open the Boot for my Lady.
'Tis done, my Coach-man does it.
I would the Devill were in your Coachmans Coat to take his carriage for his paines.
One word more Mistris, can it be he?
Lay your comands on me good Madam.
Not to your trouble, I perceive a young Gentleman attends for conference with you. Is not his name?
No Madam, his name is, much depending on the young Lord.
I thought I had known him, hee is a handsome youth. I cannot blame you now with him: but bewareof old Knights that have young Ladies of their owne. Once more adieu sweet Mistris.
Most courteous Madam -- and once more to the Devill. But on my life her chast Ladiship is taken with this beard-lesse. How shee shot eyes at him!
Now may your servant obtaine a hearing Lady.
My eares are open Sir.
But you are sad or angry, why seemes that brow to threaten a subjection over him that is your vanquish'd captive; or hasplac'd his Bow there bent at me, whose heart already lodges all his Arrowes, never to be restor'd but by your pity?
Fie, fie upon't! what talke is this? I am vex'd, and you would mad me.
What has displeas'd you?
A crosse businesse that has happened in my Shop to day, I being none of the wisest Chapwoman, have undersold a parcell of the best Commodities my husband had. And should hee know't wee should have such a scwable.
Husbands should be so serv'd that do impose Those mercenary Offices on their wives.
Talke so, and I will heare you, your amorous notes sound like Play-speeches.
Servile, nay slavish Offices, ranking their wives with their prentises.
They pretend onely that wee should over-looke our servants, when they but set us there for shew to draw in custome: but in making us such over-seers they are overseene themselves; Shopkeepers-wives will be medling and dealing in their kinde, and as they are able, as wel as their husbands (some much better, and more profitable) but I was overreach'd I confesse.
For no great matter I hope.
No, the matter was not much (that never fretted me) but the manner has eene kild a Shee shop-keeper. I cannot be long-liv'd, here under a Pent-house, as my Lord (you know) told mee when he said he would shut mee out of this servitude, and that I should change my Coat, though my husband could not, before hee were an Alderman, and be rank'd with Ladies.
My Lord has still the same regard of you.
So it appeares by the Tailor and the Mercer, whom he sent foure dayes since to measure me out, and sute mee to his Honour, and no returne of them found, yet his Land might ha' beene measur'd all and sold, while a poore sute is dreampt on, had he borne the mind of some Lord?
I doubt not but this paper will cleare that jealousie. And while you reade I'le speake that which I dare not utter through, Sighes and Blushes to an intire attention. I am of Noble-blood my selfe, free-borne, And not without good education; But since I am ingag'd in this imployment, And made an instrument of others lust, I finde my selfe a scandall to my Name, To Honour, and to Vertue, the base blot Of Pandare sticking on me. But not this Alone is my affliction. Here's my torment, That while I doe true service to my Lord (Whom I must ever honour) in my Agency Unto your selfe (whom I cannot but love) I finde my selfe a Traytor to his trust, In my negotiation for my selfe. Nor can I finde it possible to desist, Mine own attempts, to you, or forbeare to urge Your constancy to him.
How easie a worke 'Twere for one woman to supply 'em both, And hold her husband play to levell Acoile, A wooden two-leav'd booke, a paire of Tables Would do't.
How wretched is that suppliant, who must make Sute to obtaine that, which he feares to take!
At the beare at the Bridge-foot six a clock, good. Sir, I finde my Lords honorable appointments here, and have heard you all this while.
Now I could wish, and was in hope you had not.
I will not blame you on your Lords behalfe; Because you have enough rebuk'd your selfe. But Sir, if you presume upon the favour I give your Lord, and therefore to obtaine me, Cause I am his, you undervalue me To thinke that I can stoop unto his servant, Though almost his Companion, you may thinke After that degradation by degrees, I may, in time, descend unto his Footman, I'me no cast Garment of his Lordships yet.
You have school'd mee fairely, I am humbled, Lady --
Dee heare, dee heare sir, Mr., One word before you goe.
What would hee buy Mistris? can you take his money? Sir dee heare?
Pray attend you the tother end o' th' Shop, If I cannot handle a Customer, why dos your Master trust mee? Could a frowne fright you? Let a smile then cheare you.
And that's a heavenly one, As that ofat.
Pray leave your Player-like passionate expressions. And if you love mee, like a Man speake to me. As I am a Woman; are you silent? if you doubt the length of my mans Eares at that distance, you may whisper what so? But that is a right shop-whisper indeed with Trades-women that are handsome; Is that the most you will give sir? Could I afford it so, doe you thinke I'd make two words w'ye? yet this before you goe --
Now match it for the price I'le give it you for nothing.
I shall forget I have a Lord. I must forget him here.
Doe so, and if (I say) you love mee, speake plainely what you would have mee doe, or what you would doe with mee (I love to dant these young things that love before they can love to the purpose, or speake to't handsomely like a Boy that would faine be shooting at wild-fowle, before hee knowes how to discharge a Birding-piece) I would heare you speake, you have often muttered and fribled some intentions towards me, but I would heare you speake. Come, if you love me lay by the feare of the Lord that sent you, and tell me roundly now, what you would have me doe?
I would intreat you --
Well; what?
That you would be pleas'd --
With what? or to doe what?
To weare this paire of Silke stockins for me.
Is that all your sute, 'tis granted, with my thanks to you; Have you no more to say?
Yes, I say you are the beautifull'st of Women; and that my Lord in your enjoyment is the happiest --
Nay thinke not of your Lord, but aske me, something.
I would but dare not hope for such a favour, you'l never grant it, my unworthinesse.
How can you tell?
You will not wrong my Lord, so as to doe it.
Not in his sight perhaps. What is it? come.
It is --
It is then, let it be so. Go to Schoole child.
It is -- That you would, let me -- give you this ring, And grace it with your Finger.
Will that be a wrong to your Lord?
Yes, to weare any favours, but his own.
Dos he know this?
No, nor I would not that he should (and given by me) for all the Rubies in Cheapside, where I bought this but now, over the way.
Come sir, I'le dally w'ye no longer, I know what you would have with me.
And now you will betray me: I am sham'd then and undone.
No, but I have you o' the hip. 'Tis plaine you would lie with me: deny it if you can.
O deare, did I say so now?
What need you when I know it, you would lie with me, and you shall. Take courage man.
But, in good earnest, shall I? shall I?
Yes, in good earnest, you'l finde it no trifling businesse, when you come to't once. But sir, upon condition.
Any condition Lady.
All purpose on't is lost, and all comes out else.
Name your condition, I'le performe it if it be in the power of my life.
You saw here at your comming a faire Lady.
I tooke no notice of her.
But she did of you, she is calld the Lady.
SirLady?
The same, you have known her it seemes.
Seene her before shee was married.
I will be briefe with you, as you love mee shee loves you as eagerly, but with much more boldnesse, you saw her whisper mee, and how loth shee was to depart, when her eye was upon you.
I did observe it.
Shee is my noble friend, and the sweetest Lady, I need not set her out. But though you thinke you suffer in your honour, in being an instrument twixt your Lord and mee, with the base blot of Pander sticking on you, (these were your words) I have ingag'd my selfe for her to be your Pandaresse; be so, I shall be even with you in businesse if you account it so.
What dee meane Lady?
To urge against my selfe, for that sweete Lady, which no Woman else I thinke would doe, that loves you so unfainedly as I. But 'tis my fate, and the injunction I must lay upon you, to make mee yours. That first you give your selfe to her Embraces; I'le give you means for your accesse to her, and your successe with her, which done, and on your faith affirm'd to mee, 'tis so, I will perpetually bee yours more freely then your Lords.
You urge this but to try my constancy.
For that I'le satisfie you soon, my husband coming we must to night at the Beare -- My Lord writes so.
And there I will direct you in your progresse.how dost? Mr.how ist? How dos my noble Lord? You are sad methinks. Ha' you overbought any thing here, and so repent your bargaine? Or cannot my wife, and you agree upon't? you must use Mr.kindly my sweet: hee is our noblest Lords most speciall favorite, and must finde all faire dealing here, as well when I am abroad as at home sweet heart.
You heare not mee complaine sir, fare you well.
What an Affinego's this! He might ha' thank'd mee for my good words, though I meant him no good will, I hope thou hast overreach'd him indeed.
your hopes are vaine,in seating mee here to overreach, or underreach any body. I am weary of this Mechanick course; and of this courser habit, as I have told you divers and sundry times, and indeed of youthat confine me to't, but the bound must obey.
Never the sooner for a hasty word, I hope sweete; Not of me nor of my shop I prethee at seasonable times Love. But for thy habit (though this be decent on a Citizens wife) use thine owne fancy, let it be as Courtly, or as Lady-like as thou pleasest, or my Lords desires.
Then I am friends agen.
Troth, and I'le call thee friend, and I prethee, let that be our familiar and common compellation: friend it will sound daintily, especially when thou shalt appeare too gallant to be my Wife.
Then let it be so friend.
Intruth it shall, and I am very much taken with it. Friend I have found a Customer to day that will take off my rich parcell of broad Bed-lace, that my Lordbespoke, and left on my hands, for lack of money.
I have sold it already friend, with other Laces at a good rate.
And all for ready money friend?
Yes friend, a hundred pounds, and somewhat more.
Who would be, or who could live without such a friend, in such a shop? This money comes so pat for a present occasion, to stop a gap. It has stopt a gap already friend.
I have dispos'd of the money, the odd hundred pound for apparrell, friend, and other accommodations for my selfe.
Never the sooner for a hasty word I hope friend.
I have done it friend, whereby to appeare more Courtly, and Ladilike as you say, to gaine you more custome to your Shop.
Uuch friend -- Is it so?
And friend you must not be angry, or thinke much of it, if you respect your profit friend.
I were no friend but a wretch if I would. No let it goe friend, and --is my word, I must not grudge at my friend in any thing.
Then friend, let your shop be your own care for the rest of this day, I have some busines abroad.
Whither sweet friend?
Is that a friendly question?
I am corrected friend, but will you not take a Man to wait upon you?
To watch me, shall I? and give you account of my actions? was that spoke like a friend?
I am agen corrected friend, Doe your own pleasure, you'l returne to supper.
Yet againe?
And agen, I am corrected friend.
Neither to supper, nor to bed perhaps.
Never the sooner for a hasty word I hope.
But if I chance to stay, you cannot be a faithfull friend and aske mee where, or in what company, friendship you know allowes all liberty.
A wity wife, with an imperious will, Being crost, findes meanes to crosse her Husband still; And Tradesmen that so match, must not with Gall Temper their wives, but sweetly by wit-all.
Dos not the World come finely on,, ha? And have not wee convenient commings in already, ha!
Better then wee know how to have payd, for that's the glory on't.
I need no more insconsing now in, nor the Sanctuary of, the Forts of, and, whose walls are dayly batter'd with the curses of bawling creditors. My debts are payd; and here's a stock remayning of Gold, pure Gold harke how sweetly it chincks.
Yes, and 'twill ring the changes shortly.
For necessaries, for necessaries it shall change, and Ring all out, and 'twil so long as I have an Unkle, and know to mannage him, let money flie, I can no faster spend then he supply.
For necessaries sir, but you must not now count Sack and Tobacco, Whores and Fidlers in abundance, necessaries.
Why pray?
Because you'l have but little then for extraordinaries, That is to say in a Gentleman for charitable, and pious works and uies.
The fellow's spoy'ld.
Not spoy'ld neither: For I would but wave your purpose of flying at all new Game, and neglect your poore whore, who now begins to be so violent forwrongs, shee can no longer beare, that shee intends to pursue you with her complaints hither to your Unkles House.
My Unkles House? my house. Is not the first Mornings draught mine?
With great reason, for you are first dry in the morning.
Is not the question first ask'd mee, what will you have to breakfast? what will please you for Dinner, and what for Supper? Has not my Unkle let out monies, and taken Bonds and Morgages in my name? doe not his Tenants crowch to mee, and his servants all call me young Master? And dos not my Unkle take care to marry mee to ten thousand pound, and a thing like a wife?
You have got a brave possession here, I must needs say; and I applaud your fortune most in this, that your young Aunt the noble Lady here, who you see feard would prove a cruell Stepdame to you, appeares to be more friend to you then your Unkle. 'Tis a most gracious Sun-shine in her.
Shee shall lose nothing by't. I have thought a way to requite her.
But sir, for Mistris, will you take no order for the poore soule?
I do not like your zealous solicitation, but her's an order for her, in answer of her Malipert Letter you brought me last night. Give it her, and these five pieces, upon condition that shee never come, write, or send to me againe, till I send to her.
That's somewhat hard Sir.
Nay look you, you are a little mistaken in me. I must give over whoring, for speciall causes thereunto me moving.
O now I finde you. And 'twere richly worthyour patience, if you could winne the Widow by't, for whom you stood in faire election once, untill your last debauchment.
I shall stand fairer for her sir, when I leave working but a weeke or two, shall I not?
Yes, if you leave it quite, but to forsake her whom you have brought low, to fall to others, were such a thing --
Well sir, it may be I will, it may be I wo'nt, what's that to you? carry you the Letter, and the Money, and try how that will worke with her.
I'le doe my best, but if shee should exclaime, and bring on her Cosen Mr.to bee clamorous --
Her Cozen's a Cuckold, exclaime and clamorous! give me my money againe.
Nay I am gone sir.
The Rogue's in faction with 'em; O noble Mr., you have most fairely kept your minute with me, I have written my Letter, seald it and all, here to the Widow.
So early? that is well.
I have written no lesse then six large Epistles this morning, and sent 'em now by my Man to be convey'd into the Country to Lords and Knights, with all the news spirituall, and temporall, forraine and domestick that could possibly fall into a private Gentlemans Collection.
Is it possible?
With such dexterity, that if I would make a Trade on't, I could undoe all the Newes-mongers in Town that live by't.
It is a most commendable practise in a Gentleman, and it will mature your judgement in the bothCommon-wealth and State affaires, and in short time invite you unto the chaire of.
When I am once married, and setled, you shall see what an asse 'tis, he believes me.
How am I comforted in my Meditation for you, and how over-joy'd will your Unkle be at the use you make of your retirements!
I confesse it is (by reason of my unwontednesse to it) some difficulty for me to write to women; wherefore since you have so nobly undertaken the conveyance of this, let me beseech you to apologize for the rudenes of my stile.
Anne Crostill,; The out-side hath no rudenesse on it, and (I doubt it not) shee shall finde within all sweetenesse and urbanity.
As you may interpret it to her sir.
Sir, what I have already said, and do intend to say unto her from your Unkle, and my selfe on your behalfe, together with what you have here written, shall (I doubt it not) prepare so faire a way of proceeding for you; That at your visit of her you may say,, she is your own.
And then -- a ha, Mr.!
Expect your fortune modestly, and when it comes embrace it with discretion.
Sir, I am edified.
It is well if you be so; I will put my undertaking in action presently, Pray for my good successe.
I dare not tell him now I cannot; but I wish well for the Monies sake; and let the Vintners pray, and all the decay'd Sparks about the Towne, whom I will raise out of ashes into flame againe. Let them pray for my good wokes. O my young Lady aunts grave waitingWoman. If shee were not hers, and out of this house I should take her for a Bawd now. But being hers, and here how much may I mistake? all flesh is frayle.
Not to disturbe your morning Meditations, my Lady has sent you --
And you have brought me, what sweet Mistris?
A part of her Ladiships own breakfast, it is very cordiall and comfortable to the spirits, I assure you, and delectable to the younger sort, and profitable to the old.
One ofworkes, or the mad Doctor that preaches boyld in't I thinke.
'Tis a composition of mine owne Sir, of many excellent decoctions, of most wholesome restorative, and costly ingredients.
That it was sent by her makes it more excellent, whose bounteous care of me, I must acknowledge exceeds all cost in carving to me, and countenancing me at her Table, in gracing me in presence of the Ladies that come to visit her; in giving charge for decency in all things for my Chamber, my fires shining, my odours burning, my livery serv'd in, my soft and costly bed prepar'd and spread with perfum'd linnen -- here's Ambergreece in this now --
O is it so, doe you finde that?
But though shee is my own Unkles wife, I could e'ne say 'tis pity a young man had her not.
What a wag's this?
Shee is a most sweet Lady.
Shee is a sweete Lady indeed, I can best speakeit that have knowne her from the wombe hitherto: A sweete infant shee was borne, and a sweete babe I swadled it, and a sweete child I nurs'd it, I traynd it up a sweete child. It was in manners a sweet child, at her Booke and Sample a sweet child. I never whipt it but once, and then it was sweete too, and sprawl'd but a little, and whimper'd but a little it was so sweet a child; And so shee grew upwards, and upwards towards woman, and a sweet youngling shee was, and so grew upwards and upwards towards man, and then a sweete Bride shee was, and now a most sweet Lady shee is, (as you say, and I commend you for it) And so she stands at a stay. For now shee growes no more upwards then upon her Wedding day, not upwards as I would have her upwards, here I meane young Gentlemen, could I but see a sweet babe of hers once by my Master, I could be then content to sleep with my Ancestors.
I had rather see your Gibship hang'd up with Polcatts in a Warren, and your sweet Lady with you, though I confesse that were some pitty. I hope her barrennesse, or his will preserve her from my curse.
I hope still, and shee hopes still; and I make him of this broth for every morning, and many other good strengthning things (I cannot say for the same purpose) for I shall never see him have an heire by her.
Excellent! that's best of all.
Because you then are heire, say you so? Is that your love to your Aunt?
No I protest, I meant by the broth, the bottome was the best of all.
Then I cry mercy.
Cannot all thy art, and her cost finde helpe for my Unkle, think'st thou, to get a child?
Helpe! what dee meane. He might have helpeand helpes enough, were she not too vertuous.
Still thou mistak'st me.
Away wag away, your Aunt loves you too well to thinke so of her.
as I hope to inherit any thing hereafter --
I should but serve you well to tell her your good thought of her.
, by this good -- peece I thinke no harme.
Nay, nay.
Take it I say. And tell her if thou wilt, that I love her so well, that were shee not mine Unkles wife, I would get her an heire my selfe rather then be his.
Kinde young Master, now I am heartily sorry that I mov'd you.
And for my Unkle were I his heire apparent, I rather wish he might live till all this World were weary of him, and the next affraid to take him. Then I survive him (Tongue, a pox punish you for lying) Now I live well, and merily good, Wealth and Estates, bring cares and troubles with 'em, Were all young heires of my contented mind, Parents and Patrons would be better prayd for.
Good Gentleman.
Closet. ----
O my Lady calls.
Present my thanks and best respects unto her.
I should ha' told you first -- I ha' forgot. My head is naught,
What member hast thou good then?
My Lady desires you -- This talke has put me out -- O this head! My Lady desires you --
Desires shee me?
Yes sir, shee desires you.
Refuse me if I desire not her as much, for all she is my Unkles leavings.
My Lady desires you.
And shee shall have me-- And she were ten Unkles wives, and she ten of mine Aunts.
O this head! nay now you will not heare mee, shee desires you to goe abroad in the Coach with her.
Any whither, to, or any of the City out-leaps (I know 'em all) for a spirt and back againe, tell her I am up and ready for her, and could ha' been without her stirrup porredge, though I thanke her for her care. A man can not be too well prepar'd, or provided for so sweete a Lady, in so much distresse. A very, chain'd to a Rock.
What's this you say? I understand no word of it, I would take your answer right, though I falter'd in my Ladies message.
The Devills in this overruning Tongue of mine, I could finde in my heart to worme him out with my teeth.
What must I tell my Lady Sir?
That I am more oblig'd to her Ladiship then I was to my Mother, shee has brought mee a new man into the World, and that my Being and my Life is hers.
I hope hee's a true convertite, did I send you to hold discourse here, Closet?
Nor did I Madam, but I could heare this Gentleman a whole day methinks. Hee speakes so acknowledgingly of your Ladiships vertue, and goodnesse towards him.
I am beholding to him, will you goe with mee Nephew to the Exchange? I am to buy some toyes there for the Country, you may get a fancy by't.
Good, I must weare her favours.
Or cannot you forbeare your study so long?
To doe you service Madam, under whose commands I build my happinesse.
Be not at the distance of complement with mee good Nephew.
I would not be thought insolent deare Madam.
Come the Coachman grumbles at my stay, and 'twill be Dinner-time presently, so the Cooke will be angry too.
You are all tendernesse to your servants Madam.
A sweete Gentleman, and bountifull, if my Lady had been blest with such a Husband, what a place had I had!
Doe you know the contents Mr.of the familiar Epistle you have brought me here?
No Lady, but I guesse it a faire expression of the Writers affection to you, although hee desired mee to crave your pardon for the rudenesse of his stile, it being the first that hee hath composed of that consequence.
Ha, ha, ha, I'le trust you sir, with the full knowledge of it, pray read it your selfe.
I finde shee is pleased, and my indeavour prosperous, for the young Gentleman, I am sorry that I delaid a day in the delivering of it.
Pray read it out sir, for I finde it so pleasant that I could heare it a whole day together.
-- Blesse mee! sure if hee writ this, the Devill dictated to him.
On sir, that's but his first charge.
This could no otherwise be done but by the Devill that ought him the shame.
What follows I pray, there's the first and second point past? marke his method.
Thirdly, and lastly, let mee advise you, since you are so hot upon Marriage, though I assure my selfe you love none but mee, (and I thanke you for't) that you fraine or dissemble an affection to some one of the City, who is but comparative to your selfe in blood and fortune, and so you may make by-use of me as your friend, and have children like me,.
Have you ever heard so queint a Love Letter?
Lady, the injury done in it, to your selfe is unanswerable, but my wrong in being his Messenger, I will make him answer.
Excuse me Sir, he has done me a favour; I pray informe him so with my great thankes. But for what you conceive a wrong to your selfe, use your discretion, you have no more to say to me for him at this present, have you sir?
Not for him but against him, I will un-say all that I sayd before intended for his good.
But i'le not heare you wrong your former love, and judgement of him so, which made so deepe impression here, that I had lock'd his love up as a Jewell in my Breast, and you in striving now to wrest it thence may breake the Cabinet; I rather wish you'l be a friendly meanes to draw his presence hither, that I my self may mildly question him.
Are you serious Lady?
I feare I shall not rest before I see him, but doe not tell him that, lest in this sullen humour, hee force his absence to afflict mee more; I'le hold you sir no longer, deale for me as you can, I know you have a guesse at my desire.
I'le doe you service in it.
I guesse that her desire is to doe some act of Revenge upon him. And (so it be not mortall) it were but Justice in her for so grosse a scorne by him cast upon a well reputed Gentleman. Yet is it observ'd in her that shee has a violent humour to do, and not to doe things oftentimes wilfully against all good councell or perswasion, shee has the spirit of contradiction in her, and an unalterable resolution upon sodaine intentions, a most incorrigible will shee has that will not bow nor breake. This crosse abusive Letter therefore may doe good upon her,however mischievous hee might intend it. If shee meant well to him before, it may the faster bring her on, but it amazes me that hee should write so, bearing his Unkle, and my selfe in hand, that hee so fairely lov'd her, and besought us to negotiate with her for him, should shee forgive it, yet the wrong to us in his vile manners is unpardonable, and so sir, I come to you.
O Mr.--
What mischiefe or despight have I e're done you, That could provoke your desperate spleene against mee, To wound mine honour?
What doe you meane good sir?
You have employed mee basely, made mee your Carrier of scandall, and scurrility to the hands Of noblenesse and vertue. Could the Fiend Lust that is in you suffer you to write No other Sense or Language to a person Of her faire Name, and Worth, then such as Ruffians Would send to strumpets? or it being such.
Could not a Porter, or your Pandare there Serve for the lewd conveyance?
What a welcom's that!
You might safer Ha' sent it so, and your own right hand with it; Then to have drawn my just revenge upon you.
Hold I beseech you, and sir, though I lose the Widow by my error (which was indeed but a meere accident) let mee not be so miserable made as to lose you, before you heare a short Examination -- Deliver'd you the Letter which I sent Yesterday to the Damsell that you wot of?
Yes sir, shee read it, kist it a hundred times, Then made a bosome Idoll on't, And sayes you are the noblest Gentleman.Under a Saint that e're tooke care for sinner.
Hell take her for a mistaking whore, Shee has the widows Letter, and the widow hers, I found it sir, when you judiciously Said it was Ruffian-like, and Strumpet language.
How could you erre so strangely?
O slightly, slightly, curse o' my heedless braine! And then too be trapp'd with carelesnesse. When I was so religiously resolv'd, T'incline to vertue, and a Marriage life, Thinking with one hand to cast off my follies, And to take hold of vertue with the other, For sir, (I will confesse my selfe to you) The Letter you conveyed was in defiance, A loose liv'd wanton, intended to a whore, That impudently hopes an interest in me.
It was not so directed.
I there was (The Hell confound it on't) my giddines: I seald both Letters e're I superscrib'd 'em, And so gave each the contrary direction.
'Twas a grosse carelesnesse, and if you lose A fortune by't, do not blame your friends.
That fortune should favour a whore before An honest woman. 'Twas the sweetest Letter, The daintiest winning things -- (the Devills in't) Shee must not carry't from the widow so. Fetch mee the Letter againe.
Do you thinke shee'l part with't sir?
Cannot you beat it out of her sir?
I cannot tell how to do that.
Thus sir -- i'le give you demonstration, you malicious Rogue, you that conspirst with her to betray me, so good a Master I have beene to thee, and so good a friend to her, i'le recompence you both.
You have undone us both, and will discard us now you are warme in your Unkles bosome agen -- but --
But what you Traitor you?
You put me in good minde, and if I do not somewhat.
I owe you somewhat for your last-nights absence, too pernicious Villaine that kepst thy selfe out o' the way o' purpose that I should bee drunke, and abuse my self, and the house here all lay o' your absence, There's somewhat more for that.
'Tis all upon account sir.
Who knowes an honest Servingman that wants a good Master.
Was it your mans fault Mr.? if I be not reveng'd &c.
No faith, To speak truth he was as much abus'd in it, as you in doing a thing as contrary to his vile conditions, as you did to your noble Name. But I crave onely your pardon, I know not what I doe besides. This crosse blow of chance staggers my reason so --
Well sir, since I have found the errour, my reason reconciles me to you, and since it grew out of your equall intent to cast off the evill, as to embrace the good, I will re-mediate for you to the widow.
But yet shee'l know I have had a whore. Yet then you may say, 'tis such a running Disease among young Gentlemen, that not one of a hundred has scap'd it, that have prov'd stay'd men afterwards, and very sober husbands; As looke you yonders one may prove, whom now I have in good sooth a great desire to beate.
In your Aunts presence, and your Unkles house; Though I were not his friend; could you be so outragious? I muse I see him here though.
Cry you mercy sir, are you his friend?
I make my selfe so, hee being dependent to my noblest Lord, whom I am bound to honour.
What Lord I pray, that I may honour him too.
The Lord.
That loves women above wine, wine above wealth, wealth above friend, and friends above himselfe. There's no scandall in all that sir.
It goes so of him indeed, but he loves honor above all those.
Mr.a word.
Your servant Madam.
In the name of flesh, for what dos his Lordship employ that Angle-worme to my Aunt? Hee has had her this houre in private conference, close chamberd up together, not so much as Matronin the roome with 'em, 'Tis a fine sleeke thing, and almost pitty to hunt it, but sure I must beat it, as place and time convenient may serve.
Pray Mr.move you my Husband for it, I would not medle in his money matters willingly.
Five hundred pound for my Lord upon the mentioned security, I will break it to sir.
Is that the businesse after so much privacy? very prety, my Aunts a woman too, and my Unkle may have as forked a fortune, as any of the City, that lend out money to hedge in Lordships.
I am his Lordships servant.
And I your Lordships good Madam. And yours Mr..
I am for your way Mr..
And I sir, and't please you.
, I would speak with you.
May I not wait upon your Gentleman to the Gate Madam?
No good, though I commend your curtesie, yet would I not you should neglect your owne dignity.
Umh -- I am under Government.
The young man, if you have modesty will thinke you mock him, if not you'l make him become arrogant, know you not whose man he is?
No tis apparent, this over-slighting of him proclaimes shee loves him, whose follower Madam, and I know Lords followers, Knights fellows.
Not all Lords followers to all Knights.
To as many as their faire Ladies will give way to, that are not faint-hearted.
I understand you not; something troubles you, you are not right to day.
I am only as I am in your favour Madam.
Come I know what perplexes you, and 'tis therefore that I desire to talke with you; I am not angry with you, but let mee tell you, although not openly I tooke notice of the pickle you came home in last night, after your Unkle was in Bed; to whom, mervayling at your absence I excus'd you, as gone at my request to visit some Ladies with whom you staid Supper, I told him, when you were with your Roucers.
But did you never go?
Indeed I did, and he was satisfied.
O my sweet Lady Aunt! I was indeed amongst 'em, and deeply merry.
And drunke as deeply!
I will abuse your goodnesse so no more.
Say and hold, for your own good.
What's now become of mee, I am under correction.
I would you could have seene your selfe, and how your disguise became you, as I was told, I do but friendly tell you of some passages, as they were to mee related, by those whom I have charm'd to speake no more on't. Be secure therefore in your Unkle.
O my deare heavenly Aunt!
First, at the doore you bounc'd like a Giant at the Gate of an inchanted Castle, before which could be opened offence was taken by you at your Sedan-men; for asking money (as appeard afterwards) more then you brought from the Taverne, and leaving their office fouler by a distemper'd stomach-full, then you found it. In the strife for these sad causes your Sword being seiz'd on, you being unable to use it, were found by my servants atwith your brace of Corps bearers, in the dirt, and their poore hovill Chaire turnd on his ridge in the Kennel.
I'le never be drunk agen.
I hope you will say so, when you have heard all; but by the way your late stock being spent, here are ten peeces towards a supply.
O sweet golden Aunt!
Well sir, the striefe appeas'd, you were tane in. Then hay is there no Sack i'the house? Tis for you in you Chamber is replid, up you are had, where is the Rogue my man? not seene since Yesterday; Fetch me a wench. Blesse us cries oldthe Butler, wee have none i'th house, nor cannot send for any out o' dores. Dost -- tell me that? is not my Ladies Woman, my Ladies Chamber-maide, the Laundry-maide, the wench under the Cooke, my Ladies Nurse old, nor my Lady her selfe within? I know, or will know all the shee things in the house.
But why me up in your bedroll?
Pseigh.
You remember none o' this!
It is not worth it Madam.
Nor how you scar'd Chamber-maid, whomsent in love to see care taken for you, not dreaming of any ill thought in you, doe you remember how you told her, and what you would give her, when your Unkle died for a small present curtesie? she was faine to satisfieyou with a false promise to steale to bed to you before foure men could force, or humor you into it.
What an unhallowed Rascal was!
'Tis well you consider it now. And still consider. How ill excesse of Wine, Roaring and VVhoring becomes a Gentleman, and how well sobrietie, curtesie, and noble action, and dangers wait upon the one sort, and what safety accompanies the other!
Wine, Roaring and Whoring,will lay that saying of yours Madam to my heart; but Wine is the great wheele that sets the rest a whirling.
True, for had you not first beene sullied with Wine, you would not have abus'd your selfe to ha tumbled in the dirt with your Litter-mules, nor offer'd to seduce my Chamber-maide. Suppose you had overcome her, how could you have come off but with shame to your selfe, and the utter ruine of the poore Wench?
Still shee corrects me for my medling with base matters and people, shee is not angry shee sayes, thoughcall'd for her last night i'my drinke, shee gives me mony,will now understand her, and whereunto all her former favours and her later admonitions are directed, and presently appeare a gratefull Nephew.
Nay, bee not sad upon it, aswould win you from your faults,would have you still be cheerfull. If any thought troubles you, you may be free with me.
O Madam you have made me, and now take me to you.
How meane you?
Freely and wholly, the truest, faithfullst servant, and I thinke the ablest that any Lady of your lacks and longings ever bestowd a favour on, though I say't my self. You'l swear't when you have tri'd me, and't be but hourely for a month together.
Is the man sound troe?
I defy Surgeon, or the Potecary can come against mee.
Sound i' your senses sir, I meane.
O for blabbing Madam never feare mee, now I am resolv'd to live soberly, and be onely yours. And with such pleasure, with such safety, secresie, and fulnesse, I will so constantly supply you, that you shall not have time to dreame of the defects of your old man.
Doe you meane your Unkle, and not know whose wrong you unnaturally and sinfully pursue?
No man living Madam can doe it for him, more naturally and lesse sinfully; I am of the same flesh and blood, and bring his youth to your pleasure, how can you thinke old Unkles children are got? or how came up the proverbe,, doe you thinke? You would have a child by him. All your Cawdells and Cock-broaths will never doe it, An old mans generative spirit runs all into braine, and that runs after covetousnesse too, get wealth, not children. Believe it, much Nephews helpe belongs to it, and then the children are not degenerate, I cannot thinke but many Unkles know it, and give way to it, because stranger bloods shall not inherit their Lands, and so sweet Aunt if I live not to inherit his, my son may, in your first born. There will be a sweet comfort to you.
But is all this in earnest?
In earnest? yes, And I pray so take it, and let it be a bargaine, and now presently in the Chamber, I will make you my first payment for the purchace.
Fie, fie, you doe but say so?
That shall be tri'd presently. Come sweet Madam, I finde you are willing, and I sweare I am resolute, and will be as secret as your own woman, if you will not goe I protest i'le carry you.
Nay preytheeset me down a little.
Psewgh -- I need none o' these whesings I.
But prathee tell mee, dost thou not all this onely to trie me, or am I a Rogue thinke you, or wouldst thou seriously that thine own naturall Unkle, thy bountifull Patron, nay thy father on the matter, should suffer such a wrong, and done by us?
Harke there againe, Madam have I not proved sufficiently and plainely, that I shall in doing the feate for him doe him the greatest right in the world, in getting him, and you an indubitable heire, and to give him both the comfort, and the glory of it?
Was ever such a Reprobate?
And you can doe him no wrong (though you had not a Ladies priviledge) to Cuckold him, for assure your selfe hee Cuckqueanes you, now come Madam.
You speake not on your knowledge.
I never was his Pimpe, but what I have heard, I have heard. Now come Madam.
I heard Mr.protest within these three days that hee thought my Husband the chastest man (of a Gentleman) that he knows.
O did hee so, Madam, believe it they two have whor'd together, and thathas pimpt for him oftener then you ever lay with my Unkle.
What! since he married me?
What else?is not onely his grave Parasite, but his Pimpe, and has spent my Unkle more in these civill punctuall wayes, then I in all my whole debauches, what did you thinke hee kept him for? O they are a brace of subtle dry Tweakes, come now Madam.
What an inhumane Villain's this!
I'le tell you all now upon our inward acquaintance.
You have told too much already to have any acquaintance with me at all, nor shall you unlesse you presently recant all that you have, or would have said upon this subject.
Madam --
Stand further and replie not, lesse I call in those that shall sadly silence you. Have you abus'd your Unkle, and the next best friend you have i' the World, in hope thereby to abuse mee most, that was no enemy of yours till now you justly have provok'd me?
I tooke not a right course.
Was this the best construction you could make of my love to you, or a fit requitall, to make me an incestuous Whore?
Yes, yes, a pox my course was right enough, but I undertooke her at an ill season. Her spruce springall left her but now, i'le tell her so Madam.
Come I perceive you are sorry; and that's a part of satisfaction. Therefore for once i'le winke at your transgression, especially before others. Here's one you see.
I doe, the Devill blind her.
Madam --
But tempt me so againe, and i'le undoe you.
I know how you'l undoe mee witty Madam,--
Nay be not sad, discover not your selfe, and you are safe, for once I tell you.
Shee'l come about I see.
But will you Cozen goe, and doe that for me?
Most readily good Madam, I have your full directions.
All Cosen, if you forget not.
I cannot be so negligent in your service Madam, I finde by this fain'd errand shee dares not trust her trollop there, I love her wit now too.
He is both schoold, and coold I hope. Nowwhat's your News?
Of a Citizen Madam that intreats to speake with your Ladiship.
Doe you not know his Name, or Trade?
Yes, I had both eene now, but I have such a Head.
If you have lost 'em by the way pray go back and seeke 'em, or bring you his businesse.
I ask'd his businesse Madam, and told him hee might trust mee with it without a hand to his booke, but he said it could not be delivered, but by his owne word o' mouth to your Ladiship.
What strange matter is it troe? or what Citizen, is not his Name?
Yes Madam, and he is a (O this head) a --
A Silkeman is he not?
Yes Madam the same.
I hope his impudent Wife has not told him all; if shee has, where's his remedy in this Womans Lawcase?
There's a Gentleman with him too Madam.
Then wee shall have it, 'Tis his Wife sure, well Iam prepar'd for the incounter. Bid 'em come up, if they grow violent or too bold with mee, i'le set my Nephewupon 'em. 'Tis not his Wife, what Creature is it troe with me, Mr.?
Craving your pardon Madam, a few words in the behalfe of this poore Kinsewoman of mine, touching a Gentleman, who I heare lives in your House, Mr., Madam, by whom shee has received much injury.
How sir I pray?
Pray Madam read this Letter, weepe not, but hold up thy head Cuz, wee will not be dasht, nor basht in a good cause; pray read you Madam.
Wherein appeares the injury to your Kinswoman?
In flying from his Word, and Deed Madam. He has borne her in hand these two yeares, and use her at his pleasure, detaining her from her choyce of many good fortunes, and at last sends her this to make amends for all, and denies his act the next day, sending his man to take the Letter from her, pretending 'twas directed to another. But never the sooner for a hasty word Cosen, we will not be dasht nor basht, I warrant thee.
Here's the direction., is that your Name Lady?
I am the sorrowfull one that is knowne by it Madam.
Never the sooner for a hasty word Cosen.
I conceive the businesse, and find the error, and my great doubt is over.
Weepe not I say.
What would you have me doe Mr.?
You have discretion Madam, and I made choice of your Ladiship to open this matter unto you, rather then to Sirhimselfe, whom I would not willingly exasperate against his Nephew, you may be pleased in a milder way to temper him, and worke a satisfaction for my Kinsewoman; Sirand your selfe Madam, are noble Customers to my Shop, and for your sakes I would not deale rigourously with your Kinseman, if a gentle end may be made. But, if you cannot so compound it, the Law lies open, money and friends are to be found, a good cause shall not be sterv'd, I will not be dasht nor basht,is my word, and so good Madam you know my mind.
'Tis pity a Gentlewoman should suffer too much, and I like her so well at first sight, that I am easily mov'd to doe good for her, is shee your Kinsewoman in blood Mr., or your wifes?
Mine I assure your Ladiship, though my wife can boast as great and noble friends I thank fortune, as the wife of any Tradesman that carries a head in the City, (but that's by the by) yet I came of a better house, and am a Gentleman borne, none disprais'd.
Well Mr., leave your Kinsewoman with
me a little while, you shall not be seene in my act, i'le try
what I can doe for her.