What! Not ready yet, Man?
You do not consider my Voyage fromlast night.
Pish, a meer Ferry, get up, get up; my Cousins Maids will come and Blanket thee anon: Art thou not ashamed to lie a Bed so long?
I may be more ashamed to rise; and so you'l say, dear Heart, if you look upon my Cloaths; the best is, my Buff-coat will cover all.
I gad, there goes more cunning than one would think, to the putting thy Cloaths together: thy Doublet and Breeches are Guelphs and Ghibellins to one another; and the stiches of thy Doublet areso far asunder, that it seems to hang together by the Teeth. No Man could ever guess to what part of the Body these fragments did belong, unless he had been acquainted with u'm as long as thou hast been. If they once lose their hold, they can never get together again, except by chance the Rags hit the Tallies of one another. He that gets into thy Doublet, must not think to do't by storme; no, he must win it inch by inch, as thedid.
You are very merry with my Wardrobe: but till I am provided of a better, I am resolv'd to receive all Visits in this Truckle-bed.
Then I will first scotch the Wheels of it, that it may not run; thou hast Cattle enough in it, to carry it down stairs, and break thy neck. 'tis got a yard nearer the door already.
Sir, Mr.your Taylor's below, and desires to speak with you.
He's an honest Fellow, and a fashionable, he shall set thee forth I warrant thee.
I, but where's the Money for this dear Heart?
-- Well, but what think you of being put into a
Suit of Cloaths, without Money?
You speak of Miracles.
Do you not knowhumor?
Prethee, What have I to do with his humor?
Break but a Jest, and he'll beg to trust thee for a Suit; nay, he will contribute to his own destruction; and give thee occasions to make one: he has been my Artificer these three years; and, all the while I have liv'd upon his favourable apprehension: Boy, conduct him up.
But, What am I the better for this? I ne'r made Jeast in all my life.
A bare clinch will serve the turn; a Carwichet, a Quarterquibble, or a Punn.
Wit from a Low-Countrey-Soldier? One that has convers'd with none but dullthese ten yeares! What an unreasonable Rogue art thou? why, I tell thee, 'tis as difficult to me, as to pay him ready Money.
Come, you shall be rul'd for your own good, Lie down; I'll throw the Cloaths over you to help Meditation; and, upon the first opportunity, start you up, and surprise him with a Jeast.
Well, I think this impossible to be done: but, however I'll attempt.
Husht! he's coming up.
Morrow Mr.: What, I warrant you think I come a Dunning now?
No, I vow to Gad,, I have a better opinion of thy Wit, than to think, thou would'st come to so little purpose.
Pretty well that: No, no; my business is to drink my mornings-Draught in Sack with you:
Will not Ale serve the turn,?
I had too much of that last night; I was a little disguis'd, as they say.
Why disguis'd? Hadst thou put on a clean Band, or wash'd thy Face lately? those are thy Disguises,.
Well, in short, I was drunk; damnably drunk with Ale; great Hogen Mogen bloody Ale: I was porterly drunk, and that I hate of all things in Nature.
And of all things in Nature I love it best.
Art thou there I'faith; and why, old Boy?
Because when I am porterly drunk, I can carry my self.
Ha, ha Boy.
This Porter brings sad Newes to you, you must trust him for a suit of Cloathes, as bad as 'tis: come, h's as honest Fellow, and loves the King.
Why? it shall be my Suit to him, that I may trust him.
I grant your Suit, Sir,
Make hast and dress you: SirDines here to day you know him.
I, I a good honest young Fellow; but, no Conjurer; he and I are very kind.
I gad we two have a constant Revenue out of him: he would now be admitted Suitor to my Lady,my Lordhis Daughter; our Neighbour here in.
Is the Match in any forwardness?
He never saw her before yesterday, and will not be brought to speak to her this Moneth yet.
That's strange.
Such a bashful Knight did I never see; but we must move for him.
They say here's a great Dinner to be made to day here, at your Cousin, on purpose for the enterview.
What he keeps up his old humor still?
Yes certain; he admires eating and drinking well, as much as ever, and measures every mans wit, by the goodness of his Palate.
Who Dines here besides.
O, my Ghest.
He has ever had the repute of a brave clear-spirited Fellow.
He's one of your Dear Hearts, a Debauche.
I love him the better for't: the best Heraldry of a Gentleman is a Clap deriv'd to him, from three Generations: What fortune has he?
Good Fortune at all Games; but no Estate: he had one; but he has made a Devil on't long ago: he's a bold Fellow, I vow to Gad: a person that keeps company with his betters; and commonly has Gold in's pockets: come; I see thou longest to be at thy mornings watering: I'll try what credit I have with the Butler.
Come away my noble Festus and new Customer.
Now will he drink till his Face be no bigger than a three-pence.
Nay, the Devil take thee, sweet Landlady, hold thy tongue: Was't not enough thou hast scolded me from my Lodging, which, as long as I rent it, is my Castle; but to follow me here to Mr., where I am invited; and to discredit me before strangers, for a lowsy, Paltry summ of Money?
I tell you truely, Mr., my husband and I cannot live by Love, as they say; we must have wherewithal, as they say; and pay for what we take; and so shall you, or some shall smoak for't.
Smoak! why a piece of hung Beef inis not more smoakt, then thou hast Smoak'd me already. Thou know'st I am now fasting; let me have but fair play; when I have lined my sides with a good dinner, I'll ingage upon reputation to come home again, and thou shalt scold at me all the afternoon.
I'll take the Law on you.
The Law allows none to scold in their own Causes: What do'st thou think the Lawyers take our money for?
I hope you intend to deal by my Husband like a Gentleman, as they say?
Then I should beat him most unmercifully, and not pay him neither.
Come, you think to fobb me off with your Jests as you do my Husband; but it wonn't be: yonder he comes, and company with him; Husband, husband; whyI say!
Speak softly, and I will satisfie thee.
You shall not satisfie me, Sir; pay me for what you owe me, for Chamber-rent, and Diet, and many a good thing besides, that shall be nameless.
What a Stygian woman's this to talk thus? hold thy tongue till they be gone, or I'll Cuckold thy husband:
You Cuckold him -- would you durst Cuckold him; I will not hold my Tongue, Sir.
Yonders my Guest; what say you Gentlemen? shall I call him to go down with us?
I must make a loose from her, there's no otherway: Save ye Mr.; is your Cousinstirring yet: answer me quickly Sir, is you Cousinyet stirring?
I'll go and see, Sir; sure the man has a mind to beat me; but I vow to Gad I have no mind to be beaten by him: come away.. you'll follow us.
I'll be with you immediately --
Who was that with,.
A man at Armes, that's come from.
A man out at Armes thou mean'st,.
Good I'faith.
I, I; you run questing up and down after your Gambols, and your Jests; and never mind the main chance, as they say: pray get in you Debts, and think upon your Wife and Children.
Think upon the Sack at, with theflavour. hang a Wife; What is she, but a lawful kind of Manslayer? every little hugg in bed, is a degree of murdering thee: and for thy Children fear u'm not: thy part of u'm shall be Taylors, and they shall trust; and those thy Customers get for thee shall be Gentlemen, and they shall be trusted by their Brethren; and so thy children shall live by one another.
Did you mark that? there was wit now; he call'd me Cuckold to my face, and yet for my heart I cannot be angry with him: I perceive you love, Sir; and I love her the better for your sake; speak truly, do you not like such a pretty brown kind of woman?
I do I'faith,. your fair Women have no substance in u'm they shrink Ith' wetting.
Well, you may be undone if you will Husband: I hear there are 2 or 3 Actions already out against him: you may be the last, if you think good.
'Tis true she tel's me; I love your wit well Sir; but I must cut my coat according to my cloath.
Sir, we'll come by our own as we can; if you put us off from week to week thus.
Nay, but good Landlady --
Will good Landlady set on the Pot, as they say; or make the Jack goe; then I'll hear you.
Now she's too much on the t'other hand: hold your prating; or I'll put you out of your Pater Nosters with a sorrow to you.
I did but lay the Law open to him, as they say, whereby to get our money in: but if you knew how he had used me Husband.
Has he us'd you; put so much more into his Bill for Lodging.
Honest, and so he dy'd; I thank thee little, being sober, and when I am drunk, I will kiss thee for't.
Thank me, and pay me my money, Sir; though I could not forbear my jest, I do not intend to lose by you; if you pay me not the sooner, I must provide you another Lodging; say I gave you warning.
Against next quarter Landlord?
Of an hour Sir.
That's short warning,.
By this hand you shall up into the Garret where the little bed is; I'll let my best room to a better paymaster; you know the Garret, Sir.
I, he knows it by a good Token Husband.
I sweat to think of that Garret,. thou art not so unconscionable to put me there: why 'tis a kind of little ease, to cramp thy rebellious Prentices in; I have seen an Usurers Iron Chest would hold two on't: a penny Looking-glass cannot stand upright in the Window, that and the Brush fills it: the Hat-case must be dispos'd under the Bed, and the Comb-case will hang down from the Seeling to the Floore. If I chance to Dine in my Chamber, I must stay till I am empty before I can get out: and if I chance to spill the Chamber-pot, it will over-flow it from top to bottom.
Well, for the description of the Garret, I'll bate you something of the Bill.
All, all, good. or to stay thy fury till my Rents come up; I will describe thy little Face.
No, rather describe your own little money; I am sure that's so Little, it is not visible.
You are ith'right, I have not a cross at present, as I am a sinner; and you will not believe me, I'll turn my Pockets inside outward -- Ha! What's the meaning of this, my Pockets heavy? Has my smal Officer put in Counters to abuse me? -- How now, yellow Boyes, by this good light! Sirrah, Varlet, how came I by this Gold? Ha!
What Gold do you mean, Sir? the Devil-a-piece you had this morning: in these last three weeks, I have almost forgot what my Teeth were made for; last night good Mrs.here took pitty on me, and crumm'd me a Mess of Gruel, with the Children, and I popt and popt my Spoon three or four times to my mouth, before I could find the way to't.
'Tis strange, how I should come by so much Money!
Has there been no body about my Chamber this morning, Landlady?
O yes, Sir; I forgot to tell you that: this Morning a strange Fellow, as ever eyes beheld, would needs come up to you when you were asleep; but when he came down again, he said, He had not wak'd you.
Sure this Fellow, who e'r he was, was sent by Fortune to mistake me into so much Money. -- Well, this is not the first time my necessities have been strangely supply'd: someor other has a kindness for me, that's certain:
-- Well Monsieur, from henceforward I'll keep my wit for more refin'd spirits; you shall be payd with dirt; -- there's the Money for you.
Nay, Good Sir. --
What's your summ? tell it out: Will the Money burn your fingers? Sirrah, Boy, fetch my Suit with the Gold Lace at Sleeves from Tribulation -- Gives him Gold.
Mr., I shall turn the better Bill-man, and knock that little Coxcomb of yours, if you do not answer me what I owe you.
Pray Sir, trouble not your self; 'tis nothing; Ifeck now 'tis not.
How, nothing Sir?
And't please your worship, it was seventeen pounds and a Noble, yesterday at noon, your worship knows: and then your worship came home ill last night, and complain'd of your worships head; and I sent for three Dishes offor your good worship, and that was six pence more, and please your worship's honor.
Well; there's eighteen pieces, tell u'm.
I say,, do not take u'm,
What, Is all your pleading of necessity come to this?
Now I see he will pay, he shall not pay,; go home, and fetch him the whole bag of forty pounds, I'll lend it him, and the Lease of the House too; he shall want for nothing.
Take the Money, or I'll leave your house.
Nay, rather than displease his Worship, take it.
So, so; go home quietly, and Suckle my God-son,.
If you are for the Cellar, Sir, you know the way.
No, my first visit shall be to my Mistriss, the Lady: She's discreet, and how the Devil she comes to love me, I know not; yet I am pretty confident she loves me: well, no woman can be wiser than, you know what will give her leave to be.
Look, look; Is not that your Servant,?
'Tis she; there's no being seen, till I am better habited --
Let him go, and take no notice of him: poor Rogue! He little thinks I know his poverty.
And less, that you supply it by an unknown hand.
I, and falsified my Fathers Keyes to do it.
How can you answer this to your discretion?
Who could see him want she loves?
Oh here's Mr.come, your Jeweller, Madam.
Welcome, hast thou perform'd thy visit Happily, and without discovery?
As you would wish it, Madam: I went up to his Chamber without interruption; and there found him Drowning his cares, and pacifying his hunger with sleep; which advantage I took, and undiscovered by him left The Gold divided in his Pockets.
Well, this Money will furnish him I hope, that we may have his company again.
Two hundred and fifty good pounds, Madam! Has your Father miss'd it yet?
No; if he had, we should have all heard on't before now: but, pray God Monsieurhas no other haunts to divert him now he's ransom'd: what a kind of woman is his Landlady?
Well enough to serve a Taylor; or to kiss when he comes home drunk, or wants money; but, far unlikely to create jealousie in your Ladiship.
Madam, Justicedesires your Ladiships excuse, that he has not yet perform'd the Civilities of his hour to you; he is dispatching a little business, about which he is earnestly employed.
He's Master of his own occasions.
We shall see him anon, with his face as read, as if it had been boyl'd in pump-water: but, When comes this Miror of Knighthood that is to be presented you for your Servant?
Oh, 'tis well thought on; 'Faith thou know'st my affections are otherwise dispos'd; he's rich, and thou want'st a Fortune; atchieve him if thou can'st; 'tis but trying, and thou hast as much wit as any Wench in.
On condition you'l take it for a Courtesie to be ridd of an Ass, I care not if I marry him: the old foole, your Father, would be so importunate to match you with a young Foole, that partly for quietness sake I am content to take him.
To take him! then you make sure on't.
As sure, as if the Sack Posset were already eaten.
But, What means wilt thou use to get him?
I'll bribe, he's the man.
Why this Knight is his inheritance; he lives upon him: Do'st thou think he'll ever admit thee to govern him? no, he fears thy wit too much: besides, he has already received an hundred pound to make thee Match between Sirand me.
'Tis all one for that; I warrant you he sells me Fee-simple of him.
Your Father, Madam. --
The Tempest is risen; I see it in his face; he puffs and blowes yonder, as if two of the Winds were fighting upwards and downwards in his belly.
Will he not find your false Keyes, Madam?
I hope he will have more Humanity then to search us.
You are come after us betimes, Sir.
Oh Child! I am undone; I am robb'd, I am robb'd; I have utterly lost all stomach to my dinner.
Robb'd! good my Lord how, or of what?
Two hundred and fifty pounds in fair Gold out of my Study: an hundred of it I was to have paid a Courtier this afternoon for a Bribe.
I protest, my Lord, I had as much a do to get that parcel of Gold for your Lordship. --
You must get me as much more against to morrow; for then my Friend at Court is to pay his Mercer.
Nay, if that be all, there's no such hast: the Courtiers are not so forward to pay their Debts.
Has not thebeen in the Study? he may have carried it away, and dropt it under the Garden-window: the grass is long enough to hide it.
I'll go see immediately.
This is the Gentleman, my Lord
He's wellcome --
And this the particular of his Estate.
That's wellcome too.
But, besides the Land here mentioned, he has wealth in specie.
A very fine young Gentleman.
Now, my Lord, I hope there's no great need of Wooing: I suppose my Estate will speak for me; yet, if you please to put in a word.
That will I instantly.
I hope I shall have your good word too Madam, to your Cousin for me;
Any thing within my power, Sir.
Daughter, here's a person of Quality, and one that loves and honours you exceedingly --
Nay, good Lord! you discover all at first dash.
Let me alone, Sir; Have not I the dominion over my own Daughter?, here's a Knight in love with you, Childe.
In love with me, my Lord, it is not possible.
Here he stands that will make it good, Childe.
Who I, my Lord? I hope her Ladyship has a better opinion of me than so.
What, Are not you in love with my Daughter? I'll be Sworn you told me so but even now: I'll eat words for no man.
If your Ladyship will believe all reports that are raised on Men of Quality --
He told it me with his own mouth, Child: I'll eat words for no man; that's more then ever I told him yet.
You told him so but just now; fye, Sir.
He shall have no Daughter of mine and he were a thousand Knights; he told me, he hop'd I would speak for him: I'll eat no mans words; that's more than ever I told him yet.
You need not keep such a pudder about eating his words; you see he has eaten u'm already for you.
I'll make him stand to his words, and he shall not marry my Daughter neither: by this good day, I will --
'Tis an ill day to him; he has lost 250in't.
He swears at the rate of two thousand pounds a year, if theAct were still in being.
He's in passion man; and besides, he has been a great Fanatick formerly, and now has got a habit of Swearing, that he may be thought a Cavalier.
What noise is that? I think I hear your Cousinvoice.
I'll go see --
Come Sir, be not discouraged: 'tis but an old mans frowardness; he's alwayes thus against raine.
O Madam follow me quickly; and if you do not see sport, Melancholly be upon my head. --
Cinque and Cater: my Cinque I play here Sir, my Cater here Sir: Now for you Sir: but first I'll drink to you Sir; upon my faith I'll do you reason Sir: mine was thus full Sir: pray mind your play Sir: -- Size Ace I have thrown: I'll play em at length Sir: -- will you Sir? then you have made a blot Sir; I'll try if I can enter: I have hit you Sir. -- I think you can cog a Dye Sir. -- I cog a Dye Sir? I play as fair as you, or any man. -- You lye Sir, how lye Sir; I'll teach you what 'tis to give a Gentleman the lye Sir. --
Is this your serious business?
O you Rogue are you there? you are welcome huswife, and so are you,.
Prithee be not so rude.
Huswife, I'll have you into my Larder, and shew you my provision: I have Cocles, dainty fat Cocles that came in the night; if they had seen the day, I would not have given a fart for u'm. I would the King had u'm.
He has as good I warrant you.
Nay that's a lye, I could sit and cry for him sometimeshe does not know what 'tis to eat a good meal in a whole year: his Cooks are Asses: I have a delicate dish of Ruffs to dinner Sirrah.
To dinner!
To dinner! why by supper they had been past their prime, I'll tell thee a story of u'm: I have a friend. --
Sir Dinner's upon the Table.
Well, well; I have a friend as I told you. --
Dinner stayes Sir, 'tis Dinner that stayes: sure he will hear now.
I have a friend as I told you. --
I believe h's your friend, you are so loath to part with him --
Away; away; -- I'lltell you the story between the courses. Go you to the Cook immediately, Sirrah; and bring me word what we have to supper, before we go to dinner; I love to have the satisfaction of the day before me.
Speak thy conscience; was it not well dress'd sirrah?
What think you of the Park, after our plenteous entertainment Madam?
I defie the Park, and all its works.
Come, Mr., we'll walk in your Garden.
O, one thing I had almost forgot to tell you: one of us two must ever be near Sir.
Why?
To guard our interest in him from the Enemy Madam; who, I doubt, has designes upon him. I do not fear her wit, but her sex; she carries a prevailing argument about her.
By this hand, I have a light upon the best wine in your Cousins Cellar, drink but one glass to me, to shew I am welcome, and I am gone.
Here then, honest. 'tis a cup of forbearance to thee.
Thank you Sir, I'll pledge you -- now here's to you again.
Come away; what is't.
'Tis what you christened it, a cup of forbearance Sir.
Why, I drank that to thee. that thou shouldst forbear thy money.
And I drink this to you, Sir; henceforward I'll forbear working for you.
Then say I: take a little Bibber, and throw him in the River, and if he will trust never, then there let him lie ever.
Then say I: take a little, and throw him to the Jaylour; and there let him lie, till he has paid his Tailor.
You are very smart upon one another Gentlemen.
This is nothing between us; I use to tell him of his Title,; and his setting dog, that runs into Ale-houses before him, and comes questing out again, if any of the woots his customers be within.
I faith 'tis true; and I use to tell him of his two Capons tails about his hat, that are laid spread eagle wise to make a feather; I would go into the snow at any time, and in a quarter of an hour I would come in with a better feather upon my head; and so farewell Sir; I have had the better on you hitherto, and for this time I am resolved to keep it.
The rogue's too hard for me; but the best on't is, I have my revenge upon his purse.
Came not Sirthis way, Gentlemen? he left us in the Garden, and said he would look out my Lord, to make his peace with him.
Madame, I like not your enquiring after Sir: I suspect you have some design upon him: you would fain undermine your Cousin, and marry him your self.
Suppose I should design it; what are you the worse for my good fortune? Shall I make a proposition to you: I know you two carry a great stroke with him: make the match between us, and propound to your selves what advantages you can reasonably hope: you shall chouse him of horses, cloathes and Money, and I'll wink at it.
And if he will not be chous'd, shall we beat him out on't?
For that, as you can agree.
Give us a handsel of the bargain; let us enjoy you, and 'tis a match.
Grammarcy ifaith boyes; I love a good offer how e'r the world goes? but you would not be so base to wrong him that way.
I vow to gad but I would Madam: in a horse or a woman I may lawfully cheat my own Father: besides, I know the Knights complexion; he would be sure to follow other women; and all that.
Nay, if he fought with the sword, he should give me leave to fight with the Scabbard.
What say you Madam? is't a bargain.
'Tis but a promise; and I have learnt a Court trick for performing any thing
Well Gentlemen, when I am married I'll think upon you; you'll grant there's a necessity I should Cuckold him, if it were but to prove my self a Wit.
Nay, there's no doubt you'll Cuckold him; and all that; for look you he's a person fit for nothing else; but I fear we shall not have the graffing of the horns; we must have Livery and Seisin before hand of you, or I protest to gad we believe you not.
I have past my word, is't not sufficient? what do you think, I would tell a lie to save such a paltrie thing as a nights lodging? -- Hark you Sir:
Now will she attempt; igad she has found him out for the weaker vessel.
I have no kindness for that, we'll strike him out, and manage Sirour selves.
Indeed we wonnot.
a Rook, and besides, he's such a debauched fellow.
I am ten times worse.
Leave it, and him that taught it you: you have virtuous inclinations, and I would not have you ruine your self. He that serves many Mistresses, surfeits on his diet, and grows dead to the whole sex: 'tis the folly in the world next long ears and braying.
Now I'm sure you have a mind to me; when a woman once falls to preaching, the next thing is ever use and application.
Forbear your rudeness --
Then I am sure you meant to jilt me: you declinebecause he has wit; and you think me such an ass, that you may pack me off so soon as you are married; no, no, I'll not venture certainties for uncertainties.
I can hold no longer; Mr., what do you think this fellow was saying of you?
Of me, Madam.
That you were one of the errantest Cowards in Christendom, though you went for one of the Dear Hearts: that your name had been upon more posts than play-bills: and that he had been acquainted with you these seven years, drunk and sober, and yet could never fasten a quarrel upon you.
Do you believe this, Dear Heart?
If you deny it, I'll take his sword, and force you to confess it.
I vow to gad, this will not do, Madam: you shall not set us at variance so easily; neither shall you have Sir.
No! then mark my words: I'll marry him in spight of you; and which is worse, you shall both work my ends; and I'll discard you for your pains.
You shall not touch a bit of him: I'll preserve his humbles from you igad; they shall be his Keepers fees.
She shall cut an Atome sooner than divide us.
I have given u'm the slip in the Garden, to come and overhear thee: no fat overgrown virgin of forty ever offer'd her self so dog cheap, or was more despis'd: me-thinks now this should mortifie thee exceedingly.
Not a whit the more for that: Cousin mine, our Sex is not so easily put out of conceit with our own beauties.
Thou hast lost the opinion of thy honesty, and got nothing in recompence: now that's such an oversight in a Lady.
You are deceiv'd; they think me too virtuous for their purpose; but I have yet another way to try, and you shall help me.
Mr.. welcome, welcome: where have you been this fortnight.
Faith Madam, out of Town to see a little thing that's fallen to me upon the death of a Grandmother.
You thank death for the windfall, Servant: but why are you not in mourning for her.
Troth Madam it came upon me so suddenly I had not time: twas a fortune utterly unexpected by me.
Why, was your Grandmother so young you could not look for her disease?
Not for that neither; but I had many other kindred whom she might have left it to, only she heard I liv'd here in fashion, and spent my money in the eye of the world.
You forge these things prettily, but I have heard you are as poor as a decimated Cavalier, and had not one foot of land in all the world.
Rivals tales, Rivals tales, Madam.
Where lies your land, Sir?
I'll tell you Madam, it has upon it a very fair Manor house; from one side you have in prospect an hanging Garden.
Who was hang'd there? not your Grandmother I hope?
In the midst of it you have a Fountain: you have seen that at; it will serve to give you a slight image of it. Beyond the Garden you look to a River through a Perspective of fruit-trees; and beyond the River you see a Mead so flowry: well I shall never be at quiet, till we two make hay there.
But where lies this Paradice?
Pox on't; I am thinking to sell it, it has such a villanous unpleasant name; it would have sounded so harsh in a Ladies ear. But for the Fountain, Madam --
The Fountain's a poor excuse, it will not hold water; come the name, the name.
Faith it is come so lately into my hands, that I have forgot the name on't.
That's much, now, you should forget the name, and yet could make such an exact description of the place.
If you will needs know, the name's; sure this will give a stop to their curiosity.
At least you'll tell us in what County it lies, that my Cousin may send to enquire about it; come, this shall not serve your turn, tell us any Town that's near it.
'Twill be somewhat too far to send; it lies in the very North of.
In good time, a Paradice in the; is't not so Sir?
It seems you went Post, Servant: in troth you are a rank rider, to go to the North of, stay and take possession, and return again, in ten days time.
I never knew your Grandmother was awoman: is she not atoo: pray whistle for her, and lets see her daunce: come -- whist Grannee!
Fie fie Servant; what no invention in you? all this while a studying for a name of your Manor? come, come, where lyes it? tell me.
No faith, I am wiser than so; I'll discover my Seat to no man; so I shall some damn'd Lawyer keep a prying into my title to defeat me of it.
How then shall I be satisfied there is such a thing in Nature?
Tell me what Jewel you would wear, and you shall have it: Enquire into my money, there's the trial.
Since you art so flush, Sir, you shall give me a Locket of Diamonds of three hundred pounds.
That was too severe; you know he has but a 250to bestow.
Well you shall have it, Madam: but I cannot higgle: I know you'll say it did not cost above 200 pieces.
I'll be hanged if he does not present you with a parcel of melted Flints set in Gold, orpebbles.
Little Gentlewoman you are so keen: -- Madam, this night I have appointed business, to morrow I'll wait upon you with it.
By that time he has bought his Locket, and paid hisLandlady, all his Money will be gone: but, Do you mean to prosecute your plot, to see him this evening?
Yes, and that very privately; if my Father know it I am undone.
I heard him say this night he had appointed business.
Why that was it Madam; according to your order I put on a disguise, and found him in the: having drawn him aside, I told him, if he expected happiness, he must meet me in a blind Alley I nam'd to him, on the back-side of Mr.house, just at the close of evening; there he should be satisfied from whom he had his suplies of Money.
And how did he receive the Summons?
Like a bold Hector of; without the least doubt or scruple: but, the jeast on't was, he would needs believe that I was the Devil.
Sure he was afraid to come then.
Quite contrary; he told me I need not be so shy, to acknowledge my self to him; he knew I was the Devil; but he had learnt so much civility, as not to press his Friend to a fartherdiscovery than he was pleased, I should see I had to do with a Gentleman; and any Courtesie I should confer on him he would not be unthankful; for he hated ingratitude of all things.
'Twas well carried not to disabuse him: I laugh to think what sport I shall have anon, when I convince him of his lies, and let him know I was the Devil to whom he was beholding for his Money: go; and in the same disguise be ready for him.
How dare you trust this fellow?
I must trust some body; gain has made him mine, and now fear will keep him faithful.
Pray, my Lord, take no picque at it: 'tis not given to all men to be confident: Igad you shall see Sirwill redeem all upon the next occasion.
A raw mieking Boy.
And what are you but an old Boy of five and fifty; I never knew any thing so humorsome. -- I warrant you, sir, I'll speak for you.
Would'st thou have me be friends with him! for thy sake he shall onely add five hundred a year to her Joynture, and I'll be satisfied: come you hither, Sir.
You'l not find your account in this trick to getbeaten; 'tis too palpable and open.
I warrant you 'twill pass uponfor a time: so my revenge, and your interest will go on together.
, there's mischief a brewing, I know it by their whispring I vow to gad: look to your self, their designs on you; for my part I am a person that am above u'm.
But then you must speak for me Mr.; and you too my Lord.
If you deny't again, I'll beat you; look to't Boy.
Come on; I'll make the bargain.
You were ever good in a Flesh Market.
Come you little Harlotry; What satisfaction can you give me for running away before the Ruffs came in?
Why I left you to u'm, that ever invite your own belly to the greatest part of all your feasts.
I have brought you a Knight here Huswife, with a plentiful Fortune to furnish out a Table; and, What would you more? Would you be an angel in Heaven?
Your minds ever upon your belly.
No; 'tis sometimes upon yours: but, What say'st thou to Sir, little?
Would you have me married to that KingFace?
me no; he's a Wit; he understands eating and drinking well:, the heathen Philosopher, could tell you that.
Come on Sir; What's your will with me?
Why Madam, I could onely wish we were a little better acquainted, that we might not laugh at one another so.
If the Fool puts forward I am undone.
Fool! Do you know me Madam?
You may see I know you, because I call you by your name.
You must endure these rebukes with patience, Sir.
What, are you Plannet stroke? Look you, my Lord, the Gentleman is Tongue-ty'd.
This is past enduring.
'Tis nothing, my Lord; Courage, Sir.
I say 'tis past enduring; that's more then ever I told you yet: Do you come to make a fool of my Daughter?
Why Lord --
Why Lady --
Let's follow the old Man, and pacifie him.
Now Cousin --
Well Mr., I did not think you of all the rest would have endeavoured a thing so much against my inclination, as this Marriage: if you had been acquainted with my heart, I am sure you would not.
What can the meaning of this be? you would not have me believe you love me; and yet how otherwise to understand you I vow to gad I cannot comprehend.
I did not say I lov'd you, but if I should take a fancy to your Person and Humour: I hope it is no Crime to tell it you: Women are ty'd to hard unequal Laws: the passion is the same in us, and yet we are debarr'd the freedom to express it. You make poorbeggars of us Ladies; our desires must have no language; but onely be fastned to our breasts.
Come, come; I gad I know the whole Sex of you: your Love's at best but a kind of blind-mans-buff, catching at him that's next in your way.
Well Sir, I can take nothing ill from you; when 'tis too late you'l see how unjust you have been to me. -- I have said too much already. --
Nay, stay sweet Madam: I vow to gad my fortunes better than I could imagine.
No, pray let me go, Sir; perhaps I was in jeast.
Really Madam, I look upon you as a person of such worth and all that, that I Vow to gad I honour you of all persons in the World; and though I am a person that am inconsiderable in the World, and all that Madam, yet for a person of your worth and excellency, I would --
What would you, Sir?
Sacrifice my life and fortunes, I vow to gad, Madam.
There'sclose in Talk with my Cousin; he's solliciting your suit, I warrant you, Sir: do but observe with what passion he courts for you.
I do not like that kneading of her hand though.
Come, you are such a jealous Coxcomb: I warrant you suspect there's some amour between u'm; there can be nothing in't it is so open: pray observe.
But, How come you so officious, Madam; you, that e'r now had a design upon Sirfor your self?
I thought you had a better opinion of my Wit, than to think I was in earnest. My Cousen may do what she pleases, but he shall never pin himself upon me assure him.
Sirlittle knows how dangerous a person he has employed in making love: --
How's this! Pray my Lady, what's the meaning of that you say to?
What luck was this, that he should over-hear you! pax on't!
Mr., I owe you not that satisfaction; what you have heard you may interpret as you please.
The Rascal has betray'd me.
In earnest, Sir, I do not like it.
Dear Mr.. be pacify'd; you are a person I have anhonour for; and this change of Affairs shall not be the worse for you I gad Sir.
Bear up resolutely Mr.; and maintain my Favours, as becomes my servant.
He maintain u'm! go you! I'll teach you what 'tis to play fast and loose with a Man of War
Lay it on.
Spare him not,.
Fear him not,.
Oh, oh; would no body were on my side; here I am prais'd I vow to gad into all the Colours of the Rainbow.
But, remember 'tis for me.
As you like this, proceed, Sir; but, come not near me to night, while I'm in wrath.
Come, Sir; How fare you after your sore Trial: you bore it with a most heroick patience.
Brave man at Armes, but weak to!
I hope to gad, Madam, you'l consider the merit of my sufferings: I would not have been beaten thus, but to obey that person in the World --
Heaven reward you for't: I never shall.
How Madam!
Art thou such an Ass as not to perceive thou art abused: this beating I contriv'd for you: you know upon what acount; and have yet another or two at your service: yield up the Knight in time, 'tis your best course.
Then, Does not your Ladyship Love me Madam?
Yes, yes; I love to see you beaten.
Well, methinks now you have had a hard bargain on't: you have lost your Cully, Sir; and your Friend, and all to get a poor beating: but I'll see it mended against next time for you.
I am so much amaz'd, I vow to gad, I do not understand my own condition.
What will become of me to night! I am just in the condition of an out-lying-Deere, that's beaten from his walk for offering to rutt: Enter I dare not for.
I hear a voice, but nothing do I see; speak what thou art.
There he is, watching for me: I must venture to run by him, and when I am in, I hope my Cousinwill defend me: the Devil would not lie abroad in such a night.
I thought it was the Devil before he nam'd himself.
Honest Sathan! well encounter'd! I am sorry with all my heart it is so dark: 'Faith I should be very glad to see thee at myLodging; prithee let's not be such strangers to one another for the time to come; and, What hast thou got under thy Cloak there little Sathan; I warrant thou hast brought me some more Money.
Help; help; Thieves, thieves.
This isvoice: How the Devil was I mistaken! I must get off, e'r Company comes in.
Thieves! Thieves!
Where! where!
One was here just now; and it should beby his voice, but I have no Witness.
It cannot be; he wants no Money.
Come, Sirrah; I'll take pity on you to night; you shall lie in the Truckle-bed.
Pox o' this noise, it has disturb'd me from such a Dreame of Eating!
'Twas ill luck to have the meeting broke last night, just aswas coming towards him.
But in part of recompence you'll have the pleasure of putting him on farther streights, O, these little mischiefs are meat and drink to me.
He shall tell me from whence he has his Money: I am resolv'd now to try him to the utmost.
I would devise something for him to do, which he could not possibly perform.
As I live yonder he comes with the Jewel in his hand he promis'd me; prithee leave me alone with him.
Speed the Plough; if I can make no sport I'll hinder none: I'll to my Knight, Sir; shortly you shall hear newes from.
Look you Madam, here's the Jewel; do me the favor to accept it, and suppose a very good Complement deliver'd with it.
Believe me a very fair Jewel: but, Why will you be at this needless charge? What acknowledgment do you expect? you know I will not Marry you.
How the Devil do I know that; I don not conceive my self under correction, so inconsiderable a person.
You'll alter your partial opinion, when I tell you 'tis not a flash of wit fires me; nor is it a gay out-side can seduce me to Matrimony.
I am neither Fool, nor deform'd so much as to be despicable. What do I want?
A good Estate, that makes every thing handsome; nothing can look well without it.
Does this Jewel express poverty?
I conjure you by your love to me, tell me one truth not minc'd by your invention: How came you by this Jewel.
'Tis well I have a Voucher; pray ask your own Jeweller, if I did not buy it of him.
How glad you are now, you can tell a truth so near a lie: but, Where had you the Money that purchas'd it? come, -- without circumstances and preambles --
Umh, -- perhaps that may be a secret.
Say it be one; yet he that lov'd indeed, could not keep it from his Mistriss.
Why should you be thus importunate?
Because I cannot think you love me, if you will not trust that to my knowledge, which you conceal from all the World beside.
You urge me deeply --
Come, sweet Servant, you shall tell me; I am resolv'd to take no denial: Why do you sigh?
If I be blasted it must out.
Either tell me, or resolve to take your leave forever.
Then know I have my means; I know not how.
This is a fine secret.
Why then if you will needs know; 'tis from the Devil; I have Money from him, what, and when I please.
Have you seal'd a Covenant, and given away your Soul for Money?
No such thing intended on my part.
How then?
I know not yet what conditions he'll propose: I should have spoke with him last night, but that a cross chance hinder'd it.
Well, my opinion is, some great Lady that is in love with you, supplies you still; and you tell me an incredible Tale of the Devil, meerly to shadow your infidelity.
Devise some meanes to try me.
I take you at your word; you shall swear freely to bestowon me, what ever you shall gain this unknown-way; and for a proofe, because you tell me you can have Money, what and when you please; bring me an hundred pounds e'r night: (If I do marry him for a Wit) I'll see what he can do; he shall have none from me.
You overjoy me, Madam; you shall have it, and 'twere twice as much.
How's this!
The Devil a cross that I have; or know where to get; but I must promise well to save my credit: now Devil, if thou do'st forsake me!
I mistrust you; and therefore if you faile, I'll have your hand to show against you; here's inke and paper
What makesyonder? he's Writing somewhat.
I'll go see. --
Have you no more manners then to overlook a man when he's a Writing? -- Oh, Is't you Sir? you may stand still; now I think on't you can not read Written hand.
You are very familiar with Sir.
So I am with his Companions Sir.
Then there's hopes you and I may be better acquainted: I am one of his Companions.
By what title, as you are an Ass Sir.
No more Loveby. --
I need not Madam; alass this fellow is onely the 
Sollicitor
of a quarrel, till he has brought it to an head; and I will leave the
fighting part to the Curteous pledger. Do not I know these fellows? 
you
shall as soon perswade a Mastiff to fasten on a Lyon, as one of 
these to
ingage with a courage above their own: they know well enough who 
they can beat, and who can beat them.