Was afraid, all had been discover'd.
I tremble with the Apprehension still.
That my Brother should take Lodgings i'the Very House where you lie.
'Twas lucky, we had timely notice to warn the People to be secret, he seems to be a mighty good Humour'd old man.
He ever had a notable smerking way with him.
He calls me Rogue, tells me he can't abide me; And does so bepat me.
On my word you are much in his favour then.
He has been very inquisitive I am told about my Family, my reputation, and my Fortune.
I am confident he does not i'the least suspect You are the Woman his Son's in Love with.
What shou'd make him then inform himself soParticularly of me?
He was always of a very Loving Temper himself; It may be he has a doating Fit upon him, who knows.
It cannot be.
Here comes my Nephew. Where did You leave your Father?
Writing a Note within,, this early visit Looks as if some kind Jealousie wou'd not let you Rest at home.
The knowledge I have of my Rival, Gives me a little cause to fear your Constancy.
My Constancy! I vow --
Do not vow -- Our love is frail as is our life, and Full as little in our power, and are you sure you shall Out-live this day?
I am not, but when we are in perfect health, 'twere An idle thing to fright our selves with the thoughts of Sudden death.
Pray what has pass'd between you and your Father I'the Garden?
He's firm in his resolution, Tells me I must marry Mrs., Or swears hee'l marry himself, And disinherit me, when I saw I could not Prevail with him to be more indulgent, I dissembled An Obedience to his Will, which has compos'd his passion, And will give us time, and I hope opportunity to Deceive him.
Peace, here he comes.
, take this, and let your man carry it for me To Mr.Chamber, my Lawyer i'the Temple. Neighbour, a Dod I am glad to see thee here,
Make much of her Sister, she's one Of the best of your acquaintance; I like her Countenance and her behaviour well, she has A Modesty that is not Common i'this Age, a Dod, She has.
I know her value Brother, and esteem her accordingly.
Advise her to wear a little more mirth in her Face, a Dod, she's too serious.
The fault is very excusable in a young Woman.
Nay, a Dod, I like her ne're the worse, a Melancholy Beauty has her Charms, I Love a pretty sadness in a Face which varies Now and Then, like changeable Colours, into a smile.
Methinks you speak very feelingly Brother.
I am but Five and Fifty Sister you know, an Age not altogether unsensible!
chear up sweet Heart; I have a secret to tell thee may Chance to make thee merry, we three will make Collation together anon, i'the mean time Mum, I can't abide you, go I can't Abide you --
, Come, you Must along with me to my Lady. I am going to slip the Boy at a Mistress.
At a Wife Sir, you wou'd say.
You need not look so glum, Sir, a Wife is no Curse when she brings the blessing Of a good Estate with her, but an idle Town Flurt, with a painted Face, a rotten Reputation, And a crasie Fortune, a Dod is the Devil and all, And such a one I hear you are in League with.
I cannot help detraction, Sir.
Out, a pise o' their Breeches, there are Keeping Fools enough for such flaunting Baggages, and they are e'ne too good for 'em.
Remember Night, go y'are a Rogue, y'are a Rogue; fare you well, fare you well; come, come, Come along, Sir.
On my Word the old man comes on apace; I'le lay my life he's smitten.
This is nothing but the pleasantness of his humour.
I know him better than you, let it work, It may prove lucky.
Madam, Mr.has sent to know Whether a Visit will not be TroublesomeThis Afternoon?
Send him word his visits never are so.
He's a very pleasant man.
He's a very necessary man among us Women; He's not scandalous i'the least, perpetually Contriving to bring good Company together, And always ready to stop up a gap at Ombre, Then he knows all the little news o'the Town.
I love to hear him talk o' the Intrigues, Let 'em be never so dull in themselves, he'l Make 'em pleasant i'the relation.
But he improves things so much one can take no Measure of the Truth from him. Mr.swears a Flea or a Maggot, is Not made more monstrous by a magnifying Glass, than a story is by his telling it.
Hold, here he comes.
Mr..
Your Servant Madam.
You have made your self a Stranger of late.
I believe you took a surfeit of Ombre Last time you were here.
Indeed I had my Belly full of that Tarmagant, Lady Dealer; there never was so unsatiable A Carder, an old Gleeker never lov'd to sit To't like her; I have plaid with her now at Least a dozen times, till she'as worn out all Her fine Complexion, and her Tour wou'd Keep in Curl no longer.
Blame her not poor Woman, she loves nothing So well as a black Ace.
The pleasure I have seen her in when she has had hope In drawing for a Matadore.
'Tis as pretty sport to her, as perswading Masks off is to you to make discoveries.
Pray where's your Friend, Mr.?
Soliciting his affairs, he's a man of great Imployment, has more Mistresses now dependingThan the most eminent Lawyer inHas Causes.
Here has been Mrs., so uneasie and Out of humour these two days.
How strangely love and Jealousie rage In that poor Woman!
She cou'd not have pick'd out a Devil Upon Earth so proper to Torment her, Has made her break a dozen or two of Fans already, tare half a score Points in pieces, And destroy Hoods and Knots without number.
We heard of a pleasant Serenade he gave Her tother Night.
A Danish Serenade with Kettle Drums, and Trumpets.
Oh Barbarous!
What, you are of the number of the Ladies whose Ears are grown so delicate since our Operas, you can be charm'd with nothing But Flute doux, and French Hoboys.
Leave your raillery, and tell us, is there any New Wit come forth, Songs or Novels?
A very pretty piece of gallantry, by an Eminent Author, call'd,, very necessary to be read by all Old Ladies who are desirous to improve themselves At Questions and Commands, Blindmans buff, And the like fashionable recreations.
Oh Ridiculous!
Then there is the Art of affectation, written By a late beauty of Quality, teaching you how To draw up your Breasts, stretch up your neck, To thrust out your Breech, to play with your Head, To toss up your Nose, to bite your Lips, to turn Up your Eyes, to speak in a silly soft tone of a Voice, and use all the Foolish French Words That will infallibly make your person and Conversation charming, with a short apologie At the latter end, in the behalf of young Ladies,Who notoriously wash, and paint, though they Have naturally good Complexions.
What a deal of stuff you tell us?
Such as the Town affords Madam. Thehearing the great respect we Have for Foreign Dancing, have lately sent Over some of their best Balladins, who are Now practising a famous Ballat which will Be suddenly danc'd at the.
Pray forbear your idle stories, and give us An account of the state of Love, as it now stands.
Truly there has been some revolutions in those Affairs, great chopping and changing among the Old, and some new Lovers, whom malice, Indiscretion, and misfortune, have luckily Brought into play.
What think you of walking into the next Room, And sitting down before you engage in this business?
I wait upon you , and I hope (though Women Are commonly unreasonable) by the plenty of Scandal I shall discover, to give you very good Content Ladies.
Madam.
I hate my self, I look so ill to day.
Hate the wicked cause on't, that base man Mr., who makes you torment and Vex your self continually.
He is to blame indeed.
To blame to be two days without sending, Writing, or coming near you, contrary to His Oath and Covenant; 'Twas to much Purpose to make him swear; I'll lay my Life there's not an Article but he has Broken, Talk'd to the Vizards i'the Pit, waited upon the Ladies from the Boxes to their Coaches; gone behind The Scenes, and fawn'd upon those little insignificant Creatures, the Players; 'tis impossible for a man Of his inconstant temper to forbear I'm sure.
I know he is a Devil, but he has something of the Angel yet undefac'd in him, which Makes him so charming and agreeable, that I Must love him be he never so wicked.
I little thought Madam to see your spirit Taim'd to this degree, who banish'd poor Mr.but for taking up another Ladies Fan in your presence.
My knowing of such odious Fools, contributes to the Making of me Lovethe better.
Your knowing of Mr., in my mind, shou'd Rather make you hate all mankind.
So it does, besides himself.
Pray, what excuse does he make in his Letter?
He has had business.
Business in general terms wou'd not have Been a currant excuse for another; A Modish Man is always very busie When he is in pursuit of a new Mistress.
Some Fop has brib'd you to rail at him; He had business, I will believe it, and will forgive him.
You may forgive him any thing, but I shall never Forgive him his turning me into Ridicule, As I hear he does.
I perceive you are of the number of those Fools his Wit has made his Enemies.
I am of the number of those he's pleas'd To railly, Madam; and if we may believeMr., and Mr., he sometimes Makes merry with your self too, among His Laughing Companions.
Blockheads are as malicious to witty men, As ugly Women are to the handsome; 'tis Their Interest, and they make it their business To defame 'em.
I wish Mr.wou'd not make It his business to defame you.
Shou'd he, I had rather be made infamous By him, than owe my reputation to the dull Discretion of those Fops you talk off.!
My Dear.
You have been unkind of late.
Do not say unkind, say unhappy!
I cou'd chide you, Where have you been these two days?
Pitty me rather my dear, where I have been So tired with two or three Country Gentlewomen, Whose conversation has been more Unsufferable than a Country Fiddle.
Are they Relations?
No, Welch acquaintance I made when I was last year At St., they have asked me a thousand Questions of the Modes and Intrigues of the Town, And I have told 'em almost as many things for news That hardly were so, when their Gowns were in Fashion.
Provoking Creatures, how cou'd you endure e'm?
Now to carry on my Plot, nothing but love Cou'd make me capable of so much falshood;
'Tis time to begin, lestshou'd Come before her Jealousie has stung her;
I was yesterday at a Play with 'em, Where I was fain to shew 'em the living, as theMan atdoes the dead; that is Mrs. such a one admired for her Beauty, This is Mr. such a one cry'd up for a Wit; That is sparkish Mr. such a one who Keeps reverend Mrs. such a one, and there Sits fine Mrs. such a one who was lately Cast off by my Lord such a one.
Did you seethere?
I did, and imagine you were there with him, And have no mind to own it.
What shou'd make you think so?
A Lady mask'd in a pretty dishabillie`, Whomentertain'd with more Respect, than the Gallants do a Common Vizard.
at the Play entertaining a Mask, Oh Heavens!
Good.
Did he stay all the while?
'Till the Play was done, and then led her Out, which confirms me it was you!
Traytor!
Now you may believe he had business, and You may forgive him too.
Ingrateful perjur'd man!
You seem so much concern'd my Dear, I fear I have told you unawares what I Had better have conceal'd for your Quiet.
What manner of shape had she?
Tall and slender, her motions were very gentile, Certainly she must be some person of condition.
Shame and confusion be ever in her face When she shows it.
I should blame your discretion for loving that Wild man my Dear, but they say he has a way So bewitching, that few can defend their hearts Who know him.
I will tear him from mine, or die i'the attempt.
Be more moderate.
Wou'd I had Daggers, Darts, or poyson'd Arrows in my Breast, so I cou'd but remove the thoughts Of him from thence.
Fie, fie, your transports are too Violent, my Dear. This may be but an accidental Gallantry, And 'tis likely ended at her Coach.
Shou'd it proceed farther, let your comfort be, The Conduct Mr.affects, will Quickly make you know your Rival, ten to one Let you see her ruin'd, her reputation expos'd To the Town; a happiness none will envy her But your self Madam.
Who e're she be, all the harm I wish her, is, may She love him as well as I do, and may he give her As much cause to hate him.
Never doubt the latter end of your Curse Madam!
May all the passions that are rais'd by neglected Love, Jealousie, Indignation, Spight, and Thirst of Revenge, eternally rage in her Soul, as they do Now in mine.
Madam, Mr.--
I will not see him.
I told him you were within, Madam.
Say you ly'd, say I'm busie, shut the door; Say any thing.
He's here, Madam.
What dancing the Galloping Nag without a Fiddle?
I fear this restlessness of the body, Madam,
Proceeds from an unquietness of the mind. What unlucky accident puts you out ofHumour; a Point ill-wash'd, Knots spoil'd i'the Making up, Hair shaded awry, or some Other little mistake insetting you in order?
A trifle in my opinion, Sir, more inconsiderable Than any you mention.
Oh Mrs., I never knew you sullen enough To be silent, come let me know the business.
The business, Sir, is the business that has taken you Up these two days; how have I seen you Laugh at men of business, and now to become a man Of business your self!
We are not Masters of our own affections, our Inclinations daily alter; now we love pleasure, and Anon we shall doat on business; humane Frailty will have it so, and who can help it;
Faithless, inhumane, barbarous man --
Good, now the Alarm strikes --
Without sense of Love, of Honour, or of Gratitude, Tell me, for I will know, what Devil mask'd She was, you were with at the Play yesterday?
Faith I resolv'd as much as you, but the Devil was obstinate, and wou'd not tell me.
False in this as in your Vows to me, you do know!
The truth is, I did all I cou'd to know.
And dare you own it to my Face? Hell and Furies!
Spare your Fan, Madam, you are growing hot, And will want it to cool you.
Horrour and distraction seize you, Sorrow and Remorse gnaw your Soul, and punish all your Perjuries to me --
, you are the Devil that have rais'd This storm;
you were at the Play yesterday, And have been making discoveries to your Dear.
Y'are the most mistaken Man i'the World.
It must be so, and here I vow revenge; resolveTo pursue, and persecute you more impertinently Than ever any Loving Fop did his Mistress, hunt You i'the, trace you i'the, Dog You in every visit you make, haunt you at The Plays, and i'the Drawing Room, hang my Nose in your neck, and talk to you whether You will or no, and ever look upon you with such Dying Eyes, till your Friends grow Jealous of me, Send you out of Town, and the World suspect Your reputation.
At my Ladywhen we go from hence.
I'le meet you there.
Enough.
Stand off, you sha'not stare upon her so.
Good! There's one made Jealous already.
Is this the constancy you vow'd?
Constancy at my years! 'tis not a Vertue in Season, you might as well expect the Fruit the Autumn ripens i'the Spring.
Monstrous Principle!
Youth has a long Journey to go, Madam, shou'd I have set up my rest at the first Inn I lodg'd at, I shou'd never have arriv'd at the happiness I now enjoy.
Dissembler, damn'd Dissembler!
I am so I confess, good nature, and good manners Corrupt me. I am honest in my inclinations, and Wou'd not, wer't not to avoid offence, make a Lady a little in years believe I think her young, wilfully Mistake Art for Nature; and seem as fond of a thing I am weary off, as when I doated on't in earnest.
False Man.
True Woman.
Now you begin to show your self!
Love gilds us over, and makes us show fine things To one another for a time, but soon the Gold Wears off, and then again the native brass appears.
Think on your Oaths, your Vows and Protestations. Perjur'd Man!
I made 'em when I was in love.
And therefore ought they not to bind? Oh Impious!
What we swear at such a time may be a certain proof Of a present passion, but to say truth, in Love there is No security to be given for the future.
Horrid and ingrateful, begone, And never see me more!
I am not one of those troublesome Coxcombs, who Because they were once well receiv'd, take the Priviledge to plague a Woman with their Love ever After; I shall obey you, Madam, though I do my Self some violence.
Come back, you sha'not go. Cou'd you have the ill nature to offer it?
When love grows diseas'd the best thing we can do Is to put it to a Violent Death; I cannot Endure the torture of a lingring and Consumptive passion.
Can you think mine sickly?
Oh, 'tis desperately Ill! what worse symptomes Are there than your being always uneasie when I visit you, your picking quarrels with me on Slight occasions, and in my absence kindly listning To the impertinences of every fashionable Fool That talks to you?
What fashionable Fool can you lay to my charge?
Why the very Cock-fool of all those Fools, Sir.
I never saw him in my life but once.
The worse Woman you at first sight to put on All your charms, to entertain him with that softness In your voice, and all that wanton kindness in your Eyes, you so notoriously affect, when you design A Conquest.
So damn'd a lie did never malice yet invent;Who told you this?
No matter; that ever I shou'd love a Woman that Can doat on a senceless Caper, a Tawdry French Riband, and a Formal Cravat!
You make me mad.
A guilty Conscience may do much, Go on, be the Game-Mistress o'the Town, and Enter all our young Fops, as fast as they come From travail.
Base and Scurrilous!
A fine mortifying reputation 'twill be for a Woman of your Pride, Wit, and Quality!
This Jealousy's a meer pretence, a cursed trick Of your own devising; I know you.
Believe it and all the ill of me you can, I wou'd Not have a Woman have the least good thought Of me, that can think well of; farewel, Fall too, and much good may do you with your Coxcomb.
Stay, oh stay, and I will tell you all.
I have been told too much already.
Call him again.
E'ne let him go, a fair riddance.
Run I say, call him again, I will have him call'd.
The Devil shou'd carry him away first, Were it my concern.
H'as frighted me from the very thoughts of Loving men; for Heav'ns sake, my dear, Do not discover what I told you; I dread his tongue As much as you ought to have done his Friendship.
He's gone, Madam.
Lightning blast him!
When I told him you desired him to come back, He smil'd, made a mouth at me, flung into his Coach, and said --
What did he say?
Drive away, and then repeated Verses.
Wou'd I had made a Contract to be a Witch When first I entertain'd this greater Devil,Monster, Barbarian; I could tear my self in pieces. Revenge, nothing but Revenge can ease me; Plague, War, Famine, Fire, all that can bring universal ruin And misery on mankind, with Joy I'd perish to Have you in my power but this moment!
Follow Madam, leave her not in this outragious passion.
H'as given me the proof which I desired of His love, but 'tis a proof of his ill nature too; I wish I had not seen him use her so. I sigh to think thatmay be, One day as faithless, and unkind to me.
Dear Madam! Let me set that Curl in order.
Let me alone, I will shake 'em all out of order.
Will you never leave this Wilderness?
Torment me not.
Look! there's a Knot falling off.
Let it drop.
But one pin, dear Madam.
How do I daily suffer under thy Officious Fingers?
Ah the difference that is between You and my Lady? how uneasy she is If the least thing be amiss about her?
She is indeed most exact! nothing is ever wanting To make her ugliness remarkable!
Jeering people say so!
Her powdering, painting, and her patching never fail in Publick to draw the tongues and Eyes of all the men upon her.
She is indeed a little too pretending.
That Women should set up for beauty as much in spite Of nature, as some men have done for Wit.
I hope without offence one may endeavour To make ones self agreeable.
Not, when 'tis impossible. Women then Ought to be no more fond of dressing than Fools Should be of talking; Hoods and Modesty, Masques and Silence, things that shaddow and conceal; They should think of nothing else.
Jesu! Madam, what will your Mother think is Become of you? for Heav'ns sake go in again.
I won't!
This is the Extravangant'st thing that ever You did in your life, to leave her and a Gentleman Who is to be your Husband.
My Husband! Hast thou so little wit to think I spoke what I meant When I over-joy'd her in the Country, with a low Courtsy, And what you please, Madam, I shall ever be obedient.
Nay, I know not, you have so many fetches.
And this was one, to get her up to! Nothing else I assure thee.
Well, the man, in my mind, is a fine man!
The man indeed wears his Cloaths fashionably, and Has a pretty negligent way with him, very Courtly, And much affected; he bows, and talks, and smiles So agreeably as he thinks.
I never saw any thing so gentile!
Varnish'd over with good breeding, many a Blockhead makes a tolerable show.
I wonder you do not like him.
I think I might be brought to endure him, and that is All a reasonable Woman should expect in a Husband, but There is duty i'the case -- and like the haughty, I,,.
I wish you do not design your own ruine! I partly Guess your inclinations Madam -- that Mr.--
Leave your prating, and sing some foolish Song or other.
I will, the Song you love so well ever since you saw Mr..
Shall I be paid down by a covetous Parent for a purchase? I need no Land; no, i'le lay my self out all in love. It is decreed --
What generous Resolution are you making Madam?
Only to be disobedient, Sir.
Let me join hands with you in that --
With all my heart, I never thought I should have given You mine so willingly. Here I--
And I--
Do solemnly protest --
And vow --
That I with you --
And I with you --
Will never marry --
A match!
And no match!How do you like this indifference now?
You expect I should take it ill I see!
'Tis not unnatural for you Women to be a little Angry, you miss a Conquest, though you wou'd slight the Poor man were he in your power.
There are some it may be have an Eye like, Big enough for the whole Fair, but I am not of the Number, and you may keep your Ginger-bread. 'Twill be more acceptable to the Lady, Whose dear Image it wears Sir.
I must confess Madam, you came a day after the Fair.
You own then you are in love --
I do.
The confidence is generous, and in return I could almost Find in my heart to let you know my inclinations.
Are you in Love?
Yes, with this dear Town, to that Degree, I can scarce indure The Country in Landskapes and in Hangings.
What a dreadful thing 'twould be To be hurry'd back to!
Ah -- name it not! --
As for us, I find we shall agree well enough! wou'd We cou'd do something to deceive the grave people!
Could we delay their quick proceeding, 'twere well, A reprieve is a good step towards the getting of a pardon.
If we give over the Game, we are undone! What think you of playing it on booty?
What do you mean?
Pretend to be in love with one another! 'twill make Some dilatory excuses we may feign, pass the better.
Let us do't, if it be but for the dear Pleasure of dissembling.
Can you play your part?
I know not what it is to love, but I have made Pretty remarks by being now and then where Lovers meet. Where did you leave their Gravities?
I'th' next Room! your Mother wasCensuring our modern Gallant.
Peace! Here they come, I will lean against this Wall, And look bashfully down upon my Fan, while You like an Amorous spark modishly entertain me.
Never go about to excuse 'em, come, come, It was not so when I was a young Woman.
A Dod, they're something disrespectful --
Quality was then consider'd, And not rally'd by every fleering Fellow.
Youth will have it's Jest, a Dod it will.
'Tis good breeding now to be civil to none but Players andWomen, they are treated by 'em as much Above their Condition, as others are below theirs.
Out a pise on 'em, talk no more, the Rogues ha' got an ill habit of preferring Beauty, No matter where they find it.
See your Son, and my Daughter, they have Improv'd their acquaintances since they were within.
A Dod, methinks they have! Let's keep back and observe.
Now for a look and gestures that may perswade 'em I am saying all the passionate things imaginable --
Your Head a little more on one side, ease your self On your left Leg, and play with your right hand.
Thus, is it not?
Now set your right leg firm on the ground, adjust Your Belt, then look about you.
A little exercising will make me perfect.
Smile and turn to me again very sparkish!
Will you take your turn and be instructed?
With all my heart.
At one motion play your Fan, roul your Eyes, And then settle a kind look upon me.
So.
Now spread your Fan, look down upon it,And tell the Sticks with a Finger.
Very Modish.
Clap your hand up to your bosom, Hold down your Gown. Shrug a little, draw up your Breasts, and let 'em fall Again, gently, with a sigh or two,
By the good instructions you give, I suspect you for one Of those malitious Observers who watch peoples Eyes, And from innocent looks, make scandalous conclusions.
I know some indeed who out of meer love To mischief are as vigilant as Jealousy it self, And will give you an account of every Glance That passes at a Play, and i'th' Circle!
'Twill not be amiss now to seem a little pleasant.
Clap your Fan then in both your hands, snatch it To your Mouth, smile, and with a lively motion fling your Body a little forwards. So -- now spread it; fall back on The sudden, Cover your Face with it, and break out Into a loud Laughter -- take up! look Grave, and fall a fanning of your self -- Admirably well acted.
I think I am pretty apt at these matters!
A Dod I like this well.
This promises something.
Come! there is Love i'th' case, a dod there is, Or will be; what say you young Lady?
All in good time Sir, you expect we should fall to, And Love as game-Cocks fight, as soon as we are set Together, a Dod y'are unreasonable!
A Dod sirrah, I like thy wit well.
The Coach is at the Door Madam.
Go, get you and take the Air together.
Will not you go with us?
Out a pize: A Dod I ha' business and cannot. We shall meet at night at my Sister.
He's going to.
I overheard him talk of a Collation.
I pitty the young lovers, we last talk'd of, Though to say truth their conduct has been so indiscreet, They deserve to be unfortunate.
Y' have had an exact account, from the great Lady I'th'Box down to the little Orange wench.
Y' are a living Libel, a breathing Lampoon; I Wonder you are not torn in pieces.
What think you of setting up an Office of Intelligence For these matters? the project may get Money.
You would have great dealings with country Ladies.
More thanhas With their husbands.
, what has been become of you! we Have not seen you here of late With your friend Mrs.
Dear creature, I left her but now so sadly afflicted.
With her old distemper Jealousy!
has plaid her some new prank.
Well, thatis certainly the worst Man breathing.
I once thought so.
And do you not think so still?
No indeed!
Oh Jesu!
The Town does him a great deal of Injury, and I Will never believe what it says of a man I do Not know again for his sake!
You make me wonder!
He's a very well bred man.
But strangely ill-natur'd.
Then he's a very Witty man!
But a man of no principles.
Your man of Principles is a very fine thing indeed.
To be preferr'd to men of parts by Women who haveRegard to their Reputation and quiet. Well were I minded To play the Fool, he shou'd be the last man I'd think of.
He has been the first in many Ladyes favours, though You are so severe, Madam.
What he may be for a Lover I know not, but He's a very pleasant acquaintance I am sure.
Had you seen him use Mrsas I have done, You wou'd never endure him more --
What he has quarrel'd with her again!
Upon the slightest occasion, he's Jealous Of Sir.
She never saw him in her life but Yesterday, and that was here.
On my Conscience! he's the only man in Town That's her aversion, how horribly out of humour She was all the while he talk'd to her!
And some body has wickedly told him --
Here he comes.
! you are luckily come to justify Your self -- here's a Lady --
Has a word or two to say to you from a Disconsolate person.
You tender your Reputation too much I know Madam, To whisper with me before this good Company.
To serve Mrs., I'll make a bold venture.
Here'sthe very Spirit of Scandal.
No matter!
'Tis something you are unwilling to Hear, Mr..
Tell himwhether he will or no!
Mrs.!
Softly, these are laughers, you do not know 'em.
In a Word y'ave made me hate you,
Which I thought you never could have done.
In obeying your Commands.
'Twas a cruel part you play'd! how could you act it?
Nothing is cruel to a man who could kill himself To please you; remember Five a Clock to morrow Morning.
I tremble when you name it.
Be sure you come.
I sha'not.
Swear you will!
I dare not.
Swear I say.
By my life! by all the happiness I hope for --
You will.
I will.
Kind.
I am glad i've sworn, I vow I think I should ha' Fail'd you else!
Surprisingly kind! in what temper did You leave?
Her raving was prettily over, and she began to be In a brave way of defying you, and all your works. Where have you been since you went from thence?
I look'd in at the Play.
I have promis'd and must return to her agen.
Perswade her to walk in the Mail this evening
She hates the place and will not come.
Do all you can to prevail with her.
For what purpose?
Sirwill be here anon, I'll prepare him To set upon her there before me.
You persecute her too much, but I'll do all you'l ha'me.
Tell her plainly, 'tis grown so dull a business
I can drudge on no longer.
There are afflictions in Love Mr..
You Women make 'em, who are commonly as Unreasonable in that as you are at Play; without The Advantage be on your side, a man can never Quietly give over when he's weary?
If you would play without being obliged to Complaisance, you should play in Publick places.
Ordinaries were a very good thing for that, But Gentlemen do not of late frequent 'em; theDeep play is now in private Houses.
, are you leaving us so soon?
I am to go to the Park with Mrs.Madam --
This confidence will go nigh to spoil this Young Creature.
'Twill do her good Madam. Young men who Are brought up under practising Lawyers prove The abler Council when they come to be call'd To the Bar themselves --
The Town has been very favourable to you This afternoon, my Lady, you use to have An Ambara's of Chaires and Coaches at your Door, An uproar of Footmen in your Hall, and a noise Of Fools above here.
Indeed my House is the general rendevouze, And next to the Play-house is the Common Refuge of all the Young idle people.
Company is a very good thing, Madam, but I Wonder you do not love it a little more Chosen.
'Tis good to have an universal taste, we Should love Wit, but for Variety, be able to divert Our selves with the Extravagancies of those who want it.
Fools will make you laugh.
For once or twice! but the repetition of their Folly after a visit or two grows tedious and unsufferable.
You are a little too delicate.
Sir, Madam, desires to know if You are to be seen.
Here's the freshest Fool in Town, and one Who has not cloy'd you yet. Page!
Madam!
Desire him to walk up.
Do not you fall on him,, and snub him. Sooth him up in his extravagance! he will shew the better.
You know I have a natural indulgence for Fools,And need not this caution, Sir!
Wait without.
Madam, I Kiss your Hands, I see Yesterday was nothing of Chance, The belle`s assemble`s form themselves here every day.
Lady your servant;, let me embrace Thee, without lying I have not met with any of myAcquaintance, who retain so much ofas Thou dost, the very air thou hadst when the Marquise mistook thee i'th' Tuilleries, and cry'd Hey Chevalier, and then begg'd thy pardon.
I would fain wear in Fashion as long as I can, Sir, 'Tis a thing to be valu'd in men as well as Bawbles.
Thou art a man of Wit, and understands The Town: prithee let thee and I be intimate, There is no living without making some good Man the confident of our pleasures.
'Tis true! but there is no man so improper For such a business as I am.
Prithee! why hast thou so modest an Opinion of thy self?
Why first, I could never keep a secret in my life, And then there is no charm so infallibly makes me Fall in love with a Woman as my knowing a Friend loves her. I deal honestly with you.
Thy humour's very gallant or let me perish, I knew a French Count so like thee.
Witt I perceive has more power over you Than Beauty, Sir, else you would not have Let this Lady stand so long neglected.
A thousand pardons Madam, some Civilities due of course upon the meeting a long absent Friend. The Eclat of so much beauty I confess ought To have charm'd me sooner.
The brillian of so much good language Sir has much More power than the little beauty I can boast.
I never saw any thing prettier than this high Work on your Point D'espaigne --
'Tis not so rich as Point--
Not altogether, but looks cooler, and is more Proper for the season., is not that?
The same, Sir.
Forgive me Sir in this Ambaras of Civilities, I could not come to have you in my Arms sooner. You understand an Equipage the best of Any Man in Town I hear.
By my own you would not guess it.
There are Criticks who do not write Sir.
Our peevish Poets will scarce allow it.
Dam'em, they'l allow no Man Wit, who does not Play the fool like themselves and show it! Have you Taken notice of the Gallesh I brought over?
O yes! 't has quite another Air, than th'English makes.
'Tis as easily known from an English Tumbril, As an Inns of Court-man is from one of us.
Truly there is a bell-air in Galleshes as well as men.
But there are few so delicate to observe it.
The world is generally very grossier here indeed.
He's very fine.
Extream proper.
A slight suit I made to appear in at my first arrival, Not worthy your consideration Ladies.
The Pantaloon is very well mounted.
The Tassels are new and pretty.
I never saw a Coat better cut.
It makes me show long-wasted, and I think slender.
That's the shape our Ladies doat on.
Your breech though is a handfull too high in my Eye Sir.
Peace, I have wish'd it lower a thousand Times, but a Pox on't, 'twill not be.
His Gloves are well fring'd, large and graceful.
I was always eminent for being.
He wears nothing but what are Originals of the Most Famous hands in.
You are in the right Madam.
The Suit?
Barroy.
The Garniture.
Le Gras --
The Shooes!
Piccar!
The Perriwig!
Chedreux.
The Gloves!
Orangerii! You know the smell Ladies!, I could find in my heart for an amusement To have a Gallantry with some of our English Ladies.
'Tis a thing no less necessary to confirm the Reputation of your Wit, than a Duel will be To satisfie the Town of your Courage.
Here was a Woman yesterday --
Mistriss.
You have nam'd her!
You cannot pitch on a better for your purpose.
Prithee! what is she?
A person of Quality, and one who has a rest of Reputation enough to make the Conquest considerable: Besides I hear she likes you too!
Methoughts she seem'd though very reserv'd, And uneasie all the time I entertain'd her.
Grimace and affectation: You will see Her i'th' Mail to night.
Prithee, let thee and I take the Air together.
I am engag'd to, but I'le meet you at Saint, and give you some information, upon the Which you may regulate your proceedings.
All the World will be in the Park to night: Ladies, 'Twere pity to keep so much Beauty longer within doors, And rob the Ring of all those Charms That should adorn it -- Hey, Page.
See that all my People be ready..
A fine mettl'd Coxcomb.
Brisk and Insipid -
Pert and dull.
However you despise him Gentlemen, I'le lay my Life he passes for a Wit with many.
That may very well be, Nature has her cheats, stum's A brain, and puts sophisticate dulness often on the tastless Multitude for true wit and good humour., Come.
I must go a little way, I will meet you i'the Mail.
I'le walk through the Garden thither, we shall meet Anon and bow.
Not to night! we are engag'd about a business, The knowledge of which may make you laugh hereafter.
Your servant Ladies.
, as Sirsays --
The Old Man will be here immediately.
Let's expect him i'th' Garden --
Go, you are a Rogue.
I can't abide you.
Come along.
And leave your Mother.
will be sent with a Hue and Cry after us; But that's no matter.
'Twill look strangely in me.
She'l believe it a freak of mine, and never blame Your manners.
What reverend acquaintance is that she has met?
A fellow-beauty of the last Kings time, though by the Ruines you would hardly guess it.
By this time your Mother is in a fine taking.
If your Friend Mr.were but here now, That she might find me talking with him.
She does not know him but dreads him I hear of All Mankind.
She concludes if he does but speak to a Woman she's undone, is on her knees every day to Pray Heav'n defend me from him.
You do not apprehend him so much as she does.
I never saw any thing in him that was frightful.
On the contrary, have you not observed something Extream delightful in his Wit and Person?
He's agreeable and pleasant I must own, but he Does so much affect being so, he displeases me.
Lord Madam, all he does and says, is so easie, And so natural.
Some Mens Verses seem so to the unskilful, But labour i'the one, and affectation in the other To the Judicious plainly appear.
I never heard him accus'd of affectation before.
It passes on the easie Town, who are favourably Pleas'd in him to call it humour.
'Tis she! it must be she, that lovely hair, that Easie shape, those wanton Eyes, and all those melting Charms about her mouth, whichspoke of; I'll follow the Lottery, and put in for a Prize with my friend.
Most people preferto this place.
It has the better Reputation I confess: but I Abominate the dull diversions there, the formal bows, The Affected smiles, the silly by-Words, and Amorous Tweers, in passing; here one meets with A little conversation now and then.
These conversations have been fatal To some of your Sex, Madam.
It may be so, because some who want temper Have been undone by gaming, must others who have it Wholly deny themselves the pleasure of Play?
Trust me, it were unreasonable Madam.
Lord! who's this?
Is this the Woman your Father would Have you marry?
It is.
Her name?
I am not mistaken, she's handsome.
Talk to her, her Wit is better than her face; We were wishing for you but now.
Overcast with seriousness o' the sudden!
A thousand smiles were shining in that Face but now; I never saw so quick a change of Weather.
I feel as great a change within;
But he shall never know it.
You were talking of Play, Madam, Pray What may be your stint?
A little harmless discourse in publick walks, Or at most an appointment in a Box barefac'd At the Play-House; you are for Masks, and Private meetings; where Women engageFor all they are worth I hear.
I have been us'd to deep Play, but I can make one At small Game, when I like my Gamester well.
And be so unconcern'd you'l ha' no pleasure in't.
Where there is a considerable sum to be won, the Hope of drawing people in, makes every trifle considerable.
The sordidness of mens natures I know makes 'em Willing to flatter and comply with the Rich, though they Are sure never to be the better for 'em.
'Tis in their power to do us good, and we despair Not but at some time or other they may be willing.
To men who have far'd in this Town like you, 'Twould be a great Mortification to live on hope; Could you keep a Lent for a Mistriss?
In expectation of a happy Easter, and though time Be very precious, think forty daies well lost, to gain your Favour.
Mr.! let us walk, 'tis time to leave him, Men grow dull when they begin to be particular.
Y'are mistaken, flattery will not ensue, though I know Y'are greedy of the praises of the whole Mail.
You do me wrong.
I do not, as I follow'd you, I observ'd how you Were pleased when thecry'd she's handsome, very Handsome, by God she is, and whisper'd aloud your name, The thousand several forms you put your face into; then, To make your self more agreeable, how wantonly you play'd With your head, flung back your locks, and look'd smilingly Over your shoulder at 'em.
I do not go begging the mens as you do The Ladies Good liking with a sly softness in Your looks, and a gentle slowness in your bows, As you pass by 'em -- as thus Sir --
Is not this like you?
Your Mother Madam.
Ah my Dear child.
Now is she so pleased with finding her agen She cannot chide her.
Come away!
'Tis now but high Mail Madam, the most entertaining Time of all the Evening.
I would fain see thatMother, you so Cry out of, for a monster, he's in theI hear.
Come away then! the plague is here and you Should dread the infection.
You may be misinform'd of the gentleman?
Oh no! I hope you do not know him. He is the Prince of all the Devils in the Town, Delights in nothing but in Rapes and Riots.
If you did but hear him speak Madam!
Oh! he has a Tongue they say would tempt the Angels to a second fall.
Hey, Champaine, Norman, La Rose, la Fleur, La Tour, La Verdure. Dorimant --
Here, here he is among this Rout, he Names him; come away, come away.
This fool's coming has spoil'd all, she's gone, But she has left a pleasing Image of her self Behind that wanders in my Soul -- It must not settle there.
What resverie is this! speak man.
, a discovery! I met with.
You can tell me no news Sir, I know all.
How do you like the Daughter?
You never came so near truth in your life, As you did in her description.
What think you of the Mother?
What ever I think of her, she thinks Very well of me I find.
Did she know you?
She did not, whether she does now or no I know not. Here was a pleasant Scene towards, when in came Sir, mustering up his Equipage, and at the Latter end nam'd me, and frighted her away.
andare not far off, I saw 'em Alight at St..
Sirhark you, a word or two,
Look you do not want assurance.
I never do on these occassions.
Walk on, we must not be seen together, make your Advantage of what I have told you, the next turn You will meet the Lady.
Hey -- Follow me all.
, you shall see good sport anon betweenand this.
I thought there was something toward by that whisper.
You know a worthy principle of hers?
Not to be so much as civil to a man who speaks to her In the presence of him she professes to love.
I have encourag'dto talk to her to night.
Now you are here she will go nigh to beat him.
In the humor she's in, her love will make her do some Very extravagant thing doubtless.
What wasbusiness with you at my Lady?
To get me to meethere in order to an; I made some difficulty of it, and have prepar'd This rancounter to make good my Jealousy.
Here they come!
I'le meet her and provoke her with a deal of dumbCivility in passing by, then turn short and be behind Her, when Sirsets upon her ----
How wonderful respectfully he bow'd!
He's alwayes over-mannerly when He has done a mischief.
Methoughts indeed at the same time he had a Strange despising Countenance.
The unlucky look he thinks becomes him.
I was afraid you would have spoke to him my Dear.
I would have di'd first; he shall no more find me The loving fool he has done.
You love him still!
No.
I wish you did not.
I do not, and I will have you think so: What made You hale me to this odious place?
I hate to be hulch'd up in a Coach; Walking is much better.
Would we could meet Sirnow.
Lord! would you not avoid him?
I would make him all the advances that may be.
That would confirmsuspicion, my Dear.
He is not jealous; but I will make him so, and be Reveng'd a way he little thinks on.
If she should make him jealous, that may make Him fond of her again: I must disswade her from it. Lord! My Dear, this will certainly make him hate you.
'Twill make him uneasie though he does not care For me; I know the effects of jealousie on men of his Proud temper.
'Tis a fantastick remedy, its operations are Dangerous and uncertain.
'Tis the strongest Cordial we can give to dying 
Love, 
It often brings it back when there's no sign of life remaining: 
But I design not so much the reviving his, as my revenge.