Beleeve me Sir, I have told you what your worship may most certainly trust to.
May I not speak with her?
You know my place. There's no more hope from the deepe pit of griefe To raise in her any conceit of love, Then there's to raise her husband up againe From the cold bed he sleepes in: from the Grave. Take this for all: My Lady Sir, has vow'd To live, and die a Widdow. -- So I leave you. --
Is't possible, that such a one as shee; So young, so beautifull; so full of blood; Such lusty blood, as shee's? for such a losse, Should lose that youth; that Beauty, that quick blood In such a cold retirement? -- Well, I know not! But if she have made such a vow, and keepe it! To finde out such another, and a Phaenix, Is but an equall labour.
Save you Sir; save you, sweet Sir.
As much to you Sir; kind M..
You have bin with the Widdow; this melancholly Lady already. Give you much joy of your faire hopes Sir.
As much to your self; to your self Sir, kind M..
Ile hope as much as I can, though you be a Knight; and I but an honest Citizen. A Mercer, is a Merchant, andwill looke for good Ware, for his Money.
If he should enter now? -- Ile see the issue.
You know my comming: to speak with your Lady, M..
But shee's not at leasure to heare you.
I hope you doe but jeast.
Beleeve me Sir, in earnest.
But I'le not take't in earnest.
But you must. -- Then you'll beindeed Sir. Though you be a Citizen, you are not free of this Hall, And therefore must have no admittance.
Give you much joy of your faire hopes. Another?
Save you Gentlemen: how is't M.?
As well as we may, M..
You have got the start of me, I see that Gentlemen. A Suit, brought me home this morning, made me lye so much the longer: but, my Taylors long Bill, like a Woodcock, as hee is, shall be so much the longer a paying. -- You have beene within?
In our time Sir.
I meane, this morning.
But -- the Lady meanes no such thing Sir.
We heard of your Worships new Suit, and would not goe in before it.
I'le lead the way then.
M.? good morrow good morrow sweet M..
That sweet, to your sweetest selfe Sir.
And where's thy Lady? -- You see, we come, to come to her. --
By your favour Sir, you are too hasty.
Why, is not thy Lady up yet?
Why, doe you meane to take her downe Sir? -- Buy Sir.
This Fellow's sawcie.
Minds not your Worships new Suit Sir. -- But we must be content.
We may be patient Sir, but not content; for nothing contents me, but the Lady.
Nor me, but that beautifull Lady.
Who have wee here? Sweet and soft, M.. M.! -- I dare be so bold as embrace you too. -- But my Noble Sir. My Sir, of a thousand.
Why, I can be a Knight, an I lust Sir.
An I can be a Knight, an I lust Sir.
Dubd, with the Citie Dagger. -- Then, would be rash indeed. You come to see my Sister?
With all our hearts we would Sir.
'Las good hearts. Me thinks the Gates should of themselves flye ope, To such brave men as you are.
You have the old heart, still Sir.
The young heart still Sir; -- tho mad heart, -- the merry heart; the light heart, with the candle of conceit, burning in it, as bright as. You have not bin within? I will make out this paire of Aces, And then you shall see my Sister. I perceive by your melancholy looks, My melancholy, pettish, peevish Sister, Is not at this time to be spoke withall. 'Tis such a foolish thing; -- She knowes not worth, Nor how to entertain't: suffice it Gentlemen, I doe; -- And shall not goe behind her back To let her know your merit.
Will you Sir?
And in a just proportion to that merit, That Masse of Merit, you shall finde her favour: So M., and worthy M., I shall desire you leave us.
You'll remember.
Shall I remember (Gentlemen) to eat? To drink? to sleep? -- Then Ile remember you.
Then? -- When Sir?
When I am asleepe. -- Awake, I shall nevermind e'm. For their Worships are hardly worth it.
Yet in a just proportion, to their merit.
Yes, that's just nothing: -- Hang e'm gloworms, hang e'm.
Here's another rub in our Ally Sir.
A Tennants sonne o' mine. -- And how does my honest.
The better your good Worship is well Sir. I was to seeke your good Worship, at your Right Worshipfull house Sir: but, missing you there, I rejoyce I have met with you here.
Why, what's the matter, what's the matter?
In the way of love, as they say: from my father, and my suster; and my tother suster too; -- You know who I meane, Sir.
Thy scolding sister.
You are in the right, Sir.
And how does, my pretty Tennant?
That pretty one, is prettily well Sir.
Remember me to her by this. --
Within these two or three dayes, at the furthest, I should breath a Gelding; It may be, that wayes, and visit my pretty Tennant.
Long may your Worships Gelding breathe, and your Worshipfull selfe also. I am in hast Sir.
Take your own time good.
Thank your good Worship Sir.
I have done your patience wrong; indeed I have; But, in the best, that lyes in me to right it
You shall command me Sir: Now to my Sister. Now, where's my Sister?
Shee's within Sir.
Come then, let's to her.
You must pardon me, Shee's so retyr'd to solitude; and set So deep in grief, that till her sighs, and teares, Will give her leave to give that entertain That shall become such worthy Visitants, (Which yet, they will not) tis her strict commandThat no man enter.
Not my self?
Your self, Sir, if you would not swell her grief too big For her faint breast to carry, give her way. A little time may change her.
Tis enough. -- You see Sir.
Your Love, Sir.
But, as her Gentleman discreetly said, A little time may change her: We must still In such a kind humour a womans will. But, she's thine own, be bold on't. --
Come, thou mak'st such a Matter, of Nothing.
Nothing, doe you call it, Master? I know not, but I am sure, I feel it something -- Tis almost, kicking ripe already.
Almost, kicking ripe already, -- Come, come, thou art, A Chamber-maid still; -- And I prethee, whats this, but a work that belongs to the Chamber? Kicking ripe already, This is not the first time, that thou hast been kickt with an urchin. Once, Twice, -- this is the third time of kicking.
Well, you wo'not, marry me?
And hazard my place, wo my Lady? -- and yet, Now I think on't. -- I will --
Marry me?
To some of my old acquaintance. There be a hundred in the City, that have swallowed worse bits then thou art. Hist.
I know, my danger, and shall have a care, according.
Beseech you. Let the love you seeme to shew In these perswasions, be exprest in words, That better suit with such a robe as this, And my immutable resolve.
Immutable? -- then we perswade, in vain.
I am bound to say You have lost a worthy Gentleman; -- My selfe, A noble Master; -- one that was a Man Worth your best memory: the multitude Of sighs you have sent after him, worth all The expence of teares, you have bestowed upon him. But when we look into his Tombe and there See him lock'd up in Marble; -- in the still, And sad imagin'd language of the Grave, We are instructed, Nay, commanded Lady, To period our vain grievings.
He has told you the naked truth on't. 'Tis but in vaine to grieve; -- For, is't not sed The quick must live byth' quick, and not byth' dead? He's gone, -- Heaven be with him; -- He was a Gentleman; An honest man; -- and, which is more; -- a proper Gentleman: But, when Gentility, -- Honesty, -- and proportion, Lye in the Grave once, I ha' done with 'em.
Thy tongue's my ceaslesse torment.
Let me tell you, That infinite of love you seeme to have fixt, Upon the heart of your departed Husband, Loses no scruple, of the worth it has, Plac'd on a second Husband.
Mark you that now?
Nay, I dare tell you, that in a second Match, You love him more; more love, more honour him, Then, in your mourning Widdowhood.
Mark you that now?
Ile make it open to you: whilst you keepe Incompast, with this solitude, a Widow, You seeme, to voyce, to the ill-censuring world, Some imperfection in your selfe; some staine Makes you unworthy of a second Match: At lest, unworthy, of a worthy Husband, And in th' opinion, (which is easily rais'd) Question your Husbands judgement. -- Or, it may be,The estate he left you Lady; -- pulling so Upon the Name, you strive to dignifie, Disgrace, defames, and scandall.
Mark you that now?
If you so lov'd him living, love him dead, As I advise you Lady.
I, I, doe.
'Tis the best Tomb-stone you can lay upon him; The noblest Monument, you can erect; And to that Monument, an Epitaph, Shall make him live for ever.
Law you there now! -- Shal make him live for ever! You are not dumb tro? -- are you?
Would thou wer't. Or I had lost my hearing. -- I can wish Nothing more adverse to me, then your tongues: And therefore, if your visits bring with them Nothing, but these perswasions.
Keepe away.
Nay, as good speak't as think it. -- Here's a coyle for a Husband, I have had for mine owne part, -- 1. -- 2. -- 3. -- 4. And yet if the fift come up handsomly to me, -- I know what I know, I warrant you.
How five?
Fifteene, an the Destinies so have decreed it.
Madame, there be Suiters below would see you: M., the Mercer; -- one, a humorous Gallant; -- and a spick and span new Suiter, a Country Gentleman, -- one, M..
Spruce M.I know.
And I M., a notable humorous Coxcomb. But what's that?
Unknowne to me: but beleeve me, together, They make up, a delicate motion. -- Is your Ladiship pleas'd to see 'em?
Present your Motion some-where else, our griefes give way to no such lightnesse.
Very good. -- I'le tell e'm what you say?
Pray stay a little. I know these Suiters are but empty things; Not worth one serious entertaine; yet Sister, I wo'd not have you beat e'm back, at dore: Pray let e'm enter; Let e'm looke upon you.
Still your desire's, my anguish.
Come, come, pray. -- You are so melancholly.
Why, their mirth -- will be a means to cure you.
Kill me rather.
Goe, prethee bid e'm come.
Bid e'm be gone.
Nay, then, y'are too too cruell. -- Prethee stay.
Nay, an you know no other merriment, Then what you raise from my vexation, take it; I will not hinder your desires; pray take it.
You will not leave us, will you?
Leave this roome.
And goe mew your selfe up in your Chamber? An you will needs: -- Let me entreat one favour.
Well, what is't?
That, in your absence you'd be pleas'd to let Your wayting Gentlewoman, Mistris, Appeare in your apparrell: Tis but slipping off This upper garment; and this mourning Veile, And shee's my Lady.
How? -- My Bab, my Lady!
It will be sport to us; and to your selfe A rare advantage Sister: for this trick Keepes all your foolish Suiters at that distance, Their trouble shall ne're touch you. -- Will you?
Will you?
Though pleasure, be no pleasure to this bosome, Since you propose th'acquittance of that trouble, Your desire's granted.
But be speedie then With your directions for her carriage in it,
And we shall fit 'em neatly. -- Call e'm in.
Did you ever see such a self-will'd thing as this is? -- a widdow these two moneths, and yet not heare of a Suiter.
The Gentlemen, an't please you.
Yes indeed, an't please you.
Master.
Your servant, good deed law, Gentlewoman.
Master.
My name is; Master my Title, and Sir, a Title, that may be.
And my name is--
: thy sound is out o' season. -- But where's the Lady?
I, where's the Lady?
Wee would see the Lady.
I hope she has done mourning now, -- has she not?
Why, dos the Lady mourne?
Indeed shee dos.
Tis a delicate thing to mourne. -- Well, an my Father wou'd but dye once! Would we could see this Lady.
You have your wish already.
Beautious Lady!
Most beautious Lady!
Most beautifull Lady, that may be: for yet, I see no such matter.
Thine eyes are veyl'd with ignorance, or else, Through this thin veile, thou might'st, as we, -- behold Matter of admiration! -- You'll vouchsafe; -- Not yet.
Alas: -- upon their Captive heart, My sorrowes yet have set too strong a Guard For such delights to enter.
I could wish.That Conquerour of thy heart, and all his Guard Were visible, that I might challenge them.
I marry sir; that were a challenge indeed.
Me thinks I could -- doe --
What, doe you think you could doe Sir?
O -- my most delicate Lady!
Doe, -- his -- most delicate Lady. -- A terrible doe, indeed law.
Well Lady; if this be the man shall have you, You shall have a man, I can tell you.
If I be the man that shall have her, Shee shall have a man, I can tell you.
But, hee's a fighting man.
A fighting man? -- Let him play at the ancient weapon, an he were a Fencing man, I'll have a Bout with him.
The ancient weapon? -- What weapon's that?
Why this?
As wise, as valiant! 'tis the ancientst weapon indeed Sir.
And why not this?
I am better acquainted with this.
Well, wee shall meet?
And meet agen: -- Tell me of fighting Lady!
I see you are valiant Sir; -- and you are happy In having so much valour as you see Attend your beauty.
I must confesse them, worthy Gentlemen; But they must pardon me: -- the worth I ha' lost, With my dead husband, is so full, and fresh, Upon my understanding, that all else Have yet but homely entertaine: -- And yet, Y'are welcom Gentlemen. --
For that, we thank you.
We must hope still.
Well, an my Father would but dye once! I live in hope too Lady.
You see their valour Sir: -- and what's your weapon?
I am no man of the sword, -- I have no weapon.
How Sir? -- No weapon! --
What shouldyou do infencing Schoole, And have no weapon?
There was a time, -- I could have crost a cudgell.
And that you Sir?
Good sooth sometimes I can tell you: -- yet, if any man strike me, I have a weapon too Sir.
The coldest flint, has fire I see: What weapon?
One, that is indeed, -- All weapons. -- Long-Sword; Sword and Dagger; -- Sword and Buckler; Single Rapier, Rapier and Dagger; Case o' Rapiers; Halbert, Halfe-Pike; Quarter-Staffe; Short-Sword and Gauntlet; and that terrible Fly-flap, the Fauchion.
All these in one? --
Or one that's worth all these; -- and that, -- in a word, is the Law Sir.
A terrible weapon indeed Sir.
There, let mee firk 'em, and jerk 'em: There, Let mee stand upon Tearmes; -- There, Let me play the Master, and M. Atturny, my Vsher, and then, -- with all the weapons in that School, have at 'em.
This goes beyond your Rapier; or your ancient weapon, the Fist.
Body o' me, my husband, and Sir.
What's to be done?
Doe, as thou hast done Wench.
Play the Lady, a little longer.
Handsomly, and I'le promise thee, it shall cost me a Chamblet Pettycoat.
I'll do't as well as I can then.
Come, come, we will speake, and speed too, my Knight, of a thousand, where's this mourning Lady? -- What, my? -- and my Lady Littleworth. Hoyday? Thisof Coxcombs too!
Sir.
One. --
Kind Sir.
Two. --
Worthy Sir. --
Three, yet never a wise word amongst 'em. -- What, still in Dumbs, and dolors? -- An ye were as heavy as Lead, 'twas but a light trick of you to deny Accesse to such a brave man as this is, and allow't to such Mimicks as these are. -- Death, I could kick e'm out o' the roome. And you, though you bee my wives sister, for lodging such basenesse within you.
Why, you are not out of your wits?
You have no wit to be out of. Gentlemen, you are all -- Hobbyhorses. An it please you, to leave the house now; and come agen, -- when you are sent for, -- you shal be -- heartily glad, to be welcome.
You see his humour Gentlemen; pray leave us.
There's no resisting of him; for he has Rapier, fist, the law, and all, for any man, that shall thwart him.
Why, but I hope --
Not one word more, an you love me.
Off, ere the flame grow higher.
Come, take my counsell, and forget him.
Never.
Still looking downward, to your husbands grave?
To those that weare so sad a suit as this, The Grave's the glasse they use to deck e'm by. Pray give me leave.
Shee dos it to a haire.
Prethee look up a little; -- I can shew thee A Glasse, shall shew thee better things; -- a Glasse, That shall reflect, no such affrighting shadowes --
Nor shadowes (beautious Lady) but the same True, and essentiall comforts.
O. -- O. -- O.
Excellent, mourning Lady.
The Nuptiall knot, binds loving Paires together, Only for terme of life, has no extent O're the divorce of Death.
Pray, pray no more.
That onely binds the living to the living, And not the living to the dead.
That flesh that has a soul within it, the indowments, And excellencies, bounteous Heaven bestowes, To that, has nothing but the frightfull shape, And key-cold figure of a man.
Yet this, While thus, you dote upon your husbands dust, You doe sweet Lady; and this beauty bindTo stenches, and corruption; so imposing Upon your selfecruelty.
You have my resolution; so, pray leave me.
An you be buried in your Husbands grave, I see my suit must dye too.
Yes, and let it For ever, Let it die to her, and live To one that better shall deserve it: come, I'le bring thee, though shee be mine owneSister, My Knight, of a thousand, to her betters: -- one that is younger, fairer, richer, and it may be, -- Honester too Sir.
How Sir? Honester.
Honester?
An shee prostrate her selfe to a set o' Morris-dancers; -- and neglect such aas this is. -- Come Sir, come, let's away.
Nay, but heark you, heark you Sir; and worthy Sir; that you may see this Lady, Is not the woman that you take her for; Looke, doe you know this Lady?
How, Mistris?
My Ladies Chambermaid!
A trick o' mirth they put upon these Coxcombs.
Were you my Lady?
So, your Lady would have it, Sir.
Why, god-a-mercie faith.
There's all the comfort they are like to have.
This cloud's like; the poore shadow Sir. The substance, wee'll court for you.
My Lady. -- How like you this Sir?
This change, has put some life into me Sir. And I must tell you, betterd my opinion Both of the Ladies wisedome, and her goodnesse.
But heark you wife, may we not see my Sister?
Faith, yet her temper is not as Wee'd have it: But we shall win her by degrees, and turne Her melancholy to a sprightly humour.
A day, or two dayes passage.
Come Sir. Meane time wee'll see what mirth my house can yield To entertaine you with. -- A ha, my Girle! Why such a Wench is worth her weight in Pearle.
Well, thou hast played my Lady, like a Lady. I have a trick from this conceit, to doe, Shall make us sport, and help thy swelling too.
Sir, I have spoke my danger.
A dangerous case beleeve me. And yet, me thinks, there's no great danger neither. For, say a man offer to blowe thee up with Love-powder, If his traine lie so open, you may see it, you have the wit I hope to shun it; -- h'an't you.
I have done hitherto.
And doest thou feare, -- thou shalt hold out no longer?
Sir, I doe not. For, all the pollicies, and power he has, Can ne're prevaile to conquest. -- No, tho feare Be to our Sex a common attribute; In such a fight as this, my resolution Has that Heroick temper, I dare meet My death, e're my dishonour: -- my dishonour! For vertue's vertue, in what breast soere, And her great splendour, equall.
Splend? -- Heyday! But to the point, what is he? -- Do I know him?
Yes, if you know Sir, Your Landlord Father.
How Sir?
He. -- Sometimes, -- (tho clouded in a course disguise) He layes temptations to mine eare himselfe: Sometimes by deputy; sometimes by Letters; And sometimes by rich gifts. -- As if that Jemme (Once gone) can never be bought back againe, Were to be sold so basely. -- Here's my sore, Assist me in the remedie.
Sir! He ayme against thy chastity? Alas. Has he bestowed upon thine Infancie, That care, and cost, that he has done? -- Maintain'd thee Among his owne? -- Fed thee among his owne? Apparrel'd thee, as he has cloth'd his owne? In the same Schoole, in the same qualities, Had thee instructed with his owne? -- Has he So beautified thy mind? -- So grac'd thy body! So many yeares in his owne house! -- And now -- (So close his favours follow thee) -- does he Maintaine thee here? -- Here in this homely Roofe, A starre to that poore glimmering candle light, My poverty could afford thee! -- And for this, Is this the best you can returne him?
No -- Father, for these should I forget to pay, The most obsequious duties I can tender, 'Twere just in heaven I should forget my selfe.
Had this beene spoke of any other man. I might have lent an eare to't: -- but, Sir! Noble Sir! -- that brave man, Sir! Our bountious Benefactor! -- Say he have Scatter'd some words ith' way of merriment, Some pleasant, idle, -- wanton, -- what d'yee call't? Sprinkled a little Bawdry in his speech? (As Courtiers may, and ne'r be question'd for it) That cuts not off a Maydenhead. -- Nay, perchance The merriment, that you interpret lust, Was his meere love to vertue.
Vertue!
Yes. -- Tis my conceit, that all his talk, -- his Letters, and all the gifts he sent thee, were imployed, Ith' way of triall: -- Not to make thee naught; But so to sound thy goodnesse.
Sound my goodnesse!
Not to o'recome thy chastity; but to try If any other should assaile the Fort, How stoutly thoud'st maintaine it.
Think you so? I'le think so too then Father: -- Let him try me. But jest, or earnest, he shal ne'r come nye me.
Why, this is fine, you have the golden time on't.
What golden time? -- You'll still be scolding.
Scolding! -- Mary come up Mistris Jinnie-Pinnie; We cannot speak to you, but we scold. -- Well, I say little.
Nothing at all were better.
But I'll say something; Has a woman a tongue to say nothing?
Prethee be patient Sister.
Yes I waun't you. I must wash, and scowre; And Brew, and Bake, and doe this thing, -- and doe that thing; and doe every thing, while such a beautifull Blowse as you are, must sit still o' your taile, and doe nothing.
Why, doest thou not see her at her work?
At work! -- A greate peyce o' work, a deed law!-- Prick, prick, prick. -- As if she had nothing in the world to mind -- but Prick, Prick, Prick. -- But 'tis no matter, -- tis but my hard fortune; I am a foole indeed, and so you make me.
What, what, a shower after this peale of thunder? -- Nay, doe not crie good.
O, Father, Father.
Now Boy, what newes with you now?
Brave newes Father, -- News of the brave Sir.
Pursue me still? -- Good Father give me leave, While hee's come in, and gone agen. --
What leave?
To absent my selfe; -- but in some neighbours house: I have a trick to passe him -- You may tell him, I'm gone to London.
When I have told him already, you are here in the Parlor a sewing.
Come, y'are a Baggage; y'ar a foolish Baggage, To injure with such frivolous suspitions, A Gentleman of his repute, and goodnesse! Come, let me heare no more on't.
Sister, -- I have the rarest newes for you!
For me tis wel; -- And what news have you got for me Sir?
Skipping news, lipping news, tripping news.
How, Dancing brother? -- Dancing!
Prancing, advancing, dancing! Nay, 'tis a Match; -- a Match upon a Wager.
A Match. -- Who be they?
Why, all the Maids of our Town, And all the mad Wenches of.
A Match, and leave me out? -- When, when is't Brother?
Mary, ee'n this morning; -- they are now going to't, helter skelter.
And leave me out? -- Where brother? where?
Why there, Sister; there. -- At our owne dore almost: On the Greene there, close by the May-pole. Heark, you may heare them hither.
Ta la la la leero, ta la, la leero -- &c. An I be not one. --
Thou't never be two, I think; -- For on my conscience, there is no man that knowes her, has valour enough, to come neere her
Why, well said Girle, keepe but that resolution,
And let his purposes, be what they can, They cannot hurt thee. -- Look, hee's come already.
Good morrow Tennant; -- good morrow beautiful Tennant.
As much to my worthy Landlord.
As much to my worthy Landlord.
My Tennant! -- God-a-mercy good Tennant. I want your welcome faire one.
Sir, you are welcome.
Had this bin spoke, with smiles upon thy cheek, I durst have sworne the Syllables had beene The Language of thy heart; thy heart, sweet. What, still so adverse to my pleasure? -- Tennant -- And my young Tennant; -- shall I crave the Roome? I have something to deliver from my Lady, That she would have a secret to the Eare Of any, But faire.
The Roome? Our poverty possesses nothing Sir, But what is yours; you may command it. -- Come.
I smell my Landlord; but, -- no words but mum.
Still, still this cloud upon thy brow sweet? You know my minde.
And you know mine Sir.
I meane, I love thee, my sweet.
Doe you? -- Not halfe so well as I love you.
Love me! Then there's some hope agen. -- Why, god-a-mercy, Let's see how handsomly thou't give thy body To my embraces Girle. -- How, fly e'm? Not kisse me neither? -- such a thing deni'd, How canst thou say thou lovest me?
Yes Sir: I love you in your Name: your Reputation; The dignity you carry in your yeares; The goodnesse should goe with e'm; -- In your Lady; I love you Sir, ith' faire Benevolence You owe her vertues.
Hoyday; -- Love me quotha! -- Nay, come , come.
I love you in your vowes.Those Nuptiall vowes, that whilst you live should live Unstain'd between you: -- In a word Sir, I love you in that purity, -- that shall, When death shall threaten your last minute to you, Make you look boldly on him; smile upon him; And in conclusion, seale you, one of those, That, from this veyle of trouble, he conveyes To th' purity of Angels: -- Thus, I love you.
This is not that I look for: heark you; Your Father is my Tennant.
Sir, he is.
Nay, since you vrge it, let me tell you Minion, He's not my Tennant, neither; but my Beadsman.
And like an humble Beadsman, in his Prayers Remembers all your Charity.
He does: -- But you forget it faire one.
Then let heaven, Whence we Petition, the Reward it merits, Forget me too.
Is't not forgetfulnesse When all the love, -- the tender cares, and cost, That from thy Infancie, to this Ripe groweth, I have bestowed upon you, cannot gaine me Such a request as this is!
This? Alas. Your greatest gaine's in losing. -- Nay, I'le tell you, The love, the care, -- that cost, that Noble breeding, That seemes to you a winning Argument, Is my best Argument against you.
How?
Why Sir, the Education; -- that faire breeding You have bestowed upon my poverty, Has made me what I am: -- So copiously Furnish'd my soule, with all that best adornes her, That whatsoere's in opposition to't, Has no admittance to her; -- Neere her; -- No, -- But, -- most deservedly, doe rank themselvesWith things, that most displease her. -- Such a thing, -- is --
What? -- My Love?
No, but your lust Sir. -- I am bold, But I can kneele to beg your mercy for it.
What, she imagines water to my flame, Is oyle t'encreas't: the more she puts me off, The more she pulls me to her. -- Come, come rise, Though you be so unkind; -- Come, prethee kis me.
Why, God a mercy; -- agen, agen; Why, this is somewhat yet: Wee must not look At once, to have so great a happinesse As that we ayme at. We must use degrees. Lock me, once more, in thy embrace, and busse me, And then. --
What then?
For this timeI'll leave thee. -- What, leave thee, and leave nothing with thee Wench? Nay, that were foule play: there, -- Nay, take it. Indeed you shall.
Indeed, indeed I wonot: For any service, I can doe you Sir, Your favour's price sufficient. -- No, not yet? I see, mine eye's a: -- I ha't. How I forget my duty? -- Here so long, And ne'r a Chaire to ease you? --, -- Brother. Pray pardon me Sir.
How, a Chaire? -- Kinder, and kinder still.
Come, come, a Chaire there for Sir.
She pitties your standing Sir. -- But I have a Chaire, Almost at my fingers end. -- Look you Sir, Will it please you. Bum this Cushion?
How, Bum it Tennant?
Yes, Bum it Landlord: -- Looke you Sir, o' this fashion.
Come, you'll be foolish stil. -- You know my mind. Goe, bring e'm in.
An I bring e'm not in, let Sirkick me out.
Lord, how forgetfull I have beene Sir? But, I beseech your pardon.
Pardon thee? And seal't upon thy lip; -- Come prethee sit.
Nay, nay, sit by me; -- Ne'r a stoole? -- Sit here then.
Be fairely civill Sir; -- Nay, good Sir.
How now, -- what's that?
Musick Sir.
Musick? -- Rot on their fiddle, and their fiddle strings, Thou art my Musick. -- Hoyday, here's a Morice.
You see we swet to make your Worship merry. How doe you like our pastime?
I like it so well, I could wish you were furder off with't.
Have we this for our kindnesse Sir?
Mary, come up Sir.
Nay, there's no talking to e'm. Come, in the heat, and height, of all her kindnesse!
Shall I entreat you, Leave the Roome?
The Roome!
So she sed: but I know shee meanes no such matter, -- onely a trick: Tell her, you wonnot goe.
Pray leave the Roome.
We wonnot.
Wonnot?
No.
Wee were sent for in; and wee wonot goe out agen yet.
An your Knighthood were --
-- An 1000 pounds purchase.
Hoyday, they'l bayt me, -- and they wonot I must.
Out? -- Marry gip there, ne'r a good inch of a thousand. -- Fidler, strike. I strike you else; -- and cut your begging bowstrings.
I must be gone I see: these miserably impudent stallions -- Do but remember me, as I shall thee; -- and -- Nothing greeves me, -- but --
But what Sir?
That, -- we cannot kisse at parting --
Come, -- wee'll een have the tother Bout, -- and then. --
Nay, wee'll no more at this time there's enough.
For you: -- But 'tis not enough for me then: You shall command us, shall you?
Nay, be not angry Sister: 'Tis no command, but my entreat: -- Good Sister.
Well, since you entreat me, and seem to know your betters, -- you shall have your will, for once. -- Fid. lead the way; -- and Wenches follow your Leader.
Leader. -- An scolding were fighting, what a Leader wouldst thou be? -- Thoudst bring 'em on, with a pouder. O Father, Father.
Ne'r a wise word, for a wager. -- Sirgone I see.
Yes Sir, he is.
And how do'st find him Girle? I doe not think The man, that thy suspition seem'd to make him.
You have a good opinion of him Father, And, I'll not stand to crosse it.
Nay, nay, come; In plaine termes, tell me how didst find him? -- ha?
As good conceal't, and languish, as reveal't, And find no comfort.
Th'art a pertish thing: And -- I'm afraid, have beene distastfull to him: I'm halfe afraid on't Girle: -- we must be wise; By's frown we fall Wench; by his favours rise.
Distilling still, salt water to deface That Master-peece of Nature? -- Can the heart Thus feast it selfe, upon the Baine of hearts? For such is griefe sweet Lady.
Good enough, To make this flesh as my dead Husbands is, A banquet to corruption.
Still that Note? Touch onely that dull string of death?
When life Would willingly exchange it selfe with Death, What Musick sweeter?
I must tell you Lady, I thought the Musick of your Husbands end, Those heavenly Notes he entertain'd it with, Taught him by Angels, had instructed you, To looke upon that Being that he has, As hee's a glorious Chorister with them! And not upon that Burden of the flesh Left in the Grave behind him. -- Or at least, Not so, to looke upon your Husband dead, As thus, to dye your selfe. For what is't, while Of Lifes best hopes, you shall your Life deprive, But what I tell you? -- to be dead, alive.
Sir, as I am, pray leave me.
Only so? -- Out-ryvald by the dead.
To me hee lives: And in so vive a figure, every houre's Presented to me, that I feele no lesse Command o're my affections in that shape; Nor lesse Attraction of my duty to it, Then when he had that heat, gave all those parts, That now lye uselesse, their peculiar motion. Nay, so that shapes imprest upon my soule, That he appeares so really mine owne,As, all the embraces of a second Match Would stick upon me, like the leaprous staines Of Lust, and base Adultry. In a word, That figure fills this bosome: -- And in this Pray understand the vainenesse of your suit, And so, conclude it.
This command upon it, It dies, though I dye with it. -- Yet thus much Lady, I have not, in this eagernesse of Suit, Pursued, what's yours, But you. -- The gifts of Fortune; The state your birth allowed you, or th'addition, By your lost husband, left you; But the indowments Of your faire soule, -- your vertues, -- And of those The amplest Dower, (I cannot flatter here) Beauty was ever blest withall! These Lady Have beene the object of my Love.
A Love, That, could I love, I should ee'n dote upon; And in a Title, farre beneath your owne, Prefer't, above all Title; though it came Roab'd in the state of Princes. -- But --
No more. I have my answer, and am married.
Married!
As you are Madam; never to be married: Be that the witnesse of my Love.
Admir'd! I should not be a woman, should I not Love such a Love as this is!
Doe you Lady? Then, I revoke that Vow, and dare embrace you.
But understand me Sir; I love your Love: And -- as your selfe, have pleas'd to speak of me Those singular Vertues, it is built upon: That, I am fixt on; with that estimate, That, next the memory of my dead husband, It shall be my best comfort. -- Thus I love you;But, must not marrye.
I ha' done. -- Yet Lady In this; -- this purest, Imateriall things There may be made a contract; and the assurance Of such a Love, as this is, Interchang'd And fairelie seald betweene vs.
Sir, how meane you?
Fair'st, you have vowed your widowhood to the grave, At least, you have so protested: yet because Our hearts, and purposes, are not our owne; And, that no Bosome has that Constancie, But Heav'ns may alter, the resolve it has, And make it follow, what it fled; -- it may. My Love Petitions, that if ere hereafter, You find that alteration, in your soule, And againe Fancie Wedlocke, -- I -- your servant, May - for that second hapinesse to heaven, Stand fair'st in your Election.
Pray no more.
Give my request an answer: -- If you doe.
A fruitlesse promise: and suppose it made, This would but --
What? -- I vnderstand you Lady. It shall not make me bolder, in my suite; Nor prompt my love, in any treacherous way To gaine, what it so followes. -- No; I know The man, would basely, compasse such a Ioy, Like him that fishes with a poyson'd Bayte, Infects the meat should feed him. -- fair'st, I wo'not; Nor vex you with one syllable; but Live, Vowed, like your selfe, till such a change shall be To amorous Language, silent. -- Is it graunted? If my best thoughts merit but this, expresse it
That satisfaction take. -- If ere I Marry It shall be you; so helpe me heav'n.
To which I am rapt in this sweete tone. -- If ere I knowThe sweetes of Hymen, I must find 'em here; So helpe me heav'n! -- So, we are maried now: And in this Ioy I leave you.
What Sir? going As we are entring?
Does your Lady, drive you hence with a frowne?
My smiles may tell you, here has bin no frowning. Shee's faire and noble; and in these sweet hopes, That she has given me, I am pleased.
'Tis well.
A vengeance of all morrice dauncers I am sure, they h'a mar'd, my dancing: that delicate dance That I should have had with my tenant.
All Ioy be with you Ladies; I must leave you.
Here's a rub in your way a while, my brave Knight, of a 1000.. And how do'st find her? -- is she comming? ha?
You see my hopes set smiles upon my cheeke, Let them resolve you sir.
I vnderstand you: Why? god a mercy sister: when's the day?
Nay, question that no farther, we shall talk on't.
When a things done, 'tis done.
You'd faine be doing to then.
Wo'd I not? Do you think I am all dead flesh? -- I warrant you.
Now? -- what good tidings now sir?
My newes is, worthie sir, thatThat stout sea Captaine, is return'd from sea: Is come to London, and that yesterday He was upon th' Exchange.
That Gentleman: -- and but this morning Lady, He was seene at the Phaenix, in fleet-street.
Body o' me I should have told you so -- but, I Have such a Memory -- !
How i'st? -- ha? -- you lose colour Madam.
Lady.
Sister
Beshrew the name, and owner of that name That has disturbed you. -- whats that name to you?
Sir, nothing but my trouble.
A troublesome Captaine indeed sir, A suytor once, in her virgin dayes And Rivall to her husband, Sir. But, mis'd the marke he aymed at -- he shot faire; Butfairer. -- upon which, SirHe went to sea; where having bin three yeares, And now Returning, hearing, (as it seemes) That she's a widow, hee'd renew his suite, Give her a broad-side sir, and boord her! Nay Yave a hot Ryvall, I can tell you that. One that will Quarrel; -- fight -- and -- by my say -- I'm halfe afraid of danger.
If he be not, All valour, and no judgement, I feare none; And yet, that heate, that has not judgement with it, Cannot be counted valour, but a rash Unknowing wildnesse, -- which I wo'not thinke Him guilty of; -- But whatsoe'r he be, I'll be, but what becomes me.
Leave the Roome.
Good truth now, but you shall not.
Leave the Roome? -- What feare you Lady?
I have cause enough, For hee'll but trouble me with that, heaven knowes I have no mind to heare of.
If he have No power upon you Lady by some promise, Formerly past betweene you --
I had never, That unprepar'dnesse in me, to doe that In cause of such a Consequence as this, And breake it sir.
Such Beauty, and untruthWere ne're companions: 'tis beleev'd.
Come, come, It may be, some new Beautie has him now: Some Forraigne Mistris.
Or, it may be sister, This time of service in the warres, had made him Onely in love, with fighting.
More vexation?
This Mountaine, bring forth a Mouse! Have we talk'd all this while of a Captaine, And now, must be troubled, with Coxcombs?
The gods, protect you Lady.
Thanke you sir.
I spoake to that sweet Beauty.
But I must speake to you sir; for you see she has other imployment, Pray, stand aside a little.
If I must -- I shall attend her leasure.
You must attend her too sir: -- doe you not see, shee's busie?
I would not interrupt her.
I would not interrupt her? -- Is that the resolution of a Lover? Let me come to her.
But, you shall not sir.
Why? if I shall not sir, -- I wo'not sir.
Is that the resolution of a Lover?
A man can do, no more then a can do, But, an my father would but dye once!
Make nyce to me of entrance? Where's the Widow? For so I heare shee's now: what mourning still? I'm a bold gamester: -- Save you all at once, All suiters Gentlemen?
Yes indeed sir; we are all suitors.
Y'are a little too rash in that sir; I am none.
And, what, are you sir?
Why sir, -- I am, -- a Citizen, and a Mercer.
A Citizen, and a Mercer, -- Cheapside?
No Captain; -- but he's perfect in his Pater noster.
One of that row? -- I know't sir.
Not very farre from it: -- In Creed sir.
Does he beleeve? that's seldome found in a Broker.
How sir, -- a Broker?
I know you, by this wheele. -- you have a great many Bags, and a great many buildings to sir. -- But, dare you for all that, presume in the way of Matrimonie, to looke so high as a Lady?
He that can purchase a Lordship --
Thinks, he may purchase a Ladiship: -- you my Rivall? Can you fight sir?
It may be I, it may be no sir.
Then I'le try, whether you can or no sir. Not a word, as you love your Coxcombe.
Nay, let him alone; let him alone, I beseech you, For hitherto he has done but Justice.
Are you a Suiter too sir?
Too sir?
Y'are an Asse sir: -- Can you fight?
Fight? in a Ladyes chamber?
Why, where would you fight sir?
Why, the truth on't is; -- I would -- fight, -- no where.
Why, I thought as much; -- and therefore, -- I will kick you -- any where; good master outside of a Gentleman; follow your valiant Leader.
You will not kill him, will you?
Ha' you so much Tongue, and nev'r a good Tooth, Madam Fumble!
Fumble, fumble! -- y'are a most --
Peace, an you love your old Carkasse, -- peace.
You bind me to a patience --
Nay, good Sister: -- He does you a great deale a right, And saves me a great deale of labour. For I should have don't, if he had not.
One post support another? -- What are you sir?
Why, -- I am -- a Gentleman. --
Will your Armes beare you out in the Title?
My Legs, shall beare me out sir.
Then -- you wo'not be beat out -- as they were?
-- Beat, I should be very loath to be beaten?
-- good truth, I thinke you would sir.
Doe I looke like one that would be beaten?
An you stay, you must.
Why therefore, -- I meane, -- to be gone sir. -- But -- If my father, -- would but dye once. --