Pray, Sister, where are the best Fields and Woods, to walk in in?
A pretty Question; why, Sister!, and St.; and for close walks the.
Pray, Sister, tell me why my Husband looks so grum here in Town? and keeps me up so close, and will not let me go a walking, nor let me wear my best Gown yesterday?
O he's jealous, Sister.
Jealous, what's that?
He's afraid you shou'd love another Man.
How shou'd he be afraid of my loving another man, when he will not let me see any but himself.
Did he not carry you yesterday to a Play?
Ay, but we sate amongst ugly People, he wou'd not let me come near the Gentry, who sate under us, so that I cou'd not see'em: He told me, none but naughty Women sate there, whom they tous'd and mous'd; but I wou'd have ventur'd for all that.
But how did you like the Play?
Indeed I was aweary of the Play, but I lik'd hugeously the Actors; they are the goodlyest proper'st Men, Sister.
O but you must not like the Actors, Sister.
Ay, how shou'd I help it, Sister? Pray, Sister, when my Husband comes in, will you ask leave for me to go a walking?
A walking, hah, ha; Lord, a Country Gentlewomans leasure is the drudgery of a foot-post; and she requires as much airing as her Husbands Horses.
But here comes your Husband; I'll ask, though I'm sure he'l not grant it.
He says he won't let me go abroad, for fear of catching the Pox.
Fye, the small Pox you shou'd say.
Oh my dear, dear Bud, welcome home; why dost thou look so fropish, who has nanger'd thee?
Your a Fool.
Faith so she is, for crying for no fault, poor tender Creature!
What you wou'd have her as impudent as your self, as errant a Jilflirt, a gadder, a Magpy, and to say all a meer notorious Town-Woman?
Brother, you are my only Censurer; and the honour of your Family shall sooner suffer in your Wife there, than in me, though I take the innocent liberty of the Town.
Hark you Mistriss, do not talk so before my Wife, the innocent liberty of the Town!
Why, pray, who boasts of any intrigue with me? what Lampoon has made my name notorious? what ill Women frequent my Lodgings? I keep no Company with any Women of scandalous reputations.
No, you keep the Men of scandalous reputations Company.
Where? wou'd you not have me civil? answer'em in a Box at the Plays? in the drawing room at? in St.?? or --
Hold, hold, do not teach my Wife, where the Men are to be found; I believe she's the worse for your Towndocuments already; I bid you keep her in ignorance as I do.
Indeed be not angry with her Bud, she will tell me nothing of the Town, though I ask her a thousand times a day.
Then you are very inquisitive to know, I find?
Not I indeed, Dear, I hate; our Place-house in the Country is worth a thousand of't, wou'd I were there again.
So you shall I warrant; but were you not talking of Plays, and Players, when I came in? you are her encourager in such discourses.
No indeed, Dear, she chid me just now for liking the Player Men.
Nay, if she be so innocent as to own to me her liking them, there is no hurt in't --
Come my poor Rogue, but thou lik'st none better then me?
Yes indeed, but I do, the Player Men are finer Folks.
But you love none better then me?
You are mine own Dear Bud, and I know you, I hate a Stranger.
Ay, my Dear, you must love me only, and not be like the naughty Town Women, who only hate their Husbands, and love every Man else, love Plays, Visits, fine Coaches, fine Cloaths, Fidles, Balls, Treates, and so lead a wicked Town-life.
Nay, if to enjoy all these things be a Town-life,is not so bad a place, Dear.
How! if you love me, you must hate.
The Fool has forbid me discovering to her the pleasures of the Town, and he is now setting her a gog upon them himself.
But, Husband, do the Town-women love the Player Men too?
Yes, I warrant you.
Ay, I warrant you.
Why, you do not, I hope?
No, no, Bud; but why have we no Player-men in the Country?
Ha -- Mrs. Minx, ask me no more to go to a Play.
Nay, why, Love? I did not care for going; but when you forbid me, you make me as't were desire it.
So 'twill be in other things, I warrant.
Pray, let me go to a Play, Dear.
Hold your Peace, I wo'not.
Why, Love?
Why, I'll tell you.
Nay, if he tell her, she'l give him more cause to forbid her that place.
Pray, why, Dear?
First, you like the Actors, and the Gallants may like you.
What, a homely Country Girl? no Bud, no body will like me.
I tell you, yes, they may.
No, no, you jest -- I won't believe you, I will go.
I tell you then, that one of the lewdest Fellows in Town, who saw you there, told me he was in love with you.
Indeed! who, who, pray who wast?
I've gone too far, and slipt before I was aware; how overjoy'd she is!
Was it anyGallant, any of our Neighbours? I promise you, I am beholding to him.
I promise you, you lye; for he wou'd but ruin you, as he has done hundreds: he has no other love for Women, but that, such as he, look upon Women like Basilicks, but to destroy'em.
Ay, but if he loves me, why shou'd he ruin me? answer me to that: methinks he shou'd not, I wou'd do him no harm.
Hah, ha, ha.
'Tis very well: but I'll keep him from doing you any harm, or me either.
But here comes Company, get you in, get you in.
But pray, Husband, is he a pretty Gentleman, that loves me?
In baggage, in.
What all the lewd Libertines of the Town brought to my Lodging, by this easie Coxcomb! S'death I'll not suffer it.
Here, do you approve my choice? Dear, little Rogue, I told you, I'd bring you acquainted with all my Friends, the wits, and --
Ay, they shall know her, as well as you your self will, I warrant you.
This is one of those, my pretty Rogue, that are to dance at your Wedding to morrow; and him you must bid welcom ever, to what you and I have.
Monstrous! --
how dost thou like her, Faith? Nay, Dear, do not look down; I should hate to have a Wife of mine out of countenance at any thing.
Wonderful!
Tell me, I say,, how dost thou like her? thou hast star'd upon her enough, to resolve me.
So infinitely well, that I cou'd wish I had a Mistriss too, that might differ from her in nothing, but her love and engagement to you.
Sir, Masterhas often told me, that his Acquaintance were all Wits and Raillieurs, and now I find it.
No, by the Universe, Madam, he does not railly now; you may believe him: I do assure you, he is the honestest, worthyest, true hearted Gentleman -- A man of such perfect honour, he wou'd say nothing to a Lady, he does not mean.
Praising another Man to his Mistriss!
Sir, you are so beyond expectation obliging, that --
Nay, I gad, I am sure you do admire her extreamly, I see't in your eyes. -- He does admire you Madam. -- By the World, don't you?
Yes, above the World, or, the most glorious part of it, her whole Sex; and till now I never thought I shou'd have envy'd you, or any Man about to marry, but you have the best excuse for Marriage I ever knew.
Nay, now, Sir, I'm satisfied you are of the Society of the Wits, and Raillieurs, since you cannot spare your Friend, even when he is but too civil to you; but the surest sign is, since you are an Enemy to Marriage, for that I hear you hate as much as business or bad Wine.
Truly, Madam, I never was an Enemy to Marriage, till now, because Marriage was never an Enemy to me before.
But why, Sir, is Marriage an Enemy to you now? Because it robs you of your Friend here; for you look upon a Friend married, as one gone into a Monastery, that is dead to the World.
'Tis indeed, because you marry him; I see Madam, you can guess my meaning: I do confess heartily and openly, I wish it were in my power to break the Match, by Heavens I wou'd.
Poor!
Wou'd you be so unkind to me?
No, no, 'tis not because I wou'd be unkind to you.
Poor, no gad, 'tis only his kindness to me.
Great kindness to you indeed; insensible Fop, let a Man make love to his Wife to his face.
Come dear, for all my Wife there that shall be, thou shalt enjoy me sometimes dear Rogue; by my honour, we Men of wit condole for our deceased Brother in Marriage, as much as for one dead in earnest: I think that was prettily said of me, ha? -- But come, be not melancholy for me.
No, I assure you I am not melancholy for you.
Prethee,, dost think my Wife that shall be there a fine Person?
I cou'd gaze upon her, till I became as blind as you are.
How, as I am! how!
Because you are a Lover, and true Lovers are blind, stockblind.
True, true; but by the World, she has wit too, as well as beauty: go, go with her into a corner, and trye if she has wit, talk to her any thing, she's bashful before me.
Indeed if a Woman wants wit in a corner, she has it no where.
Sir, you dispose of me a little before your time. --
Nay, nay, Madam let me have an earnest of your obedience, or -- go, go, Madam --
How, Sir, if you are not concern'd for the honour of a VVife, I am for that of a Sister; he shall not debauch her: be a Pander to your own VVife, bring Men to her, let'em make love before your face, thrust'em into a corner together, then leav'em in private! is this your Town wit and conduct?
Hah, ha, ha, a silly wise Rogue, wou'd make one laugh more then a stark Fool, hah, ha: I shall burst. Nay, you shall not disturb'em; I'll vex thee, by the World.
The writings are drawn, Sir, settlements made; 'tis too late, Sir, and past all revocation.
Then so is my death.
I wou'd not be unjust to him.
Then why to me so?
I have no obligation to you.
My love.
I had his before.
You never had it; he wants you see jealousie, the only infallible sign of it.
Love proceeds from esteem; he cannot distrust my virtue, besides he loves me, or he wou'd not marry me.
Marrying you, is no more sign of his love, then bribing your Woman, that he may marry you, is a sign of his generosity: Marriage is rather a sign of interest, then love; and he that marries a fortune, covets a Mistress, not lovesher: But if you take Marriage for a sign of love, take it from me immediately.
No, now you have put a scruple in my head; but in short, Sir, to end our dispute, I must marry him, my reputation wou'd suffer in the World else.
No, if you do marry him, with your pardon, Madam, your reputation suffers in the World, and you wou'd be thought in necessity for a cloak.
Nay, now you are rude, Sir. -- Mr., pray come hither, your Friend here is very troublesom, and very loving.
Hold, hold --
D'ye hear that?
Why, d'ye think I'll seem to be jealous, like a Country Bumpkin?
No, rather be a Cuckold, like a credulous Cit.
Madam, you wou'd not have been so little generous as to have told him.
Yes, since you cou'd be so little generous, as to wrong him.
Wrong him, no Man can do't, he's beneath an injury; a Bubble, a Coward, a sensless Idiot, a Wretch so contemptible to all the World but you, that --
Hold, do not rail at him, for since he is like to be my Husband, I am resolv'd to like him: Nay, I think I am oblig'd to tell him, you are not his Friend. -- Master, Master.
What, what; now dear Rogue, has not she wit?
Not so much as I thought, and hoped she had.
Mr., do you bring People to rail at you?
Madam --
How! no, but if he does rail at me, 'tis but in jest I warrant; what we wits do for one another, and never take any notice of it.
He spoke so scurrilously of you, I had no patience to hear him; besides he has been making love to me.
True damn'd tell-tale-Woman.
Pshaw, to shew his parts -- we wits rail and make love often, but to shew our parts; as we have no affections, so we have no malice, we --
He said, you were a Wretch, below an injury.
Pshaw.
Damn'd, sensless, impudent, virtuous Jade; well since she won't let me have her, she'l do as good, she'l make me hate her.
A Common Bubble.
Pshaw.
A Coward.
Pshaw, pshaw.
A sensless driveling Idiot.
How, did he disparage my parts? Nay, then my honour's concern'd, I can't put up that, Sir; by the World, Brother help me to kill him; (I may draw now, since we have the odds of him: -- 'tis a good occasion too before my Mistriss) --
Hold, hold.
What, what.
I must not let'em kill the Gentleman neither, for his kindness to me; I am so far from hating him, that I wish my Gallant had his person and understanding: -- (Nay if my honour --
I'll be thy death.
Hold, hold, indeed to tell the truth, the Gentleman said after all, that what he spoke, was but out of friendship to you.
How! say, I am, I am a Fool, that is not wit, out of friendship to me.
Yes, to try whether I was concern'd enough for you, and made love to me only to be satisfy'd of my virtue, for your sake.
Kind however --
Nay, if it were so, my dear Rogue, I ask theepardon; but why wou'd not you tell me so, faith.
Because I did not think on't, faith.
Come,does not come,, let's be gone to the new Play. -- Come Madam.
I will not go, if you intend to leave me alone in the Box, and run into the pit, as you use to do.
Pshaw, I'll leavewith you in the Box, to entertain you, and that's as good; if I sate in the Box, I shou'd be thought no Judge, but of trimmings. -- Come away, lead her down.
Well, go thy wayes, for the flower of the true Town Fops, such as spend their Estates, before they come to'em, and are Cuckolds before they'r married. But let me go look to my own Free-hold -- How --
Your Servant, Sir, where is your Lady? we are come to wait upon her to the new Play.
New Play!
And my Husband will wait upon you presently.
Damn your civility --
Madam, by no means, I will not see Sirhere, till I have waited upon him at home; nor shall my Wife see you, till she has waited upon your Ladyship at your lodgings.
Now we are here, Sir --
No, Madam.
Pray, let us see her.
We will not stir, till we see her.
A Pox on you all --
she has lock'd the door, and is gone abroad.
No, you have lock'd the door, and she's within.
They told us below, she was here.
(Will nothing do?) -- Well it must out then, to tell you the truth, Ladies, which I was afraid to let you know before, least it might endanger your lives, my Wife has just now the Small Pox come out upon her, do not be frighten'd;but pray, be gone Ladies, you shall not stay here in danger of your lives; pray get you gone Ladies.
No, no, we have all had'em.
Alack, alack.
Come, come, we must see how it goes with her, I understand the disease.
Come.
Well, there is no being too hard for Women at their own weapon, lying, therefore I'll quit the Field.
Here's an example of jealousy.
Indeed as the World goes, I wonder there are no more jealous, since Wives are so neglected.
Pshaw, as the World goes, to what end shou'd they be jealous.
Foh, 'tis a nasty World.
That Men of parts, great acquaintance, and quality shou'd take up with, and spend themselves and fortunes, in keeping little Play-house Creatures, foh.
Nay, that Women of understanding, great acquaintance, and good quality, shou'd fall a keeping too of little Creatures, foh.
Why, 'tis the Men of qualities fault, they never visit Women of honour, and reputation, as they us'd to do; and have not so much as common civility, for Ladies of our rank, but use us with the same indifferency, and ill breeding, as if we were all marry'd to'em.
She says true, 'tis an errant shame Women of quality shou'd be so slighted; methinks, birth, birth, shou'd go for something; I have known Men admired, courted, and followed for their titles only.
Ay, one wou'd think Men of honour shou'd not love no more, than marry out of their own rank.
Fye, fye upon'em, they are come to think cross breeding for themselves best, as well as for their Dogs, and Horses.
They are Dogs, and Horses for't.
One wou'd think if not for love, for vanity a little.
Nay, they do satisfy their vanity upon us sometimes; and are kind to us in their report, tell all the World they lye with us.
Damn'd Rascals, that we shou'd be only wrong'd by'em; to report a Man has had a Person, when he has not had a Person, is the greatest wrong in the whole World, that can be done to a person.
Well, 'tis an errant shame, Noble Persons shou'd be so wrong'd, and neglected.
But still 'tis an erranter shame for a Noble Person, to neglect her own honour, and defame her own Noble Person, with little inconsiderable Fellows, foh! --
I suppose the crime against our honour, is the same with a Man of quality as with another.
How! no sure the Man of quality is likest one's Husband, and therefore the fault shou'd be the less.
But then the pleasure shou'd be the less.
Fye, fye, fye, for shame Sister, whither shall we ramble? be continent in your discourse, or I shall hate you.
Besides an intrigue is so much the more notorious for the man's quality.
'Tis true, no body takes notice of a private Man, and therefore with him, 'tis more secret, and the crime's the less, when 'tis not known.
You say true; y faith I think you are in the right on't: 'tis not an injury to a Husband, till it be an injury to our honours; so that a Woman of honour looses no honour with a private Person; and to say truth --
So the little Fellow is grown a private Person -- with her --
But still my dear, dear Honour.
Ay, my dear, dear of honour, thou hast still so much honour in thy mouth --
That she has none elsewhere --
Oh, what d'ye mean to bring in these upon us?
Foh, these are as bad as Wits.
Foh!
Let us leave the Room.
Stay, stay, faith to tell you the naked truth.
Fye, Sir, do not use that word naked.
Well, well, in short I have business at, and cannot go to the play with you, therefore wou'd have you go --
With those two to a Play?
No, not with t'other, but with Mr., there can be no more scandal to go with him, than with Mr., or Master.
With that nasty Fellow! no -- no.
Nay, prethee Dear, hear me.
Ladies.
Stand off.
Do not approach us.
You heard with the wits, you are obscenity all over.
And I wou'd as soon look upon a Picture ofand, without fig leaves, as any of you, if I cou'd help it, therefore keep off, and do not make us sick.
What a Divel are these?
Why, these are pretenders to honour, as criticks to wit, only by censuring others; and as every raw peevish, out-of-humour'd, affected, dull, Tea-drinking, Arithmetical Fop sets up for a wit, by railing at men of sence, so these for honour, by railing at the Court, and Ladies of as great honour, as quality.
Come, Mr., I must desire you to go with these Ladies to the Play, Sir.
I! Sir.
Ay, ay, come, Sir.
I must beg your pardon, Sir, and theirs, I will not be seen in Womens Company in publick again for the World.
Ha, ha, strange Aversion!
No, he's for Womens company in private.
He -- poor Man - he! hah, ha, ha.
'Tis a greater shame amongst lew'd fellows to beseen in virtuous Womens company, than for the Women to be seen with them.
Indeed, Madam, the time was I only hated virtuous Women, but now I hate the other too; I beg your pardon Ladies.
You are very obliging, Sir, because we wou'd not be troubled with you.
In sober sadness he shall go.
Nay, if he wo'not, I am ready to wait upon the Ladies; and I think I am the fitter Man.
You, Sir, no I thank you for that -- Masteris a privileg'd Man amongst the virtuous Ladies, 'twill be a great while before you are so; heh, he, he, he's my Wive's Gallant, heh, he, he; no pray withdraw, Sir, for as I take it, the virtuous Ladies have no business with you.
And I am sure, he can have none with them: 'tis strange a Man can't come amongst virtuous Women now, but upon the same terms, as Men are admitted into the great Turks Seraglio; but Heavens keep me, from being an hombre Player with'em: but where is--
Come, come, Man; what avoid the sweet society of Woman-kind? that sweet, soft, gentle, tame, noble Creature Woman, made for Man's Companion --
So is that soft, gentle, tame, and more noble Creature a Spaniel, and has all their tricks, can fawn, lye down, suffer beating, and fawn the more; barks at your Friends, when they come to see you; makes your bed hard, gives you Fleas, and the mange sometimes: and all the difference is, the Spaniel's the more faithful Animal, and fawns but upon one Master.
Heh, he, he.
O the rude Beast.
Insolent brute.
Brute! stinking mortify'd rotten French Weather, to dare --
Hold, an't please your Ladyship; for shame Master,your Mother was a Woman -- (Now shall I never reconcile'em)
Hark you, Madam, take my advice in your anger; you know you often want one to make up your droling pack of hombre Players; and you may cheat him easily, for he's an ill Gamester, and consequently loves play: Besides you know, you have but two old civil Gentlemen (with stinking breaths too) to wait upon you abroad, take in the third, into your service; the other are but crazy: and a Lady shou'd have a supernumerary Gentleman-Usher, as a supernumerary Coach-horse, least sometimes you shou'd be forc'd to stay at home.
But are you sure he loves play, and has money?
He loves play as much as you, and has money as much as I.
Then I am contented to make him pay for his scurrillity; money makes up in a measure all other wants in Men. -- Those whom we cannot make hold for Gallants, we make fine.
So, so; now to mollify, to wheedle him, --
Masterwill you never keep civil Company, methinks 'tis time now, since you are only fit for them: Come, come, Man you must e'en fall to visiting our Wives, eating at our Tables, drinking Tea with our virtuous Relations after dinner, dealing Cards to'em, reading Plays, and Gazets to'em, picking Fleas out of their shocks for'em, collecting Receipts, New Songs, Women, Pages, and Footmen for'em.
I hope they'l afford me better employment, Sir.
Heh, he, he, 'tis fit you know your work before you come into your place; and since you are unprovided of a Lady to flatter, and a good house to eat at, pray frequent mine, and call my Wife Mistriss, and she shall call you Gallant, according to the custom.
Who I? --
Faith, thou sha't for my sake, come for my sake only.
For your sake --
Come, come, here's a Gamester for you, let himbe a little familiar sometimes; nay, what if a little rude; Gamesters may be rude with Ladies, you know.
Yes, losing Gamesters have a privilege with Women.
I alwayes thought the contrary, that the winning Gamester had most privilege with Women, for when you have lost your money to a Man, you'l loose any thing you have, all you have, they say, and he may use you as he pleases.
Heh, he, he, well, win or loose you shall have your liberty with her.
As he behaves himself; and for your sake I'll give him admittance and freedom.
All sorts of freedom, Madam?
Ay, ay, ay, all sorts of freedom thou can'st take, and so go to her, begin thy new employment; wheedle her, jest with her, and be better acquainted one with another.
I think I know her already, therefore may venter with her, my secret for hers --
Sister, I have provided an innocent Play-fellow for you there.
Who he!
There's a Play-fellow indeed.
Yes sure, what he is good enough to play at Cards, Blind-mans buff, or the fool with sometimes.
Foh, we'l have no such Play-fellows.
No, Sir, you shan't choose Play-fellows for us, we thank you.
Nay, pray hear me.
But, poor Gentleman, cou'd you be so generous? so truly a Man of honour, as for the sakes of us Women of honour, to cause your self to be reported no Man? No Man! and to suffer your self the greatest shame that cou'd fall upon a Man, that none might fall upon us Women by your conversation; but indeed, Sir, as perfectly, perfectly, the same Man as before your going into, Sir; as perfectly, perfectly, Sir.
As perfectly, perfectly, Madam; nay, I scorn you shou'd take my word; I desire to be try'd only, Madam.
Well, that's spoken again like a Man of honour, all Men of honour desire to come to the test: But indeed, generally you Men report such things of your selves, one does not know how, or whom to believe; and it is come to that pass, we dare not take your words, no more than your Taylors, without some staid Servant of yours be bound with you; but I have so strong a faith in your honour, dear, dear, noble Sir, that I'd forfeit mine for yours at any time, dear Sir.
No, Madam, you shou'd not need to forfeit it for me, I have given you security already to save you harmless my late reputation being so well known in the World, Madam.
But if upon any future falling out, or upon a suspition of my taking the trust out of your hands, to employ some other, you your self shou'd betray your trust, dear Sir; I mean, if you'l give me leave to speak obscenely, you might tell, dear Sir.
If I did, no body wou'd believe me; the reputation of impotency is as hardly recover'd again in the World, as that of cowardise, dear Madam.
Nay then, as one may say, you may do your worst, dear, dear, Sir.
Come, is your Ladyship reconciled to him yet? have you agreed on matters? for I must be gone to.
Why, indeed, Sir, Masteris a thousand, thousand times a better Man, than I thought him: Cosen, Sister, I can name him now, truly not long ago you know, I thought his very name obscenity, and I wou'd as soon have lain with him, as have nam'd him.
Very likely, poor Madam.
I believe it.
No doubt on't.
Well, well -- that your Ladyship is as virtuous as any she, -- I know, and him all the Town knows -- heh, he,he; therefore now you like him, get you gone to your business together; go, go, to your business, I say, pleasure, whilst I go to my pleasure, business.
Come than dear Gallant.
Come away, my dearest Mistriss.
So, so, why 'tis as I'd have it.
And as I'd have it.
Sister, what ailes you, you are grown melancholy?
Wou'd it not make any one melancholy, to see you go every day fluttering about abroad, whil'st I must stay at home like a poor lonely, sullen Bird in a cage?
Ay, Sister, but you came young, and just from the nest to your cage, so that I thought you lik'd it; and cou'd be as chearful in't, as others that took their flight themselves early, and are hopping abroad in the open Air.
Nay, I confess I was quiet enough, till my Husband told me, what pure lives, theLadies live abroad, with their dancing, meetings, and junketings, and drest every day in their best gowns; and I warrant you, play at nine Pins every day of the week, so they do.
Come, what's here to do? you are putting the Town pleasures in her head, and setting her a longing.
Yes, after Nine-pins; you suffer none to give her those longings, you mean, but your self.
I tell her of the vanities of the Town like a Confessor.
A Confessor! just such a Confessor, as he that by forbidding a silly Oastler to grease the Horses teeth, taught him to do't.
Come Mistriss, good Precepts are lost, when bad Examples are still before us; the liberty you take abroad makes her hanker after it; and out of humour at home, poor Wretch! she desired not to come to, I wou'd bring her.
Very well.
She has been this week in Town, and never desired, till this afternoon, to go abroad.
Was she not at a Play yesterday?
Yes, but she ne'er ask'd me; I was my self the cause of her going.
Then if she ask you again, you are the cause of her asking, and not my example.
Well, to morrow night I shall be rid of you; and the next day before 'tis light, she and I'll be rid of the Town, and my dreadful apprehensions: Come, be not melancholly, for thou sha't go into the Country after to morrow, Dearest.
Great comfort.
Pish, what d'ye tell me of the Country for?
How's this! what, pish at the Country?
Let me alone, I am not well.
O, if that be all -- what ailes my dearest?
Truly I don't know; but I have not been well, since you told me there was a Gallant at the Play in love with me.
Ha --
That's by my example too.
Nay, if you are not well, but are so concern'd. because a lew'd Fellow chanc'd to lye, and say he lik'd you, you'l make me sick too.
Of what sickness?
O, of that which is worse than the Plague, Jealousy.
Pish, you jear, I'm sure there's no such disease in our Receipt-book at home.
No, thou never met'st with it, poor Innocent -- well, if thou Cuckold me, 'twill be my own fault -- for Cuckolds and Bastards, are generally makers of their own fortune.
Well, but pray Bud, let's go to a Play to night.
'Tis just done, she comes from it; but why are you so eager to see a Play?
Faith Dear, not that I care one pin for their talk there; but I like to look upon the Player-men, and wou'd see, if I cou'd, the Gallant you say loves me; that's all dear Bud.
Is that all dear Bud?
This proceeds from my example.
But if the Play be done, let's go abroad however, dear Bud.
Come have a little patience, and thou shalt go into the Country on Friday.
Therefore I wou'd see first some sights, to tell my Neighbours of. Nay, I will go abroad, that's once.
I'm the cause of this desire too.
But now I think on't, who was the cause ofcoming to my Lodging to day? that was you.
No, you, because you wou'd not let him see your handsome Wife out of your Lodging.
Why, O Lord! did the Gentleman come hither to see me indeed?
No, no; -- You are not cause of that damn'd question too, Mistriss? -- (Well she's in the right of it; he is in love with my Wife -- and comes after her -- 'tis so -- but I'll nip his love in the bud; least he should follow us into the Country, and break his Chariot-wheel near our house, on purpose for an excuse to come to't; but I think I know the Town.
Come, pray Bud, let's go abroad before 'tis late; for I will go, that's flat and plain.
So! the obstinacy already of a Town-wife, and I must, whilst she's here, humour her like one.
Sister, how shall we do, that she may not be seen, or known?
Let her put on her Mask.
Pshaw, a Mask makes People but the more inquisitive, and is as ridiculous a disguise, as a stage-beard; her shape, stature, habit will be known: and if we shou'd meet with, he wou'd be sure to take acquaintance with us, must wish her joy, kiss her, talk to her, leer upon her, and the Devil and all; no I'll not use her to a Mask, 'tis dangerous; for Masks have made more Cuckolds, than the best faces that ever were known.
How will you do then?
Nay, shall we go? thewill be shut, and I have a mind to see that.
So -- I have it -- I'll dress her up in the Suit, we are to carry down to her Brother, little Sir; nay, I understand the Town tricks: Come let's go dress her; a Mask! no -- a Woman mask'd, like a cover'd Dish, gives a Man curiosity, and appetite, when it may be, uncover'd, 'twou'd turn his stomack; no, no.
Indeed your comparison is something a greasie one: but I had a gentle Gallant, us'd to say, a Beauty mask'd, lik'd the Sun in Eclipse, gathers together more gazers, than if it shin'd out.
Engag'd to Women, and not Sup with us?
Ay, a Pox on'em all.
You were much a more reasonable Man in the morning, and had as noble resolutions against'em, as a Widdower of a weeks liberty.
Did I ever think, to see you keep company with Women in vain.
In vain! no -- 'tis, since I can't love'em, to be reveng'd on'em.
Now your Sting is gone, you look'd in the Box amongst all those Women, like a drone in the hive, all upon you; shov'd and ill-us'd by'em all, and thrust from one side to t'other.
Yet he must be buzzing amongst'em still, like other old beetle-headed, lycorish drones; avoid'em, and hate'em as they hate you.
Because I do hate'em, and wou'd hate'em yet more, I'll frequent'em; you may see by Marriage, nothing makes a Man hate a Woman more, than her constant conversation: In short, I converse with'em, as you do with rich Fools, to laugh at'em, and use'em ill.
But I wou'd no more Sup with Women, unless I cou'd lye with'em, than Sup with a rich Coxcomb, unless I cou'd cheat him.
Yes, I have known thee Sup with a Fool, for his drinking, if he cou'd set out your hand that way only, you were satisfy'd; and if he were a Wine-swallowing mouth 'twas enough.
Yes, a Man drink's often with a Fool, as he tosses with a Marker, only to keep his hand in Ure; but do the Ladies drink?
Yes, Sir, and I shall have the pleasure at least of laying'em flat with a Bottle; and bring as much scandal that way upon'em, as formerly t'other.
Perhaps you may prove as weak a Brother amongst'em that way, as t'other.
Foh, drinking with Women, is as unnatural, as scolding with'em; but 'tis a pleasure of decay'd Fornicators, and the basest way of quenching Love.
Nay, 'tis drowning Love, instead of quenching it; but leave us for civil Women too!
Ay, when he can't be the better for'em; we hardly pardon a Man, that leaves his Friend for a Wench, and that's a pretty lawful call.
Faith, I wou'd not leave you for'em, if they wou'd not drink.
Who wou'd disappoint his Company at, for a Gossiping?
Foh, Wine and Women good apart, together as nauseous as Sack and Sugar: But hark you, Sir, before you go, a little of your advice, an old maim'd General, when unfit for action is fittest for Counsel; I have other designs upon Women, than eating and drinking with them: I am inlove withMistriss, whom he is to marry to morrow, now how shall I get her?
Why, here comes one will help you to her.
He! he, I tell you, is my Rival, and will hinder my love.
No, a foolish Rival, and a jealous Husband assist their Rivals designs; for they are sure to make their Women hate them, which is the first step to their love, for another Man.
But I cannot come near his Mistriss, but in his company.
Still the better for you, for Fools are most easily cheated, when they themselves are accessaries; and he is to be bubled of his Mistriss, as of his Money, the common Mistriss, by keeping him company.
Who is that, that is to be bubled? Faith let me snack, I han't met with a buble since Christmas: gad; I think bubles are like their Brother Woodcocks, go out with the cold weather.
A Pox, he did not hear all I hope.
Come, you bubling Rogues you, where do we sup -- Oh,, my Mistriss tells me, you have been making fierce love to her all the Play long, hah, ha -- but I --
I make love to her?
Nay, I forgive thee; for I think I know thee, and I know her, but I am sure I know my self.
Did she tell you so? I see all Women are like these of the, who to enhance the price of their commodities, report to their fond Customers offers which were never made'em.
Ay, Women are as apt to tell before the intrigue, as Men after it, and so shew themselves the vainer Sex; but hast thou a Mistriss,? 'tis as hard for me to believe it, as that thou ever hadst a buble, as you brag'd just now.
O your Servant, Sir; are you at your raillery, Sir? but we were some of us beforehand with you to day at thePlay: the Wits were something bold with you, Sir: did you not hear us laugh?
Yes, But I thought you had gone to Plays, to laugh at the Poets wit, not at your own.
Your Servant, Sir, no I thank you; gad I go to a Play as to a Country-treat, I carry my own wine to one, and my own wit to t'other, or else I'm sure I shou'd not be merry at either; and the reason why we are so often lowder, than the Players, is, because we think we speak more wit, and so become the Poets Rivals in his audience: for to tell you the truth, we hate the silly Rogues; nay, so much that we find fault even with their Bawdy upon the Stage, whilst we talk nothing else in the Pit as lowd.
But, why should'st thou hate the silly Poets, thou hast too much wit to be one, and they like Whores are only hated by each other; and thou dost scorn writing, I'am sure.
Yes, I'd have you to know, I scorn writing; but Women, Women, that make Men do all foolish things, make'em write Songs too; every body does it: 'tis ev'n as common with Lovers, as playing with fans; and you can no more help Rhyming to your, than drinking to your.
Nay, Poetry in love is no more to be avoided, than jealousy.
But the Poets damn'd your Songs, did they?
Damn the Poets, they turn'd'em into Burlesque, as they call it; that Burlesque is a, they have got, which by the virtue of,, they make a wise and witty Man in the World, a Fool upon the Stage you know not how; and 'tis therefore I hate'em too, for I know not but it may be my own case; for they'l put a Man into a Play for looking a Squint: Their Predecessors were contented to make Serving-men only their Stage-Fools, but these Rogues must have Gentlemen, with a Pox to'em, nay Knights: and indeed you shall hardly see a Fool upon the Stage, but he's a Knight; and to tell you the truth, they have kept me these six years from being a Knight in earnest, for fear of being knighted in a Play, and dubb'd a Fool.
Blame'em not, they must follow their Copy, the Age.
But why should'st thou be afraid of being in a Play, who expose your self every day in the Play-houses, and as publick Places.
'Tis but being on the Stage, instead of standing on a Bench in the Pit.
Don't you give money to Painters to draw you like? and are you afraid of your Pictures, at length in a Play-house, where all your Mistresses may see you.
A Pox, Painters don't draw the Small Pox, or Pimples in ones face; come damn all your silly Authors whatever, all Books and Booksellers, by the World, and all Readers, courteous or uncourteous.
But, who comes here,?
Oh hide me, there's my Mistriss too.
She sees you.
But I will not see her, 'tis time to go to, and I must not fail the drawing Room.
Pray, first carry me, and reconcile me to her.
Another time, faith the King will have sup't.
Not with the worse stomach for thy absence; thou art one of those Fools, that think their attendance at the King's Meals, as necessary as his Physicians, when you are more troublesom to him, than his Doctors, or his Dogs.
Pshaw, I know my interest, Sir, prethee hide me.
Your Servant,, -- what he knows us not --
Come along.
Pray, have you any Ballads, give me six-penny worth?
We have no Ballads.
Then give me, and a Play or two -- Oh here'sWiles, and the Slighted Maiden, I'll have them.
No, Playes are not for your reading; come along, will you discover your self?
Who is that pretty Youth with him,?
I believe his Wife's Brother, because he's something like her, but I never saw her but once.
Extreamly handsom, I have seen a face like it too; let us follow'em.
Come,, your Mistriss saw you, and will be angry you go not to her; besides I wou'd fain be reconcil'd to her, which none but you can do, dear Friend.
Well that's a better reason, dear Friend; I wou'd not go near her now, for her's, or my own sake, but I can deny you nothing; for though I have known thee a great while, never go, if I do not love thee, as well as a new Acquaintance.
I am oblig'd to you indeed, dear Friend, I wou'd be well with her only, to be well with thee still; for these tyes to Wives usually dissolve all tyes to Friends: I wou'd be contented, she shou'd enjoy you a nights, but I wou'd have you to my self a dayes, as I have had, dear Friend.
And thou shalt enjoy me a dayes, dear, dear Friend, never stir; and I'll be divorced from her, sooner than from thee; come along --
So we are hard put to't, when we make our Rival our Procurer; but neither she, nor her Brother, wou'd let me come near her now: when all's done, a Rival is the best cloak to steal to a Mistress under, without suspicion; and when we have once got to her as we desire, we throw him off like other Cloaks.
Sister, if you will not go, we must leave you --
The Fool her Gallant, and she, will muster up all the youngsanterers of this place, and they will leave their dear Seamstresses to follow us; what a swarm of Cuckolds, and Cuckold-makers are here?
Come let's be gone Mistriss.
Don't you believe that, I han't half my belly full of sights yet.
Then walk this way.
Lord, what a power of brave signs are here! stay -- the Bull's-head, the Rams-head, and the Stags-head, Dear --
Nay, if every Husbands proper sign here were visible, they wou'd be all alike.
What d'ye mean by that, Bud?
'Tis no matter -- no matter, Bud.
Pray tell me; nay, I will know.
They wou'd be all Bulls, Stags, and Rams heads.
Come, dear Madam, for my sake you shall be reconciled to him.
For your sake I hate him.
That's something too cruel, Madam, to hate me for his sake.
Ay indeed, Madam, too, too cruel to me, to hate my Friend for my sake.
I hate him because he is your Enemy; and you ought to hate him too, for making love to me, if you love me.
That's a good one, I hate a Man for loving you; if he did love you, 'tis but what he can't help, and 'tis your fault not his, if he admires you: I hate a Man for being of my opinion, I'll ne'er do't, by the World.
Is it for your honour or mine, to suffer a Man to make love to me, who am to marry you to morrow?
Is it for your honour or mine, to have me jealous? That he makes love to you, is a sign you are handsome; and that I am not jealous, is a sign you are virtuous, that I think is for your honour.
But 'tis your honour too, I am concerned for.
But why, dearest Madam, will you be more concern'd for his honour, than he is himself; let his honour alone for my sake, and his, he, he, has no honour --
How's that?
But what, my dear Friend can guard himself.
O ho -- that's right again.
Your care of his honour argues his neglect of it, which is no honour to my dear Friend here; therefore once more, let his honour go which way it will, dear Madam.
Ay, ay, were it for my honour to marry a Woman, whose virtue I suspected, and cou'd not trust her in a Friends hands?
Are you not afraid to loose me?
He afraid to loose you, Madam! No, no -- you may see how the most estimable, and most glorious Creature in the World, is valued by him; will you not see it?
Right, honest, I have that noble value for her, that I cannot be jealous of her.
You mistake him, he means you care not for me, nor who has me.
Lord, Madam, I see you are jealous; will you wrest a poor Mans meaning from his words?
You astonish me, Sir, with your want of jealousie.
And you make me guiddy, Madam, with your jealousie, and fears, and virtue, and honour; gad. I see virtue makes a Woman as troublesome, as a little reading, or learning.
Monstrous!
(Well to see what easie Husbands these Women of quality can meet with, a poor Chamber-maid can never have such Lady-like luck; besides he's thrown away upon her, she'l make no use of her fortune, her blessing, none to a Gentleman, for a pure Cuckold, for it requires good breeding to be a Cuckold.
I tell you then plainly, he pursues me to marry me.
Pshaw --
Come, Madam, you see you strive in vain to make him jealous of me; my dear Friend is the kindest Creature in the World to me.
Poor fellow.
But his kindness only is not enough for me, without your favour; your good opinion, dear Madam, 'tis that must perfect my happiness: good Gentleman he believes all I say, wou'd you wou'd do so, jealous of me! I wou'd not wrong him nor you for the World.
Look you there; hear him, hear him, and do not walk away so.
I love you, Madam, so --
How's that! Nay -- now you begin to go too far indeed.
So much I confess, I say I love you, that I wou'd not have you miserable, and cast your self away upon so unworthy, and inconsiderable a thing, as what you see here,
No faith, I believe thou woud'st not, now his meaning is plain: but I knew before thou woud'st not wrong me nor her.
No, no, Heavens forbid, the glory of her Sex shou'd fall so low as into the embraces of such a contemptible Wretch, the last of Mankind -- my dear Friend here -- I injure him.
Very well.
No, no, dear Friend, I knew it Madam, you see he will rather wrong himself than me, in giving himself such names.
Do not you understand him yet?
Yes, how modestly he speaks of himself, poor Fellow.
Methinks he speaks impudently of your self, since -- before your self too, insomuch that I can no longer suffer his scurrilous abusiveness to you, no more than his love to me.
Nay, nay, Madam, pray stay, his love to you: Lord, Madam, has he not spoke yet plain enough?
Yes indeed, I shou'd think so.
Well then, by the World, a Man can't speak civilly to a Woman now, but presently she says, he makes love to her: Nay, Madam, you shall stay, with your pardon, since you have not yet understood him, till he has made an eclaircisment of his love to you, that is what kind of love it is; answer to thy Catechisme: Friend, do you love my Mistriss here?
Yes, I wish she wou'd not doubt it.
But how do you love her?
With all my Soul.
I thank him, methinks he speaks plain enough now.
You are out still.
But with what kind of love,?
With the best, and truest love in the World.
Look you there then, that is with no matrimonial love, I'm sure.
How's that, do you say matrimonial love is not best?
Gad, I went too far e're I was aware: But speak for thy self, you said you wou'd not wrong me, nor her.
No, no, Madam, e'n take him for Heaven's sake.
Look you there, Madam.
Who shou'd in all justice be yours, he that loves you most.
Look you there, Mr., who's that?
Who shou'd it be? go on.
Who loves you more than Women, Titles, or fortune Fools.
Look you there, he means me stil, for he points at me.
Ridiculous!
Who can only match your Faith, and constancy in love.
Ay.
Who knows, if it be possible, how to value so much beauty and virtue.
Ay.
Whose love can no more be equall'd in the world, than that Heavenly form of yours.
No --
Who cou'd no more suffer a Rival, than your absence, and yet cou'd no more suspect your virtue, than his own constancy in his love to you.
No --
Who in fine loves you better than his eyes, that first made him love you.
Ay -- nay, Madam, faith you shan't go, till --
Have a care, lest you make me stay too long --
But till he has saluted you; that I may be assur'd you are friends, after his honest advice and declaration: Come pray, Madam, be friends with him.
You must pardon me, Sir, that I am not yet so obedient to you.
What, invite your Wife to kiss Men? Monstrous, are you not asham'd? I will never forgive you.
Are you not asham'd, that I shou'd have more confidence in the chastity of your Family, than you have; you must not teach me, I am a man of honour, Sir, though I am frank and free; I am frank, Sir --
Very frank, Sir, to share your Wife with your friends.
He is an humble, menial Friend, such as reconciles the differences of the Marriage-bed; you know Man and Wife do not alwayes agree, I design him for that use, therefore wou'd have him well with my Wife.
A menial Friend -- you will get a great many menial Friends, by shewing your Wife as you do.
What then, it may be I have a pleasure in't, as I have to shew fine Clothes, at a Play-house the first day, and count money before poor Rogues.
He that shews his wife, or money will be in danger of having them borrowed sometimes.
I love to be envy'd, and wou'd not marry a Wife, that I alone cou'd love; loving alone is as dull, as eating alone; is it not a frank age, and I am a frank Person? and to tell you the truth, it may be I love to have Rivals in a Wife, they make her seem to a Man still, but as a kept Mistriss; and so good night, for I must to. Madam, I hope you are now reconcil'd to my Friend; and so I wish you a good night, Madam, and sleep if you can, for to morrow you know I must visit you early with a Canonical Gentleman. Good night dear.
Madam, I hope you will not refuse my visit to morrow, if it shou'd be earlyer, with a Canonical Gentleman, than Mr..
This Gentle-woman is yet under my care, therefore you must yet forbear your freedom with her, Sir.
Must, Sir --
Yes, Sir, she is my Sister.
'Tis well she is, Sir -- for I must be her Servant, Sir. Madam --
Come away Sister, we had been gone, if it had 
not been for you, and so avoided these lewd Rakehells, who 
seem to haunt us.