?
?
Sir, I perceive, by the Book in my hand, that I am Condemned to die, and after that to come to Judgement; and I find that I am not willing to do the first, nor able to do the second.
Why not willing to die? since this life is attended with so many evils?
Because I fear that this burden that is upon my back, will sinck me lower then the Grave, and I shall fall into. And Sir, if I be not fit to go to Prison, I am not fit (I am sure) to go to Judgement, and from thence to Execution; And the thoughts of these things make me cry.
If this be thy condition, why standest thou still?
Because I know notwhither to go.
Whither must I fly?
Do you see yonder?
No.
Do you see yonder shining light?
I think I do.
Keep that light in your eye, and go up directly thereto, so shalt thou see the Gate; at which when thou knockest, it shall be told thee what thou shalt do.
Life, Life, Eternal Life:
Neighbours,?
To perswade you to go back with us;
That can by no means be: You dwell,
in the City of(the place also where I was born,) I see it to be so; and dying there, sooner or later, you will sink lower then the Grave, into a place that burns with Fire and Brimstone; Be content good Neighbours, and go along with me.!
! Yes,
because that all is not worthy to be compared with a little of that that I am seeking to enjoy,and if you will go along with me, you shall fare as I my self; for there where I go, is enough, and to spare; Come away, and prove my words.
I seek an; and it is laid up in Heaven, and fast there, to be bestowed at the time appointed, on them that diligently seek it.
,
?
No, not I, said the other; because I have laid my hand to the Plow.
Pliable,.
Then said, Don't revile; if what the goodsays is true, the things he looks after, are better then ours: my heart inclines to go with my Neighbour.
Come with me Neighbour; there are such things to be had which I spoke of, and many more Glories besides; If you believe not me, read here in this Book; and for the truth of what is exprest therein, behold all is confirmed by the blood of him that made it.
Obstinate
?
I am directed by a man whose name is, to speed me to a little Gate that is before us, where we shall receive instruction about the way.
,
And I will go back to my place,
I will be no Companion of such miss-led, fantastical Fellows.
Come Neighbour, how do you do? I am glad you are perswaded to go along with me; and had evenhimself, but felt what I have felt of the Powers and Terrours of what is yet unseen, he would not thus lightly have given us the back.
Christian,?
I can better conceive of them with my Mind, then speak of them with my Tongue: But yet since you are desirous to know, I will read of them in my Book.
Yes verily, for it was made by him that cannot lye.
There is an endless Kingdomto be Inhabited, and everlasting life to be given us; that we may Inhabit that Kingdom for ever.
There are Crowns of Glory to be given us; and Garments that will make us shine like the Sun in the Firmament of Heaven.
There shall be no more crying, nor sorrow; For he that is owner of the places, will wipe all tears from our eyes.
There we shall be with, and, Creatures that will dazle your eyes to look on them: There also you shall meet with thousands, and ten thousands that have gone before us to that place; none of them are hurtful, but loving, and holy: every one walking in the sight of God; and standing in his presence with acceptance for ever: In a word, there we shall see the Elders with their Golden Crowns: There we shall see the Holy Virgins with their Golden Harps. There weshall see Men that by the World were cut in pieces, burned in flames, eaten of Beasts, drownded in the Seas, for the love that they bare to the Lord of the place; all well, and cloathed with Immortality, as with a Garment.
The Lord, the Governour of that Countrey, hath Recordedin this Book: The substance of which is, If we be truly willing to have it, he will bestow it upon us freely.
I cannot go so fast as I would, by reason of this burden that is upon my back.
Christian,?
Truly,
I do not know.
Sir,
I was directed this way by a Man called; who directed me also to yonder Gate, that I might escape the wrath to come: And as I was going thither, I fell in here.
followed me so hard, that I fled the next way, and fell in.
:
Sir, Wherefore, since over this place, is the way from the City of, to yonder Gate, is it, thatPlat is not mended, that poor Travellers might go thither with more security?
thisis such a place as cannot be mended: It is the descent whither the scum and filth that attends conviction for sin,dothcontinually run, and therefore is it called the: for still as the sinner is awakened about his lost condition, there ariseth in his soul many fears, and doubts, and discouraging apprehensions, which all of them get together, and settle in this place: And this is the reason of the badness of this ground. It is not the pleasure of the King, that this place should remain so bad; his Labourers also, have by the direction of His Majesties Surveyors, been for above these sixteen hundred years, imploy'd about this patch of ground, if perhaps it might have been mended: yea, and to my knowledge,
hath been swallowed up, at least Twenty thousand Cart Loads; Yea Millions of wholesom Instructions, that have at all seasons been brought from all places of the Kings Dominions; (and they that can tell, say, they are the best Materials to make good ground of the place;) If so be it might have been mended, but it is thestill; and so will be, when they have done what they can. True, there are by the direction ofthe Law-giver, certain good and substantiall Steps, placed even through the very midst of this; but at such time as this place doth much spue out its filth, as it doth against change of weather, these steps are hardly seen; or if they be, Men through the diziness of their heads, step besides; and then they are bemired to purpose, notwithstanding the steps be there; but the ground is good when they are once got in at the Gate.
Surely since you began to venture, I would not have been so base to have given out for a few difficulties.
Here is a poor burdened sinner, I come from the City of, but am going to Mount, that I may be delivered from the wrath to come; I would therefore, Sir, since I am informed that by this Gate is the way thither, know if you areto let me in.
I amwith all my heart,
what means that?
a little distance from this Gate, there is erected a strong Castle, of whichis the Captain: from thence both he, and them that are with him Shoot Arrows at those that come up to this Gate; if happily they may dye before they can enter in.
I rejoyce and tremble.
bid me come hither and knock, (as I did;) And he said, that you, Sir, would tell me what I must do.
Now I begin to reap the benefits of my hazzards.
Because none of my Neighbours saw their danger as I saw mine.
Yes, my Wife and Children saw me at the first, and called after me to turn again: Also some of myNeighbours stood crying, and calling after me to return; but I put my Fingers in mine Ears, and so came on my way.
Yes, both, and: But when they saw that they could not prevail,went railing back; butcame with me a little way.
We indeed came both together, until we came at the Slow of, into the which, we also suddenly fell. And then was my Neighbourdiscouraged, and would not adventure further. Wherefore getting out again, on that side next to his own House; he told me, I should possess the brave Countrey alone for him: So he went his way, and I came mine.after, and I to this Gate.
Alas poor Man, is the Caelestial Glory of so small esteem with him, that he counteth it not worth running the hazards of a few difficulties to obtain it. Well, good, comea little way with me, and I will teach thee about the way thou must go. Look before thee; dost thou see this narrow way? That is the way thou must go. It was cast up by the Patriarchs, Prophets, Christ, his Apostles; and it is as straight as a Rule can make it: This is the way thou must go.
But
?
Yes, there are many waysdown upon this; and they are Crooked, and Wide: Butthou may'st distinguish the right from the wrong,only being straight and narrow.
As to the burden, be content to bear it, untill thou comest to the place of Deliverance; for there it will fall from thy back it self.
Sir, here is a Travailer, who was bid by an acquaintance of the Good-man of this House, to call here for my profit: I would therefore speak with the Master of the House:
Sir,
I am a Man that am come from the City of, and am going to the Mount, and I was told by the Man that stands at the Gate, at the head of this way; that if I called here, you would shew me excellentthings. Such as would be an help to me in my Journey.
Come in, I will shew thee that which will be profitable to thee.
?
The Man whose Picture this is, is one of a thousand, he can beget Children, Travel in birth with Children, and Nurse them himself, when they are born. And whereas thou seest him with eyes lift up to Heaven, the best of Books in his hand, and the Law of Truth writ on his lips: it is to shew thee, that his work is to know, and unfold dark thingsto sinners; even as also thou seest him stand as if he Pleaded with Men: And whereas thou seest the World as cast behind him, and that a Crown hangs over his head; that is, to shew thee that slighting and despising the things that are present, for the love that he hath to his Masters service, he is sure in the World that comes next to have Glory for his Reward: Now,
I have shewed thee this Picture, first, because the Man whose Picture this is, is the only Man, whom the Lord of the Place whither thou art going, hath Authorized, to be thy Guide in all difficult places thou mayest meet with in the way: wherefore take good heed to what I have shewed thee, and bear well in thy mind what thou hast seen; lest in thy Journey, thou meet with some that pretend to lead thee right, but their way goes down to death.
Bring hither Water, and sprinkle the Room;
?
this Parlor is the heart of a Man that was never sanctified by the sweet Grace of the Gospel: The, is his Original Sin, and inward Corruptions that have defiled the whole Man; He that began to sweep at first, is the Law; but She that brought water, and did sprinkle it, is the Gospel: Now, whereas thou sawest that so soon as the first began to sweep, the dust did so fly about that the Room by him could not be cleansed, but that thou wast almost choaked therewith. This is to shew thee, that the Law, instead of cleansing the heart (by its working) from sin, doth revive, put strength into, and increase it in the soul, as it dothdiscover and forbid it, but doth not give power to subdue. Again, as thou sawest thesprinkle the Room with Water, upon which it was cleansed with pleasure: This is to shew thee, that when the Gospel comes in the sweet and precious influences thereof to the heart, then I say, even as thou sawest the Damsel lay the dust by sprinkling the Floor with Water, so is sin vanquished and subdued, and the soul made clean, through the Faith of it; and consequently fit for the King of Glory to inhabit.
What is the reason of the discontent of?
The Governour of them would have him stay for his best things till the beginning of the next year; but he will have all now: Butis willing to wait.
.
These two Lads are Figures;, of the Men ofWorld; and, of the Men ofwhich is to come: For as here thou seest,, this year; that is to say, inWorld;are the Men of this World: they must have all their good things now, they cannot stay till next; that is, untill theWorld, for their Portion of good. That Proverb,, is of more Authority with them, then are all the Divine Testimonies of the good of the World to come. But as thou sawest, that he had quickly lavished all away, and had presently left him, nothing butRaggs; So will it be with all such Men at the end of this World.
PatienceHis,.
Nay, you may add another; to wit, The glory of theWorld will never wear out; but these are suddenly gone. Thereforehad not so much reason to laugh at, because he had his good things first, aswill have to laugh at, because he had his best things; formust give place to, becausemust have his time to come, butgives place to; for there is not another to succeed: he therefore that hath his Portion, must needs have a time to spend it; but he that has his Portion, must have it lastingly. Therefore it is said ofLazarus.
now;come.
You say the Truth;Temporal;Eternal: But though this be so; yet since things present, and our fleshly appetite,; and again, because things to come, and carnal sense, are such strangers one to another: therefore it is, that the first of these so suddenly fall into, and thatis so continued between the second.
?
This fire is the work of Grace that is wrought in the heart; he that casts Water upon it, to extinguish and put it out, is the: but in that thouseest the fire notwithstanding burn higher and hotter, thou shalt also see the reason of that:
?
This is, who continually with the Oyl of his Grace, maintains the work already begun in the heart; By the means of which, notwithstanding what the Devil can do, the souls of his People prove gracious still. And in that thou sawest, that the Man stood behind the Wall to maintain the fire; this is to teach thee, that it is hard for the tempted to see how this work of Grace is maintained in the soul.
I think verily I know the meaning of this. Now,
let me go hence: Nay stay
till I have shewed thee a little more, and after that thou shalt go on thy way.
What means this?
?
.
I was once a fair and flourishing Professor, both in mine own eyes, and also in the eyes of others: I once was, as I thought, fair for the Coelestial City, and had then even joy at the thoughts that I should get thither.
I ama Man of Despair, and am shut up in it, as in this Iron Cage. I cannot get out; OI cannot.
I left off to watch, and be sober; I laid the reins upon the neck of my lusts; I sinned against the light of the Word, and the goodness of God: I have grieved the Spirit, and he is gone; I tempted the Devil, and he is come to me; I have provoked God to anger, and he has left me; I have so hardened my heart, that I cannot repent.
But is there no hopes for such a Man as this? Ask him,
Nay,
pray Sir, do you.
?
No, none at all.
I have Crucified him to my self, a fresh. I have despised his Person, I have despised his Righteousness, I have counted his Blood an unholy thing, I have done despite to the Spirit of Grace: Therefore I have shut my self out of all the Promises; and there now remains to me nothing but threatnings, dreadful threatnings, faithful threatnings of certain Judgement, which shall devour me as an Adversary.
For the Lusts, Pleasures, and Profits of this World; in the injoyment of which, I did then promise my self much delight: but now even every one of those things also bite me, and gnaw me like a burning worm.
God hath denied me repentance; his Word gives me no encouragement to believe; yea, himself hath shut me up in this Iron Cage; nor can all the men in the World let me out. O Eternity! Eternity! how shall I grapple with the misery that I must meet with in Eternity!
Let this mans misery be remembred by thee, and be an everlasting caution to thee.
Well,
this is fearful; God help me to watch and be sober; and to pray, that I may shun the causes of this mans misery. Sir, is it not time for me to go on my way now?
Tarry till I shall shew thee one thing more, and then thou shalt go on thy way.
Why doth this Man thus tremble?
This night as I was in my sleep, I Dreamed, and behold the Heavens grew exceeding black; also it thundred and lightned in most fearful wise, that it put me into an Agony. So I looked up in my Dream, and saw the Clouds rack at an unusual rate; upon which I heard a great sound of a Trumpet, and saw also a Man sit upon a Cloud, attended with the thousands of Heaven; they were all in flaming fire, also the Heavens was on a burning flame. I heard then a voice, saying,; and with that, the Rocks rent, the Graves opened, & the Dead that were therein, came forth; some of them were exceeding glad, and looked upward; and some sought to hide themselves under the Mountains: Then I saw the Man that sat upon the Cloud, open the Book; and bid the World draw near. Yet there was by reason of a Fiery flame that issued out and came from before him, a convenient distance betwixt him and them, as betwixt the Judge and the Prisoners at the Bar. I heard it also proclaimedto them that attended on the Man that sat on the Cloud;; and with that, the Bottomless pit opened, just whereabout I stood; out of the mouth of which there came in an abundant manner Smoak, and Coals of fire, with hideous noises. It was also said to the same persons;. And with that I saw many catch't up and carried away into the Clouds, but I was left behind. I also sought to hide my self, but I could not; for the Man that sat upon the Cloud, still kept his eye upon me: my sins also came into mind, and my Conscience did accuse me on every side. Upon this I awaked from my sleep.
Why I thought that the day of Judgement was come, and that I was not ready for it: but this frighted me most, that the Angels gathered up several, and left me behind; also the pit of Hell opened her mouth just where I stood: my Conscience too within afflicted me; and as I thought,the Judge had always his eye upon me, shewing indignation in his countenance.
?
Yes, and they put me inand.
Well, keep all things so in thy mind, that they may be as ain thy sides, to prick thee forward in the way thou must go.
The Comforter be always with thee good, to guide thee in the way that leads to the City.
.
You are like them that sleep on the top of a Mast, for the dead Sea is under you, a Gulf that hath no bottom: Awake therefore and come away, be willing also, and I will help you off with your Irons.
If he that goeth about like a roaring Lion comes by, you will certainly become a prey to his teeth.
;
:
?
We were born in the Land of Vain-glory, and are going for praise to Mount.
,
?
And besides,
so be we get into the way, what's matter which way we get in; if we are in, we are in: thou art but in the way, who, as we perceive, came in at the Gate; and we are also in the way, that cametumbling over the wall: Wherein now is thy condition better then ours?
I walk by the Rule of my Master, you walk by the rude working of your fancies. You are counted thieves already, by the Lord of the way; therefore I doubt you will not be found true men at the end of the way. You come in by your selves without his direction; and shall go out by your selves without his mercy.
Therefore
We see not wherein thou differest from us, but by the Coat that is on thy back, which was, as we tro, given thee by some of thy Neighbours, to hide the shame of thy nakedness.
By Laws and Ordinances, you will not be saved, since you came not in by the door. And as for this Coat that is on my back, it was givenme by the Lord of the place whither I go; and that, as you say, to cover my nakedness with. And I take it as a token of his kindness to me, for I had nothing but rags before. And besides, thus I comfort my self as I go: Surely, think I, when I come to the Gate of the City, the Lord thereof will know me for good, since I have his Coat on my back; a Coat that he gave me freely in the day that he stript me of my rags. I have moreover a mark in my forehead, of which perhaps you have taken no notice, which one of my Lords most intimate Associates, fixed there in the day that my burden fell off my shoulders. I will tell you moreover, that I had then given me a Roll sealed to comfort me by reading, as I go in the way; I was also bid to give it in at the Coelestial Gate, in token of my certain going in after it: all which things I doubt you want, and want them, because you came not in at the Gate.
Sirs, what's the matter you run the wrong way?
but,
the further we go, the more danger wemeet with, wherefore we turned, and are going back again. Yes,
for just before us lye a couple of Lyons in the way, whether sleeping or wakeing we know not; and we could not think, if we came within reach, but they would presently pull us in pieces.
You make me afraid, but whither shall I fly to be safe? If I go back to mine own Countrey,is prepared for Fire and Brimstone; and I shall certainly perish there. If I can get to the Coelestial City, I am sure to be in safety there. I must venture: To go back is nothing but death, to go forward is fear of death, and life everlasting beyond it. I will yet go forward.
Now,
I see the dangers thatand, were driven back by.
Is thy strength so small? fear not the Lions, for they are Chained: and are placed there for trial of faith where it is; and for discovery of those thathave none: keep in the midst of the Path, and no hurt shall come unto thee.
Sir, What house is this? and may I lodge here to night?
This House was built by the Lord of the Hill: and he built it for the relief and security of Pilgrims.
I am come from the City of, and am going to Mount, but because the Sun is now set, I desire, if I may, to lodge here to night.
My name is now; but my name at the first was: I came of the Race of, whom God will perswade to dwell in the Tents of.
I had been here sooner, but that, wretched man that I am! I slept in thethat stands on the Hill side; nay, I had notwithstanding that, been here much sooner, but that in my sleep I lost my Evidence, and came without it to the brow of the Hill; and then feeling for it, and finding it not, I was forced with sorrow of heart, to go back to the place where I slept my sleep, where I found it, and now I am come.
Well, I will call out one of the Virgins of this place, who will, if she likes your talk, bring you in to the rest of the Family, according to the Rules of the House.
This Man is in a Journey from the City ofto Mount, but being weary, and benighted, he asked me if he might lodge here to night; so I told him I would call for thee, whoafter discourse had with him, mayest do as seemeth thee good, even according to the Law of the House.
It is; and I have so much the more a desire to lodge here to night, because, by what I perceive, this place was built by the Lord of the Hill, for the relief and security of Pilgrims.
I will call forth two or three more of the Family.
Come in thou blessed of the Lord; this House was built by the Lord of the Hill, on purpose to entertain such Pilgrims in.
Christian,.
With a very good will, and I am glad that you are so well disposed.
I was driven out of my Native Countrey, by a dreadful sound that was in mine ears, to wit, That unavoidable destruction did attend me, if I abode in that place where I was.
It was as God would have it, for when I was under the fears of destruction, I did not know whither to go; but by chance there came a Man, even to me, (as I was trembling and weeping) whose name is, and he directed me to the Wicket-Gate, which else I should never have found; and so set me into the way that hath led me directly to this House.
Yes, and did see such things there, the remembrance of which will stick by me as long as I live; specially three things,, How Christ, in despite of Satan, maintains his work of Grace in the heart; how the Man had sinned himself quite out of hopes of Gods mercy; and also the Dream of him that thought in his sleep the day of Judgement was come.
Yes, and a dreadful one it was. I thought it made my heart ake as he was telling of it, but yet I am glad I heard it.
No, he took me and had me where he shewed me a stately Palace, and how the People were clad in Gold that were in it; and how there came a venturous Man, and cut his way through the armed men that stood in the door to keep him out; and how he was bid to come in, and win eternal Glory. Methought those things did ravish my heart; I could have staid at that good Mans house a twelve-month, but that I knew I had further to go.
Saw! Why I went but a little further, and I saw one, as I thought in my mind, hang bleeding upon the Tree; and the very sight of him made my burden fall off my back (for I groaned under a weary burden) but then it fell down from off me. 'Twas a strange thing to me, for I never saw such a thing before: Yea, and while I stood looking up, (for then I could not forbear looking) three shining ones came to me: one of them testified that my sins were forgiven me;another stript me of my Rags, and gave me this Broidred Coat which you see; and the third set the mark which you see, in my forehead, and gave me this sealed Roll (and with that he plucked it out of his bosom.)
The things that I have told you were the best: yet some other small matters I saw, as namely I saw three Men,,, and, lye a sleep a little out of the way as I came, with Irons upon their heels; but do you think I could awake them! I also sawandcome tumbling over the wall, to go, as they pretended, to, but they were quickly lost; even as I my self did tell them, but they would not believe: but, above all, I found itwork to get up this Hill, and asto come by the Lions mouths; and truly if it had not been for the good Man, the Porter that stands at the Gate, I do not know, but that after all, I might have gone back again: but now I thank God I am here, and I thank you for receiving of me.
Yes, but with much shame and detestation;.
Yes, but greatly against my will; especially my inward and carnal cogitations; with which all my Countrey-men, as well as my self, were delighted; but now all those things are my grief: and might I but chuse mine own things, I would chuse never to think of those things more; but when I would be doing of that which is best, that which is worst is with me.
Yes, but that is but seldom;but they are to me Golden hours, in which such things happens to me.
Yes, when I think what I saw at the Cross, that will do it; and when I look upon my Broidered Coat, that will do it; also when I look into the Roll that I carry in my bosom, that will do it; and when my thoughts wax warm about whither I am going, that will do it.
Zion?
Why, there I hope to see him, that did hangon the Cross; and there I hope to be rid of all those things, that to this day are in me, an anoiance to me; there they say there is no death, and there I shall dwell with such Company as I like best. For to tell you truth, I love him, because I was by him eased of my burden, and I am weary of my inward sickness; I would fain be where I shall die no more, and with the Company that shall continually cry,.
let us go again into the Armory,
Pray did you know him?
I asked his name, and he told me it was.
O,
I know him, he is my Towns-man, my near Neighbour, he comes from the place where I was born: how far do you think he may be before?
He is got by this time below the Hill.
Well,
good Porter the Lord be with thee, and add to all thy blessings much increase, for the kindness that thou hast shewed to me.
As it wascoming up, so (so far as I can see) it isgoing down. Yes,
so it is; for it is an hard matter for a man to go down into the valley of, asthou art now, and to catch no slip by the way; therefore,
are we come out to accompany thee down the Hill.