Madam, are you invited to Mr. such a ones Wedding.
Sir, he did me that honour.
I am very glad of it, Madam, we shall have the honour of your conversation.
It shall be I that shall receive the honour of yours, whereof I make great account.
Madam, I know that the honour you do me in loving my company is not a new thing, therein it is that I place all my happiness.
Yet, Sir, I do not observe that my approbation can be much advantagious to you.
I know by experience, that all those that are in your esteem, are reputed persons of honour.
You have as much civility as Mr.hath love for his Mistris.
I could wish it were so, Madam: for I know he loves her passionately.
All mens love is such, they are all fire and flame when they are a wooing.
Truly, Madam, a man of parts that hath made chose of a Gentlewoman of merit and of good education, ought to have as much love for her, as she hath good qualities.
I say nothing to the contrary: but they should also continue the same after their mariage.
Questionless, Madam, every man of honour doth so.
All men are generally guilty of inconstancy in this point.
I grant you that men love generally less that which is purchased: but you accuse men of a crime whereof women are guilty as well as men.
Pray, Sir, do not say so, a woman hath alwaies more love for her husband, then her husband hath for her.
I believe it Madam, but she hath less amity, because her imagination is stronger, and her apprehension less perfect.
What so great difference do you think there is between amity and love.
Love and amity do differ, in that love is a passion, andamity is a virtue which doth consist in acquaintance. Therefore the passion of love is to be excused in young people: but it is ridiculous in old men, in whom amity is commendable.
However I can prove it to you by several examples, that women love more then men.
Will you not grant me, Madam, that those which have more knowledg, are more capable of a solid amity?
What do you gather from thence?
I conclude, that men love more, having more knowledg and learning then women, and more light of their lives and behaviours, then they have of their husbands.
Examples being stronger then reasons, I can prove you my words that way.
I will hear you, Madam.
You know that from all times, women have been contented with a single husband, to keep their whole affection unto him. But in time past, as now with the Turks, a man having many wives, it followeth, that the more their affection is common, the less strong it is.
We are not in disputeof the time past, nor of the Turks custome.
True, but if it was the custome among Christians, every man would have more then one wife.
This is not a sufficient proof of that which you affirm, because a man may have as much affection for many, as for a single one.
I agree to that but it doth not follow, that he should do so.
I will prove it you my self by the effects, seeing that you will not believe my reasons.
I shall be very glad to hear what examples you can bring of men mens affection towards their wives.
Can there be a greater love then that of, who choosed to die, thathis wife might live, having killed the male of the two Serpents which he found in his Chamber: because the Oracle had assured him, that if he should kill the female, he would expose the life of his dear half to the rigour of death.
Can a love be like unto that ofQueen of, who after her husbands death swallowed down his ashes, being willing to be his grave, and joyn her self unto him.
But, Madam, can a cruelty be greater then that of, who having had the Power but one day in her hands, caused her husbandto be murdered, who had been so far indulgent unto her, and that had loved and cherished her so much all his life time.
That is a particular example of a wicked woman: but how many Emperours and Kings have been known, that have put their wives to death, to marry others?
Let us break off, Madam, undoubtedly you have a great affection for your husband. If I did not fear of being guilty, I would envy his happiness: but I will content my self in wishing for a wife who deserts might equal yours, if it be possible to find such another again.
You jear me, Sir, I wish you one worthy of your merits.
Madam, I am a thousand times obliged to you for your good wishes.
Madam, I come to have the honour to render you my respects.
Sir, you know that you are very welcome, and that I receive an unspeakable honour in your visits.
Madam, the knowledg that I have of your generosity, doth not permit me to doubt of my welcome: but for the rest I must contredict you.
How, Sir, I have heard you say formerly, that you would never contredict Ladies.
I grant it, Madam, but it is when they do not laugh at me.
Do you find that I jear you, Sir? do you think that I am so incivil?
Madam, I believe that you are the most civil Lady in the world.
Why then do you reprehend me of a crime, by accusing me of jesting.
I do not believe it to be a crime, and without doubt, Madam, you do not repute it such.
Truly, Sir, I do not hold it to be a great crime amongst friends: but if a body use it very often, I should blame him.
I would do the same, Madam, but confess that you jear when you tell me that you receive an unspeakable honour by my visits: for I rather believe, that I put too much trouble upon you.
I never saw a man like you, you would be the only civil person: you name civility a jearing in every body else but you.
I crave your pardon, Madam, it is not a jearing when you use it towards them that deserve it.
Sir, the French Gentlemen are pleased to cross the Ladies: but let us talk no more of it, do me the favour to take a seat, and to tell me some news.
Madam, I know not any that may be worthy relating to you.
Do you know any thing that is unworthy the relating?
To speak in earnest, Madam, every thing is unworthy of you, and if men would take heed of this, they would never be able to say any thing to you.
Sir, oblige me so much as to speak freely with me, andand without complement: for I asseure you that I have no skill that way.
Methinks, Madam, I perceive no complements in my discourses.
They are full of them, Sir, in fine will you inform me of nothing to day?
Madam, I'le tell you that there will be gallant company in the Park this evening.
What Company?
Master such a one wil be there with his Mistris, will you be pleased to be there, Madam?
No, Sir, I do not care to be where there is so much company.
Madam, if you please to go thither, I shall have the honour to wait upon you.
Not to day, Sir, I give you thanks for your civility.
You love nothing but solitariness, Madam, that you may entertain your self with the objects of your love.
Yet I am not in love, Sir.
I believe you are, Madam.
You surprise me very much, Sir, to make me believe thatam in love.
Be not offended at it, Madam, but asseuredly you are so, I read it in your eyes.I wonder very much at what you say, and I do not apprehend it: therefore I intreat you to explain your self.
I will obey you, Madam: is it not true that there are several sorts of love.
How manysorts?
Madam, I believe you know that as well as I: for I am certain that you are ignorant of nothing.
Excuse me, Sir, you shall oblige me in instructing me.
Madam, it is not to instruct you: for asseuredly you do not doubt that we have only one love, but that it hath several objects.
You will make me a Philosopher, Sir: but how many objects hath it?
Many, Madam: but chiefly these three, God, Man, and brutish Creatures.
What love do you think I am possessed with?
With all, Madam: for I am sure you love God well, and consequently all vertues, and your neighbours likewise.
You are very obliging, Sir, to have so good opinion of me.
I should be to blame, if I had an ill opinion of you.
But you, Sir, you have some particular Mistris which you love better then your ordinary friends.
It may be so, Madam, I should not be a man, if I should not love the finest thing in the world.
In your opinion, Sir, your Mistris is the handsomest in the world.
I do not say so, Madam, although she that I most honour is extreamly well furnished with good qualities.
Sir, I find you very happy to have a Mistris so well accomplished, I pray God give you good success in your love.
Madam, I give you many thanks with all my heart.
Sir, shall I not have the honour to know the name of her that hath the glory to captivate you?
I beseech you, Madam, hold me excused in naming of her, until she knows it her self.
How, Sir, is she ignorant of your affection?
Yes, Madam, because I durst not as yet give her notice of it.
Who hindered you?
Madam, it is for fear that she should not love me.
Fear is a passion that sogenerous a heart as yours is, ought not to be possessed with.
Madam, it is a hard matter to be very much in love without having some of every passion.
I thought, Sir, that fear was onely the passion of a cowardly man.
True, Madam.
Yet I see it not alwaies true.
It is so in one sense: for it is the fear of death that takes away courage, and that makes Cowards run away.
I find that that fear is very necessary for to preserve ones life.
It is very true: but it is much contrary to a State. For if all the subjects of a King were possessed with it, he would have but few soldiers.
It is true: but if a soldier did not fear correction, he would be very insolent.
You are in the right, Madam, it is the use that is made of it, that makes it profitable or dangerous in all manner of waies
None can be righteous without the fear of God.
The Wise man saith, that it is the beginning of wisdom.
It seems to me that Lovers live alwaies in more fear then hope: which proves true in you.
I'le tell you, Madam, that love is alwaies mingled with hope and fear.
Hope hath made more men unfortunate, then fear ever made unhappy.
It is true that hope is very deceitful.
After having hoped a long while, one doth despair.
It is a prudence to forsake hope, when one cannot attain unto his end.
One must have a great wit, and know well how to use it right, and withal one must be very discreet to govern himself in all manner of occurrences.
You possesse all these qualities in the highest degree. Therefore you are esteemed the wonder of your age.
Sir, do not flatter me, I pray you; I know my self well enough to know what I am.
I do not question it, Madam, it is that which makes you unequal: for it is the highest degree of wisdom to know ones self.
Truly, Sir, there is a great deal of satisfaction in your conversation, do me the honour to let me see you oftner.
I shall not fail to come and render you my service, as well to obey you, as for the extream pleasure that I take inyour company.
I can asseure you, Sir, that you shall alwaies be very welcome.
Madam, I give you a thousand thanks for your favors, and shall be all my life time your most affectionate servant.
Sir, I am your most humble servant.
What shall we do to day, Gentlemen? how shall we pass away this day?
What you please.
Let us walk as far as Greenwich.
Ah, Gentlemen, let us go thither, I intreat you, I have never been there.
And what do you intend to do at Greenwich?
That is a fine question, & what should we do elswhere?
Let us go thither if you please, I am content to do as the rest.
I know an honest man there, that hath good wine in his Cellar.
Let us go thither then,which way shall we go, Gentlemen?
Let us go thither by water
Let us rather take a Coach.
No, no, there is more pleasure by water.
The Gentleman saith right, we may smoke in the boat, and drink a merry cup.
For my part, you know I never smoak: but I'le be glad to drink a cup of good Canary.
Shall we not drink and smoak enough when we come thither?
Gentlemen, if we will go thither, let us not loose time, whilst the Tide serves.
Go you before, Gentlemen, I am going to the Rose for a couple of Bottles and some Pipes.
Do not stay then, we will stay for you athouse.
Go on, I'le overtake you by and by.
We should have told him that he should bring an ounce of good Spanish Tobacco.
He hath some in his Box, he is never without it.
Gentlemen, let us agree for a Boat.
Shall we take a man or two?
Let us take two.
Honest men, what shall we give you to carry us to Greenwich, and to bring us back again? Sir, you shal give vs a Crown if you please. It is too much, you shall have four Shillings. We cannot carry you for less.
We must give them five Shillings, they are honest men, they must get their living.
Well, you shall have what you ask. Where is your Boat? There it is, Gentlemen. Will you be pleased to step in?
Presently, we stay for a Gentleman.
There's Mr.coming, he hath made haste.
He goeth like a lean Cat.
Well, Gentlemen, have not I dispatcht?
Truly you are so, you shal drink first.
Have you brought good Wine?
If it be not good, I will drink it all my self.
You understand the matter very well.
Come then, Gentlemen, let us step into the Boat.
Step in first, we will follow you.
Without ceremony, Gent. let him follow me that loves me.
What needs so many complements? for my part I never use any; I take my place by you, for you keep the bottles.
Sir, I intreat you not to let me commit an incivility.
Faith, Sir, I will not go before you, I know very well the respect that is due to you.
But, Sir, you laugh at me, we will stay here then till to morrow.
I must confess, Gentlemen, you are very ceremonious.
Come, come, Gentlemen, let us make haste, what needs so many ceremonies among friends.
I beseech you, Sir, let us not make these Gentlemen stay.
Sir, I had rather commit an incivility, then to disobey you.
Seriously, Gentlemen, this is a fine River.
It is the finest in the world.
The water is very calm at present.
We could not have pitcht upon a finer day to go by water.
But Mr.you have brought Tobacco and Pipes with you: but where will you have fire?
Truly, I have forgot a match, I am giddy-headed.
So much the better, for indeed I do not love smoaking, but when I am at my journies end
Really, Gentlemen, our conversation is better then smoak.
We are very near the Bridg, is there no danger to shoot it?
No more then in this place, the water is smooth now.
I go through it two or three times a day, whether the water be high or low.
You are mighty bold, I went through it once when the water was low, the boat had like to have been sunk.
There is not too much safety, I will not trust too much to it.
Nor I neither.
What, Gentlemen, cannot you swim?
I swim like a fish, but not in my cloaths.
I have swimmed many times over the River with a Boat after me.
I'le lay a wager, that I can swim from hence to Greenwich.
Pray let us have that passtime a little.
I believe he would drink water whilst we drink wine.
Some other time, Gentlemen, the water is not hot enough now.
I wish I could swim on purpose to bathe my self now: but I swim like a stone.
We are now under Bridg.
This is a fine Bridg.
It is the finest in Europe.
How long is it since it was built, it is above --
We are now going to see a great many ships.
We shall see many of them: but they are almost all Merchant men.
Where are then the Men of War?
They are most of them now at Sea
A little before the War was proclaimed, I went toby water with some Gentlemen of, we saw the finest of the Kings ships in the River of.
Did you see the Soveraign?
Yes, and twenty more of the biggest next it.
They say it is a prodigious ship.
It is the biggest that ever I saw, you would think that you are in a Castle.
Methinks that those are very great ships.
They are big enough for Merchant Men.
Is there no Men of War upon the Thames at this time.
There may be some, I suppose.
I have heard his Majesty hath caused many Fregats to be built at& at.
I saw them begun.
Is there no way to go see them?
Yes, if we have but time enough.
We will come on purpose another time, to see the ships.
If we have time, we may land atas we come back.
As the company shal think fitting.
We shall see, we shall see.
We are almost at.
I wish we were there already: for I begin to be dry.
To the business in hand, we do not mind our bottles.
Sir, pull your Cup out of your pocket.
Truly, you have done well to put me in mind: for I did not think upon it.
Come, Gentlemen, to your health.
Tope it.
Drink to me, for I am almost choakt.
To me, Sir, I will pledg you.
Sir, I drink the Kings health.
I accept of it with all my heart.
It must go round.
Sir, it is his Majesties good health, I drink it to you, Sir.
You do not drink it up.
I cannot, Sir, the glass is too big, and you have filled it so full, that I cannot hold it without spilling.
Truly, I drunk it so.
Excuse me, I cannot drink so much at a draught.
The Gentleman is very sober.
Here, Sir, pledg me.
I desire no better.
I have drunk but one cup, make haste then, that I may drink at my turn.
Let me see the cup, Sir, I will help you.
I will help my self, give me the bottle.
Hold, here it is, it is almost empty.
There is enough still for me.
He draws pretty well for a little man.
Come, let us open the other bottle, I am so dry, that I could drink the Sea and fishes.
You spill, have a care what you do.
You cannot make so much as you have lost.
I am to blame, I confess: but seeing I have committed a fault, I must drink it.
This wine will make a Cat speak.
Gentlemen, let us empty our bottle, before we come out of the Boat.
Give a glass to these poor Watermen, that have taken so much pains to row
Here, friends, this is for you. Thanks, Gentlemen.
Gentlemen, shall we pay for Boat now, or shall we pay them when we come back?
Do as you please, as you think good.
No, no, we will pay when we come back.
This is a very fine and delightful place.
So it is.
Gentlemen, will you have me carry you to that honest mans house I spoke to you of, when we came away.
Hath he got good wine?
He hath some excellent.
Let us go there then.
Besides, he is a man of good company too. He hath been in, he can speak good French. He is altogether merry, he doth alwaies sing. He hath many drinking songs He will make you burst with laughing. One is never weary of his company.
Let us go there quickly then, he is such a man as I would have.
Your servant, Landlord. Sir, your most humble servant. How do you do? Well at your service. We are come to take a little divertisement here these Gentlemen and I. I have commended to them both your self, & your good wine Sir, I am much obliged to you, I give you thanks for it. Gentlemen, you are all very welcome. Will you be pleased to walk up staires, I have some ho-go that I wil send you up, with some of the best wine, of a high colour, it is like me? For although I am not high-minded, I love to drink high, chiefly about the higher time ofthe day (the evening) and yet I never stumble, nor am never more impertinent nor insolent.
Faith, Landlord, you speak very good French. Excuse me, Sir, I understand it more then I do high German.
Well, Gentlemen, did not I tell you, that this man was very good company.
Truly he is very merry.
He is a good Fellow, I must scrape acquaintance with him.
You will delight in his company when you know him. Gentlemen, I bring you somthing that was never eaten yet. Do you see this Neats-tongue? You never saw it before. Though it were for the Kings mouth, it could not be better.
Faith, Landlord, we are ingaged to you, come, sit down here by me. I love you, you are of a good humour, I am going to drink your health. Will you do me reason. Yes indeed, Sir, I do reason to all the world.And especially unto honest people.
Landlord, you and I must be better acquainted. Faith, Sir, if you get acquaintance with me, you will do well: for I love greatness. And though I am no great man, I do as my Granfather did, I rise betimes in the morning, before it be broad-day, and I drink a great glass of wine.
You do as an honest man ought to do. Alas, Sir, I did it formerly: but now I am not able to do it any longer, I am like my old cloaths, I have had my time.
Landlord, here's to you. Sir, I thank you. I have heard that you have a great many good songs, pray sing us one. Yes, Sir: but pray cut this Neats tongue, I asseure you that it is an exceeding good one.
Lend me a knife, Landlord, and I will cut it.
Truly, it looks well.
It is exceeding good. Gentlemen, did not I tell you so, another time you will believe me.
We did not doubt but it that it was good upon your word.Gentlemen, one word draws another, tast a little of this white wine, I believe you will like it.
I will pledg you, Landlord, it is in a good hand, well, Sir, it is the health of your inclinations. Sir, I drink it to you.
I receive it with all my heart, I will pledg you presently.
Landlord, I find this tongue a little too salted, have you got nothing else for me? For I love not things that are so salted. I have a couple of good Pullets below on the spit. Well, bring them up to us, if you please.
Ah, ah, you have then a mind to feast.
The Gentleman is of my humour, he is not dainty-mouth'd but he loves good victuals well.
Our Landlord saith right: but I'le tell you more when my belly is full, I want but few things to satisfie my hunger.
Sir, I blow this cup from you, you preach too long over the vintage. Well, well, like for like. But, Gentlemen, you do not mind that it begins to be late.
Do not trouble your self, we shall have time enough. Gentlemen, here are the two Pullets, they are tender as --
Sit you down there, Landlord, and eat a bit with us.
Gentlemen, I will tell you one thing, I eat not much: but I make it up in drink.
We must do so, little eating, much drinking.
I act my part well enough: for I do really believe, that as long as I drink, I shall never die.
You say right, but otherwise when you are dead, you shall drink no more.
Alas, what misfortune, when I think upon it; come, let us drink then while we live.
Drawer, go and draw us of the same white wine. I will, Sir. Make haste.
Come, Landlord, sing a fudling song. I will, Sir: but I must first drink a glass.
This Drawer is long a coming.
He would be fit to fetch death. Why dost thou make us stay so long?
Come, Landlord, this is to your health, and to thank youfor your good company.
Sir, I am your most humble servant. I am to give you thanks for the honour you have been pleased to bestow upon me.
What do we owe you,
Landlord?
 Gentlemen, there is eight
Shillings for Wine, pay what
you please for the rest.
 Here, Landlord, there is
fifteen Shillings for all, are you
content?
 Yes, Sir, and give you many
thanks besides.
 Farewel, Landlord, till we
see you again.
 Gentlemen, your most humble
servant, I hope you will do me
the favour to come and see me
when you come to divertise your
selves in these parts.
 Yes, yes, we will.
 You shall alwaies command
the best Wine.
 We thank you, Landlord.
 Gentlemen, I wish you well
home every one to his own house,
I pray God to keep you in good
health.
 We thank you, Landlord.
 God keep you so.
 We have staid there a long
while, it is very late.
 Let us go quickly to find out
our Boat.
 Truly, this man is good
company.So he is.
 We were not weary of his
company.
 Truly, he is very merry.
 He deserves that people should 
go to his house.
 He receives people very kindly
 Come, honest friends, we
have staid a little longer then
we thought.
 You are welcome, 
Gentlemen.
 You must make a little haste,
if you please, as much as we can
possible, Gentlemen.
 Do then, you shall have
another Shilling to drink.
 I think we shall have time
enough.
 It is fine weather, we have
wind and tide, we shall come
home in good time.
 The Moon shines bright, we
go a great pace, we shall quickly
be atBridg.
 These men are strong, they
row with all their strength.
 How pleasant it is now upon
the Water!
 Are not those fishers?
 Yes, Sir.
 Do you think they have got
any fish?
 Yes truly, they have.
 Let us buy some.
 No, no, let us not stay, we
have not too much time.What should we do with that
fish?
 We will eat it.
 There is enough at the 
Fish-market.
 You say right: but it is not
so good, and it is dearer.
 It is as good every jot, what
matter is it how dear it is? it is
not too dear neither.
 I do not love fish, I love flesh
better.
 You are a great flesh-eater.
 I love fish better then flesh.
 There is nothing better then
a good stewed Carp.
 You have reason.
 I love Tenches extreamly
when they are well season'd.
 So do I.
 Methinks that they do dress
fish better inthen here.
 That is true, the French are
better Cooks then we are.
 Yet I have eaten some well
dressed in this Country.
 I believe it.
 I was ata while
ago with a Gentleman a friend 
of mine, that carried thither
two great Carps from:
we had them drest for us very
well, in our Inn. I did never eat
any thing so good.In what Inn did you lodg?
 At the Castle.
 It is true, it is a good Inn, 
there is a handsom maid which is
a very good Cook.
 Ah, ah, we are come already
to the Tower.
 If it were not so late, we
would go to visit a Gentleman a
friend of mine in the Tower that
would entertain us nobly.
 It is too late, it must be some
other time.
 When you please, we shall go
there.
 Oh God be thanked we are
arrived.
 Softly, Gentlemen, step out
one after another, we are come
in good time.
 It is not too late, let us pay
the Boat, it is good reason.
 Here, honest men, here is your
money, here is another Shilling
that we promised you to drink.
 We thank you, Gentlemen.
 Now, Gentlemen, it is time
for us to take leave one of
another.
 Gentlemen, before we part, 
will you be pleased to let me give
you a glass of Sack?
 No, Sir, we thank you, it
shall be another time.
 Come, come, it is not so late.For my part, I must go home,
I will not drink to day, they stay
for me at home.
 Well, Sir, since you are not
pleased, farewel, I rest your
servant.
 I thank you for your good
company
 Gentlemen, your most humble
servant.
 I wish you a good evening
and a good night. My Dear, what shall we
do this evening?
 We will do any thing that you 
please.
 Let us take a walk.
 I will.
 Whither shall we go?
 Let us go into the Park.
 We have never a Coach.
 Let us hire one.
 I will not go into the Park in
a Hackney Coach.
 Why not?
 Because it is not the custome for
persons of our quality.
 People would take us to be
nought.
 Let us go see my Brother.
 He will lend us his Coach.
 Is he in Town?
 Yes.Since when?
 Since yesterday.
 How doth he do?
 He is very well,
 God be thanked for it.
 Let us go then and desire him to
lend us his Coach.
 Do you think he will be willing
to lend it us.
 I am certain he will not deny it 
me.
 But I believe he will go along
with us.
 I should be very glad of it.
 And I also.
 Brother, I come to beg a favour
of you.
 What favour, Sister?
 But will you not refuse me?
 No, if it be any thing I can do.
 If it be in your power, will you
promise me to do it?
 What need so many words?
 Do I use to deny you any thing?
 Tell me what it is.
 I will tell it you, Brother.
 Mrs.and I would fain go
walk in the Park: but we
want a Coach.
 I understand you.
 That is as much as to say you
would gladly have mine.
 You have guess'd right, Brother.
 And where is Mrs.?
 She is below in the Hall.
 You shall have my Coach, andsomething more.
 What, Brother?
 My Company.
 What a good Brother you are.
 How well you flatter, Sister!
 I love you too much, Brother.
 Can you love me too much?
 No, I confess I cannot love you
so much as you are aimable.
 And I for my part I do not
love you.
 I do not believe you.
 I know you love me well.
 I have very certain proves of
it.
 I am very sure of it.
 Let us stop here, Sister.
 What you please, Brother.
 But if you will go with us into
the Park, it is time to be
going.
 Well, well, walk down stairs.
 You leave Mrs.all alone.
 That is not civil.
 It is not for long.
 She will have the goodness to
excuse me.
 Go & intreat her to pardon me,
I wil be with you presently.
 I am going to give order for the
Horses to be put to the Coach.
 Pray do so, Brother.
 Do not make us stay too long.Mrs., my Brother is
coming down.
 He desires you to excuse him.
 He was a little busie.
 We shall have his Coach.
 He will go along with us.
 Truly? In good earnest?
 He told me so.
 Oh! what a good Brother you
have.
 He is the best young man in the
world.
 I would I had one like him.
 Really he is very civil and very
courteous.
 He is altogether gallant.
 Every body loves him.
 He is also very lovely, there he
comes.
 Madam, I intreat you to excuse
me.
 My Sister did not tell me at first
that you were here.
 Sir, your most humble servant.
 There needs no excuse where 
there is no fault.
 Madam, I think my self happy
in having the honour of
waiting upon you in the
Park.
 Sir, it shall be I that shal have
that happiness.
 Would to God, Madam, that you
would esteem it so, my desires
should be accomplished.
 I pray you, Brother, leave off
these Complements, and let 
us go into the Coach.I must obey my Sister.
 Come Madam, give me leave to
take you by the hand.
 Your servant, Sir.
 Do you leave me behind, 
Brother?
 Give me your hand.
 Sit you there.
 I will be in the Boot.
 Where you will.
 My Sister will be seen.
 She may well, Sir.
 Yes, yes, I will be seen, I fear
nothing.
 I must confess, Madam, here is
very pleasant place.
 Altogether, Sir.
 How many Coaches!
 What Coach is that?
 It is the French Embassadors.
 And that other?
 It is the Spanish Embassadors.
 Good God, what a dust here is!
 Let us go out of the dust, it
blinds me.
 Whether run all those Horses?
 There is a Race.
 Do you see that little white
Horse?
 How frolick he is!
 He runs like a little Devil.
 Here would be a great of
pleasure, were it not for the dust.
 Let us return again.
 It begins to be late.
 It is not so late as you think
it is.
 What a clock is it?
 Look on your Watch.It is not six a clock.
 It is a good hour.
 It is time to draw homewards.
 Lady, you shall not go
away.
 You shall lie with me.
 I thank you, Madam.
 What would my mother say?
 What should she say?
 It is not the first time you have
done me that honour.
 I confess I have had the honour 
to lie with you, my dear.
 But it doth follow that I must
needs lie with you this 
night.
 Why not?
 I durst not without my mothersleave.
 Madam, pray refuse not my 
Sister that favour.
 I will go my self and intreat
your Lady-mother to give you
leave.
 I thank you, Sir.
 That cannot be for this time.
 Let it alone for another time.
 We have some company to sup
with us to night.
 I must needs be at home.
 Besides, my Dancing-master
comes to night.
 How, so late?
 He comes alwaies at six a clock.
 What is his name.
 His name is Mr..
 How, is it Mr.that
teaches you?Yes, it is the same.
 I know him very well.
 I did learn of him.
 He is a very able man.
 He is an excellent Master.
 He teaches very well.
 He takes a great deal of pains.
 I love that man.
 He is mighty civil.
 How much do you give him a 
month?
 Forty Shillings.
 I did give him so much.
 Where doth he dwell?
 He dwells in, &c.
 I must go and see him.
 He spoke to me of you.
 He will be glad to see you.
 He esteems you very much.
 He saith you are very
generous.
 He is a man that knows the
world. 
 He knows what belongs to
civility.
 I am much obliged to him.
 Madam, durst I intreat you to
present my service to him?
 I shall, Sir.
 Brother, we draw near home.
 I know it very well, Sister.
 Seeing Madamwill not
go home with us, we must
wait upon her home.
 That's understood.
 Sir and Madam, I give you
thanks for the honour youhave done me.
 Farewel, my Dear.
 It is we that have received it.
 Madam, oblige me with the
honour of your commands.
 Sir, I am to obey you, not to
command you.
 What do you say, Madam? you
deserve to command all men. Sir, your Servant.
 Where are you going so?
 I do not go, I come.
 Whence come you then?
 I come from a Play.
 I did never laugh so much in my
life at the end of the Play.
 They have plaid a Farce, a Jig
the most jestful in the world.
 You never saw such a piece.
 Pray see it.
 It will give you content.
 You will laugh your belly full.
 You'l see there a pleasant Jester.
 He will make you burst with
laughter.
 He will make you shit in your
breeches for laughing.
 There are fools every where.
 There are as many in this world,
as in any place we can go.You are right.
 You have it.
 You have said wel to the purpose.
 You have hit the mark.
 You understand it.
 For whom do you take me?
 For a man of business.
 Do you speak in earnest?
 You are merry.
 You are pleased to say so.
 Who saith the contrary?
 No body speaks to you.
 Be not surly.
 Are you afraid of your shadow?
 Do not put your self in a passion.
 You would make me afraid.
 This is a fine weather.
 The finest weather in the world.
 If this weather did last long, I
should be gone quickly.
 I would suddenly depart.
 To go where?
 In.
 No to stay there?
 You intend to come again?
 Alas! God knows.
 It is true, we are all mortal.
 We do not know whether we
shall be alive to morrow.
 I am an old man already.
 I begin to grow old.
 How old may you be?
 Fifty.
 You do not seem so old.
 I could not think you to be
above forty.
 I am in good health, that is the 
chiefest.God be thanked.
 Health is a precious thing.
 It is the richest treasure we
enjoy in this world.
 Nothing more true.
 But what, do not you like this 
Country?
 Pardon me, excuse me, it is not
for that.
 A man must go and see his
friends.
 That is right.
 I wish I could travel along with
you.
 Would to God your mind were
bent that way.
 I would be huge glad of it.
 I would die even for joy.
 It would be a great honour for
me.
 Without Complement.
 If such a thing could be done.
 That is not impossible.
 It is not an thing impossible.
 I defie you.
 You dare not.
 If I should receive some monies
due to me.
 I might resolve thereupon.
 Is it but want of money?
 How! is it not necessary for
such a journey?
 I have enough for us both.
 Do not trouble your self about it.
 I give you thanks.
 I am ingaged to you.
 You are too generous.
 Think upon it then, farewel.
 You know what I am to you. Sir, your Servant.
 I am yours.
 How do you do?
 You see, Sir.
 I was never in better health.
 I am glad of it.
 I am glad that I have met with
you.
 So am I.
 Come along with me.
 Whether are you going?
 I am going to see my daughter.
 In what place?
 At.
 What doth she do there?
 What, do not you know that I
have put her at a 
Boarding-school?
 With whom?
 At onethat
keeps a French School.
 Truly I did not know it.
 What doth she learn there?
 She learns to write.
 To read.
 To speak French.
 To sing. 
 To dance. 
 To play upon the Guitarre and
Virginals.
 All those things?
 Yes.
 What do you give a year?
 Five and twenty pounds.It is not dear.
 It is very cheap.
 I have a great mind to put mine
there also.
 I advise you to it.
 It is a good School.
 They are good people.
 Mr.is a very honest
man, very courteous and
civil.
 He takes a great deal of pains to
teach his Scholars.
 He brings them to speak very
good French in a little time.
 My daughter begins to speak
already.
 How long hath she been there?
 Three months since.
 What, she can speak French
already!
 Yes truly.
 Are Children well used?
 Mighty well.
 Mrs.is a very brave
woman, she takes great care 
of Maids.
 She giveth them good
instructions.
 She keeps them very neat.
 What Religion are they of?
 They are good Protestants.
 I am glad of it.
 Mr.reads Prayers at
the French Church.
 In earnest?
 Yes I assure you.
 I must put my daughter there, I 
am resolved.You cannot do better.
 It is a thing concluded and
sure.
 I am going to speak to him now
about it.
 You will do very well.
 There is the House.
 Which?
 The first of all.
 It is a very fine House.
 Well seated.
 In a fine place.
 In a good Air.
 Is there a Garden?
 There are two.
 Is there any French Maid in
the house, to converse with
the Gentlewomen in French?
 Mr.hath his daughter
which is very handsom, who
keeps company alwaies with
Gentlewomen, and talks
with them in French.
 What do you tell me.
 I tell you nothing but what is
true.
 She is a young Maid that is very
well qualified.
 She hath a very fine voice.
 She sings rarely.
 She dances perfectly.
 She understands the Art of 
Musick very well.
 She playes upon the Virginals.
 She is very well bred, very
discreet.
 Those are fine qualities. Good morrow, my Dear.
 How dost thou do?
 Very well, my dear, at thy
service.
 Prethee take a seat, and sit
down by the fire.
 I shall have soon done.
 What art thou busie about then?
 What art thou doing then?
 I am writing a Sonnet fair.
 What Sonnet?
 A Sonnet I composed
yesterday.
 How canst thou make Verses?
 Somtimes I divert my self to
make some, to pass my time.
 When I have no other 
business.
 Thou dost jest, it belongs to none
but men to make Verses.
 Why not to women as well as to
men?
 Because men have more wit then
we have.
 At least they will have it so.
 I am not of that opinion.
 I believe that women in 
general have as much wit as
men.But generally men go beyond
us.
 Why dost thou believe that?
 Because it is men that do all.
 They make war.
 They rule all.
 They do possesse Offices.
 They get womens livelihood.
 They know Sciences.
 They compose Books, and do all
manner of other things,
which women are not capable
of.
 And thou dost infer out of all
that, that men have more wit
then women.
 It seems so, and they prove it
themselves by Scripture.
 Which way?
 They say that man was created
first, and that the woman was
made of one of his ribs, as it
is true.
 It doth not follow for all that,
that they have got more wit
then we: for beasts that
have got none, were created
before man.
 God created the noblest last of 
all.
 But God made the woman
subject unto man, and he will
have her obey him, as being
the most worthy of the two.
 But rather, it is because the
woman is the most worthy, that
God would have her obey
man, as a fierce and proud 
creature.For there is more force of wit
to yield and obey, then to
command imperiously.
 Thou speakest wonderful wel:
but yet S.saith, that the
man is the head of the woman.
 It is true.
 But are not women members
of Christ as well as men?
 There is no doubt.
 Doth the image of God
consist in the body, or in the Spirit
or mind?
 I rather believe that it is in
the Spirit: for God is not a 
body.
 Why then should not the wit
of women be as good as that of 
men, seeing that the woman is
the image of God as well as
man?
 But S.will not have
women speak in the Church.
 It is a sign that he doth not
hold them so capable as men.
 No, it is not that. The thing
only is, that he doth not hold it
so convenient, that women be
mixt with men in a 
Church-counsel. For he foresaw that
this might cause some disorder
by reason of the small accountthat men make of womens
judgment and wit.
 But it doth not follow, that
they are not capable of all
functsons of spirit as men are.It is a thing that we could 
hardly perswade them.
 That would be easie enough,
if they would hear reason.
 Is not the good behaviour of
women a sufficient proof of their
wisdom?
 Are they seen to fuddle, and
commit murders as men do?
 It is true, their Sex is much
more vicious then ours.
 But they do prevail above us,
because they go beyond us in
strenth of body.
 And that thing should bring
them to the knowledg of truth.
 How so?
 Because we see that among all
creatures, those which nature
gave less strength to, she hath
furnished them with more skill
and understanding.
 And those that are the
strongest, are the more stupid.
 Truly thou art in the right.
 That is commonly observed,
that the weakest are nearer to
reason, and have a more
powerful instinct then those whom
Nature hath endued with other
advantages.
 For a proof thereof, are there
any creatures seen lesser and
more industrious the Silk worm
the Bee, and the Ant?
 Thou dost understand then,that according to this rule,
Nature having given more
strength unto men then to 
women, she ought also to have
given us more wit and more
judgment.
 Thou dost argue strongly.
 And if it be so, why should
we not addict our selves to the
study of good letters as well as
men?
 But however, it seems
notwithstanding, that it is not the
part of a woman to make use of
a pen.
 What we must have a 
clear-sighted mind, and solid
judgment, and we must not imploy
them but only to curl our hair!
 That would be to abuse those
favours we have received from
heaven.
 The greatwas of
another mind.
 For as he did not judg our
sex less capable of Philosophy
then his own, he kept his School
open for maids and women.
 Who was that greatthou speakest of?
 He was the greatest
Philosopher of his time.
 He was experienc'd in all
manner of Sciences and
Disciplines, both Divine & humane.
 In what Country did he
teach.
 In.
 Hast thou been in his School?I should be very old to have
been there.
 He hath then been dead a
long time.
 He died in the year of our 
Lord 260.
 We were not yet born.
 Sure enough.
 Certainly thou must needs
have been at some good School:
for methinks thou dost discourse
altogether like a Philosopher.
 Alas! my dear, my knowledg
is but little. But in spight of
all men I will study to go beyond
them, or at least to equalize 
them.
 How happy art thou to have
so much wit!
 I have no more then another:
but I hope by cultivating it, to
bring it to maturity.
 If I thought to do any good 
in study, as well as thou hast
done, I would practise it.
 It is a very easie matter.
 Reading of good Books gives
us great instructions.
 But how comes it to pass, 
that men will not have us to be
Scholars?
 I cannot imagine the reason
of it.
 Sure it is to gain our
admiration.
 That would not be the way to
come where they aime at, seeinga body cannot admire a thing
unknown.
 It may be it is to make us the 
more subject.
 If it be for that end, they have
but little generosity. And if
they have dominion or command
over us, it is but little glorious,
to rule over stupid and ignorant
creatures.
 I cannot then imagine why
they approve not learning in our
Sex as well as in their own.
 The best reason they give for
it, it is (say they) that study
doth not agree with the care a
woman ought to have of her
children, and of her house.
 Yet that reason hath no place
but with them that have a mind
to marry.
 But how shall a woman bring
up her children in the fear of
God, and in the love of vertue
if she be ignorant?
 Some men are so stupid as to
say that a woman is learned
enough, when she can distinguish
her husbands bed from anothers.
 They think that honesty and
learning are things that cannot
agree together.
 Those that are of that foolish
opinion, are quite ignorant.
 They love that which they
enjoy, and that which is like them.There are some men that are
more rational, and that esteem
vertu where it is.
 Methinks that a learned man
that should have a stupid woman
could not have much content in
her company.
 How can a stupid woman
know vertue and distingish it
from vice?
 Certainly learning bring one
to the knowledg of vertue better
then ignorance.
 Ignorance is the mother of all
vices.
 Thou art in the right: for
it is the cause of idleness, and
idleness is the root of all evil.
 Ignorance is alwaies
contemptible in what sex soever it is
seen: but learning attracts the
esteem and love of every body.
 Thou hast wholly perswaded
me to apply my self to study, in
shewing me that women are no
more incapable of it then men.
 I am glad I have given thee
a better opinion of our sex then
thou hadst before.