Well met, what is the best newes that the Country doth afford at this time?
Alas sir! I wonder you should so earnestly enquire newes of mee, that live in the Countrey, whenas we receive all our newes from you. I confesse, you did prevent mee, therefore I pray, what is the best newes in the City?
Alas! the ambiguous rotation of the World is very mutable, nothing is constant, nothing durable, but all things doe praecipitate themselves most strangly in a mutuall levitie.
This newes is hard indeed: for I did expect better, in regard that I have a Son, truely a pritty Scholler (as his Master tells me) and of a hopefull expectation, whose preferment I intend to raise (God willing) Therefore I beseech you (if you can) instruct me, what way I may settle him in.
What can he understand the Latine tongue, or how farre hath he proceeded therein?
Truely sir he is past his, & histoo I'le assure you; yea, & he can reade any Chapter in the Bible very punctifully, and withall he hath read toe Master Practise on the Piety, and many other Godly bookes I thanke God for it, who hath endewed him with so much grace: Therefore because he is come to some knowledge now, I would willingly bring him up to some Scholler-ship: what think you Sir, if I should send him to the Vniversity?
Sir I commend your sedulity herein: but I have often heard, and withall I know by experience, that the Vniversity is much polluted, and contaminated with Popish superstitions, which if your sonne should be seduced into, perhaps it will cause both his utter ruine, and your perpetuall sorrow.
Is it possible that the Vniversity should be corrupt? Tis no marvell then that the whole kingdome is misled, since the very fountaines themselves are poluted.
I Exhort you as a friend; and hope you will not contemne my friendly admonition.
But my Son may avoid their crafty allurements, and if he then uncessantly follow his studdy, he may one day prove a Minister of Gods word.
Pish, a minister of Gods word quother? Now a dayes every man will become a Minister: therefore it will be but vanity for you to send your sonne thither to attaine to the Sacerdotiall function.
But dare every man presume so farre without learning?
That is the chiefe cause thereof: for learning is abused, contemned, derided, neglected, despised: theywill have noe praying, nor preaching, unlesse it be performed by instinct and inspiration, as the spirit mooves them. And if a man heapes up knowledge, and Scholler-ship by indefatigable studdy, he is thought to have fild his mind only with more advantage to doe wickednesse.
Oh lamentable!
Yea you may see Coblers and Tinkers rising from the very Dunghill, beating the Pulpits as conformably, as if they were the Kinges professors of Divinity, scattering their new doctrine and discipline in the Church, and are accounted great divines too of the vulgar. Here you shall see one making himselfe a Prophet preaching in a Tub as confidently, as if he were Doctor in Divinity. There you shall see another thumping forth his new doctrine in a Barne among his conniticles (I should have said) conventicles, as if he were Master of Artes. In the meane while revolve all, and you shall finde Scholler-ship most shamefully despised.
But if he diligently continue in his studdy, God knowes but that he may one day become a Bishop.
How? a Bishop? alas! I feare there will be no more of that dignity: for the generall assent and consent too of the Commons will admit of no Bishops: and they must all very shortly resigne their Titles, which shall be abrogated. Your sonne shall never be Arch-Bishop I'le warrant you: and if you intend to make a Divine of him, he must have a great care least the Arch-Bishop doe not cut of his eares. But I will free you from that feare, for I tell once againe that there will be no more Bishops: Yet if it seemes more just, and secure, that the holy Church should admit a degree of lesse, and greater, they will have no Bishops, but onely Lay-Elders: to the election of which dignity, they judge andsuppose none more fit, and none more prepared for the performance of every thing, belonging to Gods word, then those venerable, and reverend Fathers Master, and, men (although but of a meane Scholler-ship) yet most wonderfully inspired. Therefore I think it it meere vanity for you, to bring your sonne up to be a Scholler.
Alas! then what shall I doe? unlesse I should put him to the Innes a Court.
Soe you'l make a youngof him, and then he'l run away.
But I intend to make him a.
Alas the Starre-Chamber, and High-Commission Court is downe long agone: and he must be as busie as a, or else he will loose preferment. For Lawyers are not respected, neither are they accounted Honest, because they sell their lines dearer thenPhysicks, which I confesse is deare enough, yet nothing comparable to the price of their lines, which gape wider then an Oyster-wifes mouths, and straddle wider then a French-man's legs. Fie, fie! Lawyers are accounted Knaves over all the Country.
Tis strange! For I'm sure they have more Angels come hourely to them in Terme time, then all the Puritans in the Towne.
But here lyes the difference: Their Angels doe weare crosses: and because the Puritans will admit of no crosse, therefore they hate the Lawyers the more, because they are so ready to receive them.
And there is none of their whole Tribe, that will deny such crosses, I'le warrant you.
But Lawyers are so little regarded now adayes, that I feare before they can procure other men's Suites at Law, they'le want Suites to their owne Backs.
But perhaps he may come to the honour of a Iudge one day.
I hope you doe not desire to have your Sonne hang'd. That's a dangerous title I'le assure you: Did you not heare that most of the Iudges are to be judged under other Iudges, yea and they'le hardly escape hanging too, unlesse they give ample satisfaction to the Parliament: for they are acknowledged to be the Originall of all our greivances. Therefore if you be wise desist from that opinion.
Alas! What education shall I then impose upon my Son? Since all these grounds of hope hath deceived me. What thinke you Sir, if I traine him up to be a Souldier?
He must sweare lustily then: and bragge of many things with ostentation, although he can performe nothing. But stay! Now I thinke on it: Perhaps he may be suspected to be some Trooper, (for they say the Countrey is very full of them) then apprehended and so incontinently committed onely upon suspicion.
You say true indeed Sir: Therefore I know not what course to take with him. I intreat you Sir, to lend me your advice.
If the Lad be so hopefull, as you declare him to be: I care not greatly if I take him under my Tuition, and if you please to condescend thereunto, he shall be my Apprentice, and I'le assure you for your sake he shall be both kindly kept, and religiously instructed.
I humbly thank you for your love, wherefore I acknowledge my selfe much ingaged to you: But I pray what trade are you off Sir?
I am a Vintner by my Trade.
I am very glade to heare of that: and if my Sonne be wise enough, but to take fourty Shilling aTunne, he may prove an Alderman too. Well Sir, I am much obleiged unto you, for your love unto him, and I will bring him unto you, and if you like his morality and ingenuity, I will willingly send him unto you.
He shall be most lovingly respected.
Thankes Noble Sir; In the meane while farewell.