My old friendhow goe all things at your Office, what is it full Terme with the brave Sparkes of your Court?
Truly Sir I am sore afraid the Terme is at his full hight, J beleeve J have layd all the Records in their severall places, and placed them in due order to little purpose.
Why I pray thee tell what is the matter, J hope the Parliament doth not meddle with so great a Court as your high Court of.
For my part I know not what the Parliament either doth or intendeth to doe, but this I am sure of, all my Masters that had vsed to sell some of their papers so deare as they doe at the Lottery, walke from one end of the Office to the other sighing, and pitifully complaine and say their time of Angell-gathering, they are sore afraid, is at an end.
Is it possible any thing can discourage the sparks of your Office had they bin corrupt, as I beleeve it is unpossible?
No truly, I thinke they were never corrupt; for they were honest men enough in all Conscience to be Lawyers.
Why are not Lawyers so honest as other men? Doe you know any thing to the contrary?
No Sir, I dare not say to the contrary; for I have all my livelyhood from amongst all these large Bundels of law, which I have here placed in their order, and cleansed them from the Cobwebs, wherewith they were plentifully hung.
They are very large indeed, they cost something in writing.
J believe you, for they have bin coppied, ingrossed, written, rescribed, prescribed, and transcribed forty times over.
But what did theuse to pay for so many times writing?
Yes that they did, and in ready money too, the sparkes of our Court would not be procrastinated, prorogued, or demurred.
But J hope their Rates were conscionable: were they not?
Yes! they did pay but xij.d. a sheete for the Coppy.
That was somthing deare, but how did they write them?
Very conscionably, some 15 lines in a sheet, with some 4 or 5 words in a line, which stradled so wide as an ordinary.
In my opinion xij.d. a sheet was somthing deare.
Alas! that was not all, they must pay to theGent. in the Cut-finger'd Gloves for the expedition and for the writing, besides the xij.d. a sheet for the Coppy.
Thou now tells me of a thing more then ever J heard of; is it possible, a thing may bee copyed and ingrossed, and not written, that the Cliant must pay xij.d. a sheet for the coppy, besides money for writing, and expedition? Surely both the Masters & the clarks of your Offices, have brave times of it.
Yes, they had brave times of it, but now (if we may credit their owne report) these dayes are done, and they must suffer now for all their exactions, and extortions, for the squeesing and screwing their Cliants.
How J pray did they squeese their Cliants?
Why it had bin almost so good for a man to have bin two Termes in the high Commission (which is now in faire possibility to be purged from it's exactions, by those sure Curers thethen one Terme in the.
That is unpossible sure.
Oh these Gent. have had brave times of it; for had a cliant come some 50. or 60. miles for a, they would have made him to have attended at least 3. dayes, when they could have dispatched it in halfe an houre, andin the mackereld tailed Gowne, would have made him to have paid 5 s. for his extraordinary care and labour, though it belonged to his Office to take forth the writ, and besides hee should have paid at least xij.d. more then his due for the Fee of the Writ.
This was intollerable exaction, but I pray thee proceed.
Had a good Fellow but killed a Coney within halfe a mile of a Gent. Parke,hee thatsowes the seed of dissention for our Court (though the Gent. that ownedthe Parke never knew of it) would straight have him up, and would draw a Bill in Parliament the compasse of a mourning Cloke, wherein he would set forth, that contrary to the peace of our Soveraigne Lord the King, the people being unlawfully armed with Guns, Swords, Bowes and Arrowes, and furnished with Dogs, nets, and other Engins, there hunted, killed, and destroyed all his deare and game of Conies, with more superfluous words then are contained in a, & the poore ignorant Clyant being fetched up, and seeing all these strange matters laid to his charge; would with all his heart give halfe he was worth to be rid of this unjust businesse; and then must be forced to compound withand these other spungy Gent. who would looke so contemptibly upon the poore fellow, as a Brasen faced Jaylor will upon a Malefactor.
But what in case the poore fellow had not ready mony, would they not give him some time to furnish himselfe?
No, they had no more conscience nor beleefe then the compounded fat bawd in the middle of; For had he not ready mony they would rap out twenty Basiliske oathes, and cry.
But J pray thee to what use was the money taken, and how was it imployed?
To build neither, nor, neither the King, Common-wealth, nor party wronged was the better for it; it was for the onely benefit of our large conscienced Clarkes.
I pray thee proceed?
Had a poore Clyant that was to put in hisanswer to one of these or such like unconscionable matters, or to appeare upon some occasion in the Court, but neglected halfe an houre more then the time limited: the two Clarkes would have agreed together to informe the Court of the Contempt, and straight have him censured; which with their subtile devises for Fees and such like would have beene twice the value of the offence, and the poore Clyant should surely pay every farthing, or else lye in prison, and out of hand too a writ then would be sued forth for the levying of that in halfe an houre which is something under three dayes.
But I pray thee explaine who were these two Clarkes.
Why the one was to be for the plaintiffe, and the other for the Defendant.
Js it possible the two adverse Clarkes should agree to cosen the poore Clyant? then J perceive it is full time these things should be looked unto.
It is true as I tell you, for though they would in the presence of the ignorant Clyants raile at one another, and accuse one another, of undue proceeding, yet at night at a Taverne or else-where in some private place they would divide the spoyle & laugh at the silly ignorance of the poore Clyant; they have a thousand of these wayes: I have known them make the Clyant pay for expedition in the middle of a long vacation when they have had nothing at all to doe, yet many times made the defendant to put in his answer and take a Coppy of the Bill when the plaintife hath signified he is satisfied, and that they are agreed?
Surely then the Clarkes of your Offices are very rich.
Yes truly some of them are; but there is othersome who have laid out more money then was their owne for the purchasing of places in our Offices.
And how doe they take it?
Faith for them who lived long in our Office
as Ministers preach conscience to their under clarks,
and say they must write more close with their words,
whereas before they could never write wide enough,
and the rest that have laid out more then their owne
whole estates upon their Office, hang downe their
dejected heads, all say they are utterly broke, and
know not what course to take,: yet J hope
my generous Masters will let mee have this benefit
for all my good service to make my best profit of
all these large Roles of parchment, which I will sell
toat the signe of the 24. 
halfe-penny loaves in, who will sell
them by retaile to furnish all the large measuring
Taylors in Towne; for they are fit for nothing else,
and I hope this will be sufficient to maintaine mee in
an honest way. And so farewell allExaction.