A Young Lawyer come amongst us! perhaps you may learn something; I have been telling these young Gentlemen you see with me by what means I could make this Kingdom the most Flourishing Kingdom in the whole World.
I am sorryI am come to late to hear how so good an Effect might be so easily wrought.
Nay Sir, you are not come too late, for I can (without any weariness) sit here to tell it all day long, I so greatly desire the Publick Good. In short Sir, what I have been saying is this; I can plainly demonstrate how we may beat thewithout fighting, pay Debts without Money, make all the Streets inNavigable Rivers, harbour all the King's Great Ships upon the top of an Hill, where they shall be secured from Wind and Weather, and from an hundred other Accidents they are else obnoxious to. All or most of this you may see printed in a Book of mine, which I know you Lawyers are against, because it likewise maintains a Register, which spoils your Trade; but to be Friends with you, though I have undone you in the First Part, I have a Second Part waiting at the Press, that will maintain you all sumptuously, if there were ten times as many more as there are; what say you to all this young Lawyer, Ha?
I say you have out stripp'd all the Poets that ever wrote and that 'tis pity the King and Council should have no more regard to your Person and Discourses, than wise man have for.
Sir the Reason's plain why they mind the Improvement of the Nation no more; heark you, the Great ones have another sort of Game to play; -- no more of that -- you understand me.
Not I, I profess; I cannot be reconcil'd to half a Sentence join'd with a little push, a wink, a nod, a smile, or a Finger held up to the Nose; I have hated those sort of tricks, ever since I've read my Lord, where, under the Title of seeming wise (he saith) such persons help themselves with Countenance and Gesture, and are wise by signs, and when they know within themselves, they speak of that they do not well know, would nevertheless seem to others to know of that which they may not well speak. Therefore Sir, if you would do any good upon me, you must speak, and not leave me to conjecture what you can say.
Psha! I see you do not know the World: pray read this Paper.
A Club to consist of threescore Lords and Gentlemen., They shall be calledEngland., They shall meet twice in the week.. They shall have provided for them a pennyworth of Cheese, Bread, Beer and Mustard. A brave Treat for LordsI confess! I'le read no more, unless you tell me how this Paper is pertinent to our former Discourse.
This is to satisfie you, that I am not only one that seem wise; for I was Chair-man of the Club, and I tell you, there were some there under my Instructions, would have baffled all the Coife; therefore whate're you may think on me, you see some Ingenious Gentlemen have thought me fit to be their Instructor.
That any Ingenious man desired you to be Chair-man, is more than I know, or ever heard on before; But pray Sir no more of that! Tell me what you mean by saying.
You will understand it too soon, I am sure I foresaw what's now coming upon us, before you was born. -- We are a lost People -- a lost People! An undone Nation, An undone Nation!
Still more Riddles! Good Captain what's the matter? What's the City on Fire at one end, and are they cutting Throats at the other?
You may sport at these things, you are but a young man, and cannot see so far as I do: that Priest yonder, can tell you, 'twill not be long before you must burn, unless you are resolved (as he is) to turn.
Do you know that Gentleman?
No, I never saw the man before.
How can you pretend to be acquainted with his Resolves?
What do you talk of pretend? pray who does not know that all the Clergy of the Church of(as you phrase it) are a Pack of -- I know what?
What do you mean by? for my part I am very well satisfied, if you did know what they were, you would speak of them with as much Reverence, as you do Detraction.
Psha! I tell you they are all a parcel of Self-interested Fellows, and Papists in their Hearts.
I perceive you are such an Enemy to Prerogative, that you'l encroach even upon the Almighty's, and not suffer him to monopolize the knowledge of Hearts; but how ignorant, as well as impious this Affirmation is, will appear: for how can they be self-interested, and for Popery? for if that comes in, there will a great many come to share with them in their Spiritual Livings.
You are a young man, and run too fast; for any one knows, if Popery gets once the upper hand, all the Lands taken from the Church in8. time will be restored again; though some therefore doe come to share with them, yet their Advantages will be much greater.
You may as well say every private mans Estate will be taken from him, and given to the Church; for no man holds any Estate by a stronger Title, than the Purchasers of Church-lands hold those Lands: for first they were sold by Act of Parliament, and in QueenDays instead of abrogating that Act, it was corroborated by another, to which the consent of his Holiness was given; and if this be not Security strong enough, I'le be content (though I confess 'twill be a great punishment) to write in Vindication of a Register. But Sir, to let this Slip of yours pass, pray instruct me for what reason our worthy Divines stand condemn'd in your Judgment, for Papists?
For what Reasons? Why, don't all the World know they are against Bringing in the Bill,and that they openly pray for the Duke?
Is this all?
All! Ay and enough too.
I am sorry to see you thus hurried on by a blind Zeal; for why should they not pray for his Highness? Let him be good or bad, their Prayers are necessary; if good, that he may be so preserved, if bad, that he may be reclaim'd and converted.
I shall not so much insist upon this; but as to the other Points, I mean the Bill: I have a Paper in my Pocket will confound all your Divines, and all your Lawyers put together; here, do but read, and you'l be convinced.
What, it's Intituled?
The same.
I have read him already; but for my part, I neither approve of the Man, nor his Reasons.
Not the Man! Why you don't know who 'tis.
But I know he fails in his Morals, by injuriously calumniating both His Majesty, and all the Worthy Clergy of our Church: forhe tells you, 'tis the constant Practice of Church-men to debauch young Gentlemen with ill Principles: and, the Episcopal Sees, Deanries,were the certain and constant Rewards of such Services: such Superlative Impudence ought to be quell'd, not with a Pen, but with the Magistrates Sword. However, this is to besaid in alleviation of his Fault, what he has spoke, is so grosly false, that no one (in their Wits) will believe him.
Pray let this alone, come to his Reasons; methinks you do not care to meddle with them.
I will shew you, there is not one thing, in the whole Pamphlet, worthy the name of a Reason; For as to the first and last position, which he so much endeavours to refute (and God knows does it boldly enough) there is no need of them to maintain this Cause, so that the four first Pages and the four last, (which the Gentleman is pleased to give us) contains only a parcel of insignificant Stuff. As for his Instance of, that God said This thing was of Him, what then? Therefore he approved of the Action of the Rebels. This looks like the Logick of one that rails at the University., saith the Lord;he approves of the afflicting Instruments. He hardnedHeart, that he might not let the Children ofgo;he was pleased withfor keeping them. A brave Divine! Indeed the Church ofmen and he do differ in Opinion.
Well, but he hath other Instances.
I tell you Sir, they are all impertinent; for he hath neither proved his Cases to be parallel to ours, nor that the Actors did what they did justly; the question between us, is not only what hath, and what may be done; but what hath justly, and may justly be done; for unless he will argue, Every thing that hath been done, hath been justly done (which is like his Logick) he hath said nothing to the purpose. When he can prove thatanddid justly excludewho was their right and true King, he will speak to the Point: But pray observe his Reason whywas put by; becausewas not an honest man, not becausewas dishonest. What think you, is not this a brave Fellow to be in Print? I so much insist Sir, upon this Term; because the Supreme Authority may chance to do something unjust: (else instead of Destroying, he'l Make Popes) for they may do something against the Divine Law. But to be short, what think you ofCase? I hope we all know that Act of Parliament was sufficiently repented of, because 'twas unjust. Let us see then how it suits with our Case;received a more severe punishment by that Act, than the Laws of the Realm had provided for such Offences; this was all, and here lay the injustice of the Act. If this Bill had pass'd, thehad receiv'd more severe Punishment for his Faults, than the Laws of the Realm have provided in such Cases; either therefore, that Act was just, or this Bill unjust.of the Queen it is with good reason provided, if any made open Submission and Declaration of his or their Conformity, that then they shall be discharged, of and from all and every the Penalties and Punishments inflicted. Now suppose the D. should conform: if this Bill had pass'd, it had nothing availed him; and though the meanest Subject in the Kingdom might have taken Advantage by his Conformity, yet the D. could not; a most unreasonable thing. Now upon the whole matter I appeal to any impartial man, whether this Argument will not hold: All Subjects ought in reason and justice to bear equal Punishments for equal Faults. But if the Bill had pass'd, the D. had had a more severe Punishment than any other Subject for the same Fault; Therefore,We have hitherto taken it for granted the D. is a Papist, but now let us see whether the Parliament could justly (when the Bill was brought) take notice of him as such; I demand therefore, Had he been legally convicted of Popery?
I cannot say that.
Why then, every man is supposed innocent, till he be Tryed, and proved Guilty; and I believe all people will agree to this Argument, That 'tis highly unjust to Condemn any man unheard; but if this Bill had passed, the D. had been condemned unheard; therefore he had been unjustly Condemned. 'Tis certain by the same Reason and Justice, they may make a Law to Condemn one man unheard, they may make a Law to Condemn all men unheard; and how would you like such a Law?
I perceive you conclude the Duke to be guilty of no other Fault but Popery; but alas! we all know there are a great many other Offences laid to his Charge, and things of a high Nature too -- but no more of that.
Now are we to believe you have a thundering Reserve, when in truth you do not know so much as you have spoke. Suppose him Sir, to be Actor of the most and greatest Crimes that ever mortal man was; let him (without Favour) be charged with them all; but let him be summon'd to make his Defence, and then from what Imputation he cannot clear himself, let him suffer for it according to the Laws in such Cases: But that there should be new Laws made to punish His particular Person only, or that he should be condemn'dunheard, are things I will maintain (against you and all the Fanatick Crew) to be Dissentaneous both to right Reason and Justice.
Talk what you will, I cannot believe but that the Parliament may lay the next Heir aside: for what if he should be a Fool, or a Mad-man; must we be govern'd by him?
I begin now to be weary with your Impertinence. Pray, who does not know 'tis every man's Fate (according to Law and Reason) that is an Ideot, or Mad-man to lose the Government of his Inheritance, and this rather fortifies than exonerates whathave said: That Justice must be alike to all Subjects. Thereforehopehave fully evinc'd, that though the Divines are against the Bill, (which is more than either you orknow) they are not for that blame-worthy.
Nay, talk as long as you will, I shall still be of the same mind.
Well, I see you are an obstinate, prejudic'd Man, 
thereforetake my Leave.