Whether in such hast Mr.; you looke as if you did not know me.
I doe indeed Sir, yet I am perswaded I have seene you; and now I thinke ont, 'twas at the Sessions house.
Right Sir, my name is; I enditedfor receiving of Inmates:
I perfectly remember you good; how go'strading with you now, I am afraid wee shall have a dead time on't, you have little to doe I thinke; whencomes Pattents grow out of date.
You are in the right sir, and which is worse, the City had rather goe wetshod then have them brought vp againe
Say you so, troth I cannot much blame them, for to say truth, you have not made them serviceable for the Common wealth, you have onely a respect to your private gaine Master Pattent, you got sweetly for the time they lasted.
By your favour Master, now you talke of deceit in Trading, I must tell you your owne too: did you never vent Calves Leather for Neate, and oftentimes for Spanish to some ignorant Customers: nay now you tell me of vnserviceable ware, how many of the Kings Subjects have you put in the stockes without authority not vagrants and Beggars, but Gentlemen, Marchants, Citizens, with their wives and aughters.
I vnderstand your wit: you meane that I have made their shooes too little for them.
Yes sir,
They had better be in the Shoomakers stacks, then be so gauled by Pattents as they have beene.
I doe not thinke but you have dranke yourMornings draught in Wormewood Beere Mr..
Why?
You fall so bitter vpon me:
I shall be bitterer ere we part Master Pattent.
Doe thy worst Shoomaker.
No no no, not the worst neither: The best I have to tell you will make you madd enough, doe you remember when you were Constable Master, when you tooke me in your watch on Crispine and Crispianus Night, and carried me to the Counter.
Ha ha ha, yes I doe, I doe.
Doe you laugh at it.
Yes faith, I remember you went beyond your Last then.
I remember thou wer't the troublesom'st tyrannicall Constable that ever knock'd down iniquity with a painted staffe: Thou would'st have a finger in every mans businesse, thy very name was hatefull, if they did but heare ofthey were danted, thou hast had a pernicious wit, or else thou could'st never overcome Scriveners and Brokers, they have curst thee sufficiently, the low Country Butter-boxes wished tennehundred thousand tunne of Devill take thee, because they were forced to waight for Butter till you brought the transporters to composition: And what had your Loggerhead to doe with Mr.the; thou wilt vndertake to teach people to dye well, and thy selfe could'st never live well.
Very good.
Not very bad sir, 'tis you I am talking off, doe you heare, theMarchantvowes a revenge vpon thee, and I much feare he will take thy life: for he sayes he will send his two Faetors,andto stifle thee.
The devill he will, they are from him already man he hath put them to boord in blind Ale-houses.
No matter, ther's more wayes to kill a Dog then hanging of him.
A Dogge you Dunstable.
Yes you paper Kite, and now I talke of hanging, there could not be so much as the hangmans office to sell but Tyburne, and the rest of his kindred must allow you a pention for it.
So, so, so, can Saintand his bones protect you to talke thus liberally Shoomaker.
Oh yes, yes, yes, thou giv'st me authority, I know I may talke freely by patent my friend:
It was Master.
I that was when you traded in sheepskins and Lambskins oh thou wer't a precious Woolfe in Lambskinne.
You will answer all this, will you not.
No, I scorne it, I beleeve I have spoke more then thou canst answer.
But heark ye goodman Shoomaker.
Goodman Shoomaker, I deny and defie the title. I am a Gentleman, my gentility is of Antiquity, thou art an Upstart; Shooes were made when thy villanous Pattents were not thought on.
Well I may chance shortly brew a little Wormewood for you.
Brew say you, you have brewed for vs already I thanke you, all the Gentlemen Cordwayners in St. Martins doe wish but to have the drowning of thee for abusing the Brewers: which hath made them abuse vs and send vs inchanted small Beere in stead of strong, before you had a hand in the Brewhouse we could have oldbeere would makes all madde before Munday noone, now tis so small we can scarceget drunke byNight, a whole tunne of our beere will scarce for a; this you have done good Master Pattent.
Shall I be blam'd for this, I thinke I did the Common wealth a great deale of good to keepe it sober.
I thou art a necessary member for in keeping of them from being drunke, thou mak'st them mad, as I am a Shoomaker and free of the Cordwainers, every prentize I had came home sober lastnight: It was not so I am sure when I was a Lad:
Hay, hay?
Yes and straw to, you put me well in mind on't, the horses that had been well bred and pamper'd in the Country, and had their allowance of hay freely, and lay at racke and manger, eat what they would; now they are stinted: how many pound of hay is there in a Load Mr. Pattent.
I cannot tell?
Wee must buy hay for our horses as we buy figs by the pound, doe you beleeve when you waighed Hay that Iustice held the Scales.
I see you will have License?
Not from you Iack straw, vnlesse you were in office againe?
Iacke straw?
I prethee answer me to one question andbe just with me to a strawes breadth?
Declare your wit?
How many ounces of straw goes to the littering of a Mad man a yeare in.
'Tis a madde question?
I that's true, I know who I speake to.
Why doe you count me for a Mad man.
No for a wise man: and a man that hath had experience ith mistery, this is no question for a Mad man to answer:
It seemes your conversation is altogether with wise acres: was it not you that asked the silly question once; whether Red-herrings came out of the red Sea or no.
No but it was you that made men pay as deare for them, as if they came from thence, I wonder you had nothing to doe with dainty blote herring, blote, blote, or dryed Sprats; I beleeve you had something to doe with Gudgeons, though thy selfe art as miserable now as poorewas, is it not you that one Lent endited a poore man of Felony for frying of Bacon.
Of Fellony?
Yes of Fellony, and you would needs justifie it with an Act of Parliament, which when one looked on it which had better eyes, it was not frying of Bacon, but fiering a Beacon.
Ha ha ha.
Doest thou laugh at thy owne ignorance, doe you heare, did I never know you a Dunghill Raker.
I a Dunghill raker, ye Pantoffle.
I cry you mercy Sir, you did onely rake them that raked Dunghills, looke too't, for there is an army comming against thee, whose weapons are strong yron hookes; the Captaine of them is: those that be vnder his command I shall nominate to thee.And a great many more out of my memory at this time that have made vp a ragged Regiment and vow no more to be obedient to thy authority Moreover the Hop-Marchants have an intentionto marry all the female Bonelace makers, and get Children to fortifie themselves against theethey say if thou dost but come amongst their hops againe, they will scarce leave thee a leg to hop away vpon, and the Bonelace-makers have taken such spirit against thee, that in stead of Bone-Lace thou shalt returne with laced bones, and take my word, thou hadst better be in the middle ofpikes, then amongst theirneedles.
Doe you hold any confedrase with this lawlesse faction Mr.that you can so well tell the manner of the revenges they will execute vpon me.
I promise thee I doe not thinke but they will burne thee when all comes to all, and ther'san end of.
It must be some of your female Bonelacemakers then, I care not a button for the rest of the Rebellions.
Don't you care a button? Masterinwill make you care a button, why thou Iack in a boxe, could'st not thou be content to gaine Authority amongst the Buttonmakers of, where the sisterhood might have payed thee tribute; besides Buttons for thy breeches.
Yes when their breeches make buttons, have I lived after that rate to goe secured among Precisions you vagrants.
Among Precisians you puppie, what need you confine your selfe to one Sect when there is so much division amongst them.
That's all one, they hold the greatest sway who care no more for knocking a mans braines out in zeale, or for the good of the common cause: then I for philiping a flie to death, I would not be within y=e= jurisdiction of newfor a million.
Nay I thinke thou hadst better be in the greatCountrie:
Or have been Page to Sir, I should hope to returne with more security.
Well, but now we have been in,, and; let vs returne to oldagaine, where there is many honest men will welcome you home, one Mr..
Oh, the Hatband maker.
Then theres another one Mr.
A fiddlestring maker?
Master:
A Tobackopipe maker?
Master Glasse.
A Spectacle maker?
Master:
A Combmaker?
Doe you heare Pattent cannot you vance all trades, how many Halls have you been free of:
Whats that to thee?
That is a question all men aske when they are ashamed to give an answer.
Ashamed?
Did I say thou wert ashamed:
'Twas your pleasure?
Give me thy hand I am sorry for it, I cry thee mercy I tooke my markes amisse: Ile give thee thy due for that efaith I thinke thou wert ever shamelesse, have I hit the Naile on the head now Smith, are you pleased:
You have spoken all?
Not all, but I am drawing to an end?
Would thou hadst spoke thy last once?
I shall vexe thy soule first Sirrah, vnlesse thou canst come off with good Language, thou wilt suffer many Deaths in one, the Hatband maker will choake thee or strangle thee with, the Gutstring maker will make strings of thy Guts which will cozen the Fidlers most abhominably, for they will never stand in Tune, the Tobackopipe makers, Spectacle makers, and Combe makers, will compound with the Dicemakers for thy bones to make falce Dice with, and that's a way to make thee as mischievous in thy Death as thou wer't in thy lifetime, and if thy Bones prove so deceitfull, we may very well turne the tother end of an old Proverb, what was bred in thy flesh will never out of thy bones.
I have heard you, and doubt not the worst their mallice aymes to inflict vpon me, I have ere this my tragedy be brought to passe, contriv'd a meanes to worke revenge on them.
Declare, I shall be glad to heare it, I always had an itching desire to mischiefe as well as thou:
Thus then, I will bring up a fashion amongst some of our temporising gallants to forsake the wearing of hatbonds, we will have all our fiddle strings fromand, and as I am a Smith, I have a conceit to make yron tobacko pipes and steele Combes, and our old men when they once grow dimme sighted, shall have their writings read to them.
I this is prety well, but not in your power to perfect, this is a harder project vpon them, then the first you had, it will be a hard matter to draw the humours of the whole Kingdome to these fashions: besides your yron worke will doe no good, for we have many phantastike Company keepers that onely take Tobacko to breake the pipes, and shall we be beholding to other Nations for fiddle strings or combe our heads with Horse Combes. Besides ther's a strange conceit indeed that all old men should have their writings read to them, 'tis enough to vndoe halfe the old men in the Kingdome, their Mistresses shall not send to them letters of commendation, or places of newmeeting, but they must be enforc'd to have their wives to read them, and what inconveniency that would bring, doe but judge: No no, this will not doe Mr., I am a little in hast, I thinke it be dinner time, I will onely give you one item more and then I'le leave you to your owne direction, were you never acquainted with one Mr..
Yes, yes, a Horner.
Ware horns, take heed of him are you mari'd.
What of that?
Take heed of him, that is all; I speake as a Friend.
Friendly councell.
It is so, then doe not you know Mr. Kill Cow.
Yes the Butcher.
The very same, he hath a great many friends abroad, so hathhis Dog, be sure you goe not through field lane, Newgate market, Butcher row, St.shambles, East Cheape, or, there is wait laid for thee in all these places, and if they meet thee thou wilt be stucke fuller of Skuers then a Surloyne of roast beefe atis stucke with Rosemary: And by all meanes come not neare the Beare garden for beares and Dogs are friends and all agree, on thee to act a bloody Tragedy.
Well sirrah, you are a railing fellow, I'le talke no more to you?
One cold word more good Master.
But sirrah why doth these things trouble you so much?
I tell thee my name ismy nature is like vnto my name, and I defie such juggling in a Common-wealth, it makes my honest countrymen beg in a land of plentie; I have somthing to say to you (now I consideris so neare) concerning Cards. What new game have you set a foot, that the knave of Dyamonds doth cozen the king of Hearts and all his Subjects to the very Ace, y'are a sure Card sirrah, whendeales, all the rest doe but hold Cards.
Why not, why I tell thee I will cozen my Father at Cards.
Prethee doe not sweare I'le beleeve thee, the Father quoth he, I the Father of thy Country -- you are going now, you doe not love to heare of your faults, I have onely one thing more to say to thee, & then fire or y=e= Iakes consume thee.
I thanke you sir, spit out your spleene, what is your next venome?
No venome vpon my credit, now I have laid open thy soule inside, I will give thee a purge that is with Soape:
With Soape?
With Sope, I with Sope, that was a purge deere enough as you order'd it, all the goodHuswives in, and those that take a pride in cleane linnen, have an intention to wash thee cleere from all thy former villanies; but I am afraid they will doe no good vpon thee, they will be enforced at last to hang thee vp for the signe of y=e= Labour in vaine, which is the end I bequeath thee too, and though I am no Barbar good Mr., I must leave you ith suds at this time, for I have talk'd my selfe weary, my shop Iournimen and prentises expect me, if you have any thing to say to me, you know St., I will not change my house now the world is in hope of reformation. So good even sweet Master.
Farewell sir?
And though these things I can no longer 
thrive by,
Hang him that wants, who hath all Trades
to live by.