Wee are utterly undone, this Parliament hath not only rendred us contemptible to the world, but hath deprived us of our practice: the Kings Advocate hath not got a fee for anbusinesse this halfe yeere: my selfe have drawne no Articles against one that repeated Sermons with his family this twelve-moneth: my Lord of, might have spared the making of a table of fees, hee needed not to have turn'd out the Register for extortion, unlesse the issue had bin better.
'Tis true M., but we doe not suffer an Eclipse in the high Commission onely, but in all other Courts.that on a Court day us'd to be fuller then at a Sermon on a Sunday, and the Audience Court in, where a man could not heare with his owne eares: the Prerogative, Consistory, and Arch-Deacons, with the Deane and Chapters Courts, that were wont to be crowded like money into anUsurers bag, are very quiet and peaceable now; we cannot talke false Latine now, but it will bee understood, wee cannot get ten pounds in part for the probate of a wil, as corpulent M Copper-nose our Brother, the English Proctor could, we cannot putname to Articles, for incontinency, with the privity of the Judge, as heretofore we could, and then compound for the penance our selves, as we have done with the Judge before for his sentence.
No more can we send our Messengers into the Countrey, that pry into peoples actions there, as Aldermanspirits would into a But of unlicensed wine. You know when many Articles were drawne in the name of, against any that we knew was rich, upon no ground at all, but hope that he would refuse to take his oath, either to accuse or forsweare himselfe, if he did refuse, then we would be paid our fees; M. Advocate for perusing and subscribing the Articles, a Peece, thats two fees, when it was all but one labour, my selfe for drawing 'm, running up and downe, sending my man, and twenty pains more, that Heaven knowes I never tooke, my fees treble, and the Office would be carefull enough for their fees, for expedition for extraordinary attenda~ce, bonds and twenty things more, they would not want much of twenty times their fees, and then hee remaining obstinate, my Lords Grace would deale with him as he did with others, into prison with him, no redemption. O money causes were pure good ones; a parson would spend more money, by delay, then the benefice is worth. We could not endure Alimonie, many of them were.
A pox upon 'em, I had rather the Judge wold have given sentence against my Clyent then bestowed aon me, I am sure the creature if he follow'd not his own busines better then I, he would have a cold bargaine of it, for my part I fitted him, but sometimes he would present aor the like to my man, and if he lookt after it so, if not, I got very well by a wench that has beene undone in a darke entry. Sirwould commit her penance into ten pounds, towards the repaire of, and then we would share it. A shop doore could not be open on a holy-day, but the next Sunday the Church was saluted with a, and if he did not appeare, whether he heard of it or no,. Let him appeare when he would, he must tender downe his contumacie fees, or he remaines and is accounted, and when he is restor'd, he must pay the Officers fees, faith such businesses were pretty toyes.
And I have gain'd well by a poore will, when the estate has not amounted to above fortie pounds, I would perswade the executor for confirmation to prove it, but first it must be proved in, and by that time some twenty markes or such a sum would redound to me out o'the forty, I ne're car'd much for an Administration.
But I did, for I would get more by it, the Inventary (which my man should ingrose, as if one word were affraid of another) the account & the, and the gratuity, (which I never fayld of) then you could by an Ordinary will. All,,,, were as fearefull of me, as of aConstable or, many a time have I stept in with 'em for my fees, and have had all content possible. I should have thought it an ill day i'the vocation if I had not got a peece.
Oh brother you would not beleeve how I delighted in a Commission, which I would goe into th' Country withall, and expedite, and if they would not give me ten pounds for it, (which if a Country Proctor had done, he would not have required above a peece) I would not make many delayes for the matter, but have got it taxt by any Surrogate (whom I could perswade) to twelve or foureteene pounds, a motion flies downe and an excommunication after it, and so I liv'd in as much state as, or'e your Country, Commissions would afford good profit.
Faith brother, and I have cheated many of my brethren inth' Country, who used to send me up businesses ready roasted, I would pretend caveats were entred, and detaine the businesse in my hands a weeke longer then the time, and then make them pay me as fully for them, as if my man had ingrost them himselfe.
O but I was as good at an appeale as could be, for when the cause was ready for sentence, if I thought the adverse party would not appeale, if sentence went against him, I would perswade the Judge to give sentence against my Client, and then I would be sure to appeale, and when I had appealed, my Bill would exceed a Taylors; there would be, andtwenty things more that were never done. A notable merry fellow had a poore cause appealed thrice: and then the adverse party got a Commission of review my Client, stillhaving sentence, which when he told, how his enemy had appealed so often, and was yet gone further: sayes he, I have a Proctor that will follow to th'Divell, (if I whip him with a silver Lash. And on my conscience I should have lookt as scurvily upon a poore Client as a Beggar does upon a Beadle, or a whipping post, for Gods sake brother how long is it since these blessings faild?
Faith ever since the Parliament begun, or rather before. At the visitation at SaintChurch, when Doctorwas hunted dry foot into the water, where had he not dived, the Spanels, would have tore him in peeces, they catcht hold of his legs and made them swell extreamely, ever since that time we have bin held in most speciall contempt; your whores that would have hang'd themselves before to please us, now call us civill villaines, our Law, the bawdy Courts, and they that have preserv'd our Bills, now show them us, and expect restoration, nay thefails us now. That is, to bring a boy with fifty or three-score pounds, or within a yeer or two turne him away, but keepe his monie; this is a blacke tune for us: ten groats give in a licence now makes me as jocound as a gratuity of ten pound would before. Can not you devise what course is to be taken?
Now,could draw a prohibition,leave my Sheepskin-hood, and convert it into a
Buckram bag, aAtturney lives a Kings life now,
however I am (if the oathshot out of our new
Canons does not strik us quite dead) get acquaintance with
parish Clearks, & keep a horse that can smel out a
testament, if my brother Coppernose would die once,would be made free of the Girdlers, and beg the
probation of Citizens and Aldermens wils:
if all faile me,flye after Doctorinto, and than 
wee'l eate Capons and
revive our living.