, not a word amonst us three confederates, but what's, it is not fit to letgo off thus for 135 pounds; wee'l make him marry thee, or make thee aall thy life time: Hee'lthat we say, whilst we agree in one and the same Tale, he won't be long absent from us, therefore lets beandagainst his coming.
The project will hit doubtless, we have such a grand earnest of his folly before-hand, 'tis but making him believe shee'l turn and be honest ever after, which if it were not so, you know, for my part, I wish I were the:is not overworn, therefore not past turning, and a goodleft to look in still.
Ay, and a goodtoo thou mayst lay, but 'tis customary here to receive mony with wives, (who like light gold will not pass without allowance,) but give mony for wenches, and that hee'l do I warrant yee, wee'l make thee afor others to imitate and follow: what mustbe made aofwhere there's a? I'le make him believe she hath as many suitors as there are days in the year, to make him more zealous ofhisshould such an Amazonian beauty, accomplisht with such transcendant endowments both of body and mind, proportion'd with such equal parts, enrich'd with Silver and Golden habiliments, be parted with at an easy rate, so, as to make a slave her master, or a servant her Commander.
My very teeth water at the Contrivance, if it falls right, expect I will reward you both out of his estate, 'tis but his believing that I will be honest after all myand, and that's all one to a fool; for, I shall not be the firstthat has turn'd honest, in the flower of her age, 'tis but your getting another to supply the place during my absence, for common Jades (such as, and,) are numerous enough, and will sit with their leggs spread over the sides of a chair with their petticoates and smocks in their mouths, whilst theirrun a tilt at theirin that posture, paying twelve pence a time for holing; and for his part and mine we have taken a sure course to try each others abilities before-hand; we shall not fear commencing offor want of, or for being, yet Ile have him sign and seal these followingfor anof his future,, That Ido freely, and willingly settle 300 l. per annum upon, for and during her life time., That I will allow her aand four, withanswerable., That I wont be jealous of any man's coming, or visiting her, of what Quality, Rank or Condition whatsoever., That I will allow her a, to hold up her train whilst she walks from room to room., That she shall have free liberty to make choise of her own, and others belonging to the family, and chuse a-new every month, if they do not keep close their chaps, what ever they do with their legs.
They are singular ways to providefor his, but I would not wish you to stand upon such, if he will but marry thee, for if he should deny to let thee have thy will and pleasure afterwards, 'tis but taking a touch or two with a, (who frequently takes histhat way, if hisbe handsom,) and hee'l sue him for, and make him maintain thee out of his Estate in spite of his teeth, and then play theunder his nose as many brave lasses have done before thee, and he shall not help himself, whereof we have a thousandof women running from their husbands, and chusing otherfor their, as appears by a late Treatise entituled the, written byin the case of, &c.
Thou hast done well to satisfy me so cleerly, Ile follow the example of yongthewife, who receiving some seeming abuses from her husband, (when the major part of her Portion grew due) ran away from him, carrying all his, &c. suing him for maintenance, as he found by woful experience, and the leaving off of his trade, under the pretence of his having the.
I shall tell thee of another way besides that, ifthou hast a mind to make him run mad; take a handsomthy, and please thy, into the house, love and lie with him and hate thy husband, lie naked in the bed rather then have thy smock sow'd to his shirt, when thou wouldst under pretence of rising to piss, or going to a close stool, go to bed with thy, and if he be angry, call him, and; and if that faylshis head with a, orhiswith a, and it will cool his courage quickly.
Thou'rt a primeindeed, if thou hadst but ato match thee, for to read a Lecture in a, thou hast evermore had a natural propensity to, as to, and knowst how to ride post to the; for I dare swear there's scarse a rule in all, but thou hast it, readier then thy; for thy zeal, (likewith the,with theof, andwhen thecudgel'd the 5 pounds out of his Carkass for lying too neer his Brindle) is lockt up in amore then honesty, yet I like thy.
, as thesaid to the, be sure I have not my namefor nothing: I have told,, and you are not to seek in that point, Im'e sure on't.
Thou say'st very true,, as thou didst with my Cousin, but methinks we are grown huge modest in our debates bewixt each other, but I wondertarries all thiswhile, I wish we had some pleasant tale, told to drive away the tedious night.
Rather then want, I would invent a, but this I shall tell you stands upon record, is very true, and was try'd atof a, who was courted by a neighbor whom she did not fancy: this yongout of spight, reports she had noand scarce a pissing place; a second suitor engages her affections, but upon noise of the rumor relinquishes her; a(as most of that function are) tells her he would sue thisin her behalf, and demand nothing till, to which she assented, the party being arrested the suit was shortly brought to tryal, where a Jury of women were summoned (not men) to search her, who upon demand from the, what they had to say in the business, one of the eldest Matrons answer'd that she had a good thing (meaning the maid, not her self,) the Judge told her that was not enough to satisfy the Jury, she must speak broader and plainer? Why, then (quoth she) she hath a very: I tell thee again woman thou must speak plain; why, then if I must I will, and will swear it again and again, before yourand the, she hath alarge enough for the beggest mansin the Parish, at which they all laughed, and the Jury (for that she was a handsom wench) fined her adversary threescore pounds damage which was accordingly paid the.
That was honestly done of them, and is neer a kin to a passage I have heard of a fellow who helping a Gentlewoman on Horse-back, slipp't his hand under her belly and tore a tufft of hair off herCommodity, waring it in a Bravadoin his hat; which her husband hearing of, su'd him for it, and it cost him forty pounds for his frolick.
Well I am bound to tell a Tale or let a fart, therefore give ear to this following, concerning a Gentleman who had continu'd with a great deal of eagerness a suitor to a Gentlewoman, whose incivilties could not retract him, nor perswasions withdraw him, at length when nothing would serve his turn, she uncover'd her breast naked, ranckled, rotted and corrupted, which he espying took leave of her, and never set eye on her after.
I believe neither of you two would have uncover'd your infirmities, in such a Case, but for my part I conceive it lawful for men and women, to, and were it customary as in, your, andwould be less in request, both with your selves and oother's, and fewertoand, which is seldom occasion'd by a brown skin, a crook'd back or legs, or poor habit, but often byand, with other, which cover yourand: I have known many women, taken out of (their better part) theirwould have been a loathing to themselves and others, who otherwise were doted upon in their.
Should you men, see all ouractions in a true, (and not a counterfeit) glass, we should be the mostin the world, but we can order you in that point, as most of yourdo their, who if they won't let them havetheirandto boot, 'tis but dissembling aor, a, or some other distemper, and theirshall cost them more mony in, (who now and then cornute them into the bargain),, and, then if they had granted their desires at first.
I am no stranger to those tricks, for if I were, I should have a better opinion of your sex, then they have deserved (the number of wicked women, being numberless) amongst which number are, who broke her husbands head with a, and had like to have kill'd him with it,, who us'd to comb her husbands head with a, into which hiswas struck as if he had been in the, or got aabout his neck,at the further end of, who is never quiet but whenthein, is at work in her, and, who notwithstanding her husbands lawful and due correction, will tempt,thein, to make her husband a: well if you think to haveI hear, and see coming, you must behave your self with more discretion, as a, said her husband did her.
Prithee, but stick close to us in our;, truly devoted of your servants salutes you, and rejoyces at your appearance, why so long absent from her so deerly loves you, why at such a distance from her whose life and fortunes lie andtruckle at your foot-stood, whose presence is my life and absence death.
Thy company's no less to me my, my, and my, of whom I'le say:deerrosy lippscomplete partssweet joyessweet armeskind bosomLoversLadies.
That you have gain'dis no news, I would advise you Sir to marry her, you may meet with a, and that's worse then a, but she hath vow'dfor the future.
I can assure that to be true, that she's resolved to turn if you'l marry her.
I thought I had remov'd all scruples in that point, is the motion of your mentioning?
Truly sir, I am very weary of this life, and would gladly turn, would you let me be devoted wholly to your service.
'Tis no sleight Question to answer, much more to execute, so that you must pardon me in that Point.
Why then you must allow her a yeerly revenue to maintain her for your self, and keep her in herand.
There's all the reason in the world for't,what would not some men give for ain a corner, the.
Well what's your demands, what will maintain her from theof, come speak out or letdo't for you, but marry I may not.
a year is as little as can be to maintain herand.
Well, provided she layes no claims to marriage with me, I'le settle 50 Pounds.
Come she shall do't, Ile be her, fill us some wine to seal the bargain.
Content till our next days meeting.