Care I for thy worldly trash? not a rush: tell not mee of thy millions, thousands, and hundreds: I prayse my (bountifull) starres I have an inbred treasury, not valuable in respect of that which thou countest good.
I, I, talk on, talk on; it seemes thou art neither acquainted with wealth, nor (what thou brag'st of most) wit; for thou art quite beside thy Arethmatick, putting the cart before the horse: millions first, and hundreds last: a preposterous Argument, suitable to thy disposition.
Why? I tell thee (foole) I am soe weaned from the very conception of any thoughtconcerning Riches, that tis noe wonder, if all words spoken by mee on that hatefull subject prove to be abortive.
How doest thou live then, I prithee?
By my wit, I tell thee, and hold it a farre richer Patrimony then all thy gold can make thee soe much as capable of.
Marry I tell thee in my conceit thou'st but a very bad trade on't now. What canst thou expect to get by thy wit, in an age which regards neither wit, honesty, conscience, humanity, Noble-Ancestrey, nor indeed (to bee briefe) any thing; but what I am Master of, (and by which I can accomplish whatsoever my thoughts would acquire) and that is money, the darling of the time, the conquerour of Conquerers, the Coyner of Honesty, and the Muzzell of Eloquence?
O brave, why now I perceive the case is much altered since I saw thee last, I doe not think but thou haste bought (and read), or (rather); why thy phrase and manners is quite changed from what was wont to bee, or I now expected, I do not think but thou art become one of the wits of the times, all thy usuall Dialect was&, orbut now let me see what is't the Darling of the Time, Conquerour of Conquerers, Muzzle of Eloquence; O rare stile! but tell me, is all this Rhethorick proper to Pelf?
This quotha? why I'd have thee to know, that these golden phrases, and thousands more daily in use are the very children of drosse (as thou callest it) Subjects of silver, Servants and slaves of gold: why man didst never heare talke of golden Boyes, Girles worth gold, and penny white, brown bread Lasses? I'm sure thou hast.
I marry have I, what then? are all these Epethits equivalent with an admirable wit, a quaint conceit, a curious delivery, an exquisite device, an elaborate stile, and a gallant humour?
Tush, what of all this? why, I say againe and againe, and as many times againe as thou wilt, that all this, and as much as thou canst sum up between Shrove-tide and Easter, are but Lent by the benevolence of industrious gold and silver, does not money buy Learning? and (I prethee) does not learning make Divines, Lawyers, Phisitians, Phylosophers, Poets, and what not?, no mony no Master, no Master noScholler; for it is an old Proverb,; thereforeleave off thy bragging of wit, least thou prove thy self a fool, in preferring it before wealth, which is (as it were) a creator of Wit.
I protest, though indeed I never held thee to bee very wise, yet I tell thee, I never expected such a vacuity of discretion, as now thou hast bewrayed in thy last discourse, out upon thee, hold thy tongue for shame, till thou learn how to use it better: I vow I'me asham'd of thee.
Why Sirrah? tell me patiently, I beleeve in truth this is but a flourish of wit, a meere whimsie to daunt me, and make mee leave off, but in faith thou art a younger brother in that, all thy witty flashes cannot beat me off from my ground, I say still, that wealth is to be preferred before wit, as being (in a manner) the very nurse and foster father of it, all these thy bravadoes shall never beat me off, while I can speak my minde to maintain it.
I marry, thou hast spun a fine thred indeed, thy argument is even as strong as a Spiders web, which thou shalt see me presently blow away, and dissolve with a blast from my mouth; thou hast spoken like a meere Dody-pole as thouart, in seeking to prove that Wealth buyes Learning, and Learning creates wit, when it is apparently seen to the contrary; onely this I confesse that Literature is a most necessary handmaid to the Muses, without which (indeed) they cannot be well dressed, but, a Poet is so born, not so made, for unlesse a man have an inbred and naturall proclivity, what boots all his Learning? nay rather, doth it not render him more odious to his auditors, who expecting the Nut of Learning, finde nothing but the shell of guilded ignorance, like a Jay deck'd in Peacocks feathers, a Sow with a gold ring in her snout, and a Millers Asse, garnished with the rich saddle and trappings of, doth not the experience of all ages ratifie this? speak man.
Thou wouldst inforce me to beleeve so, but I neither can nor will, without particulars to confirm thy words more then a generall saying that it is so, therefore I absolutely deny the Argument to be good unlesse thou canst instance some pregnant proofe to justifie thy assertion.
That I can very readily doe, not needing to trouble thee with precedent men & times, but even turning to those now living in thispresent age, and of them one most eminent may serve to dignifie a multitude of others more obscure: what thinkest thou of that notable (only) English Poet, how many sublime and (truely) witty Poems hath hee published in Print? raising a Pyramides to his never dying memory, of an ingenuous fertile braine without any addition of learning worth mention: but what his own industrious (and inbred) capacity hath possest him of; what curry-combs hath hee taken out of the Iron-mongers own shop to dresse the (ill-conditioned) Iade withall? how artificially hath he rosted and broyled him upon his own spits, and grid-irons, how hath hee fry'd and toss'd him in his own frying-pan, basted him with his own ladle, and boyl'd him like a Calves-head and Bacon in his own pottage-pot? Now I prethee judge impartially of this; the one vaunts much of great learning (which thou sayest is bought with money) the other professeth himself to be guilty of very little (if any) and yet how different their writings are, having (with all possible acerbity prest the Presse against each other, the world hath censured already, and so doe thou now.
Why, is not the Iron-monger counted for a pregnant witty fellow? I think he is,he hath published (and doth weekly) a number of Pamphlets, which some like exceeding well.
Why, I tell thee hee hath no wit, but a kinde of railing invention; was ever any age guilty of producing such a firebrand of mischiefe? what pestiferous incentives hath hee writen and published, to stir up sedition betwixt the King and his people, while it is to be feared hee is really true to neither.
Well then, leaving this discourse, let us proceed to something (in my conceit) more pertinent to our purpose, which shall bee this: whether Wit or Wealth (as I touched in the beginning) will best feed and cloath a man? answer me to that briefly and plainly; here's the case, thou hast Wit enough, and I have Wealth enough; now which of them affords the best maintenance, there lies the state of the question, I hold my principle still, Wealth is to be preferred before Wit?
And I will confidently defend the precedency of Wit before Wealth, as being a divine and supernaturall gift, which mony can never purchase.
That's confest but neverthelesse thou canst not deny but Wealth is a Divine gift, as well as Wit, is it not? doth not holy writmention many godly men, very rich?
I pretheelet holy Writ alone in our quarrell, for I love not to mix holy and prophane matters together, but if thou shouldest hedge in them to make thy fence the stronger, the examples are so few, in comparison of others, that have abandoned riches to imbrace contemplation in poverty; that the difference would easily appeare; to what end thinkest thou did my Couzenthat witty Phylosopher, throw all his wealth (which was abundance) into the Sea; was it not because it was an impediment to his study, and our Poets in imitation of him, if they be possest with any worldly trash (as loathing to keep it) doe they not drown it in Sack, as he drowned his in the Sea? what should he doe with wealth, who hates it in comparison of his study? the Muses children ne're turn Usurers, nor care they for coyn, but for necessity, all besides is superfluous.
This is all true (I confesse) but tell me one thing, how if thou should'st come to be sick, lame, cast in prison, or feel any such kind of affliction, can thy wit ease or release thee, will the Phisitians, or Gaolers, take learned Epistles, or witty Poems, in lieu of their fees, canst thou in rime shew them a reason why they shoulddeliver thee without money? nay, Ile goe a nearer and easier way with thee, canst thou by such meanes procure any palliation or mitigation to (or of) thy misery, will they be mollified with Madrigalls, softned with Sonets, entreated with Epigrams overcome with Odes? tell mee seriously,, what think'st thou? whether will Wit or Wealth (in such sad exigents) stand thee in the most stead?
This touches home I protest, thou never graveld'st me till now, yet Ile beare up still; and suppose that reliefe may be gain'd by Art; for ifhad power with his dulced harmony to convert salvage beasts from their naturall (and customary) truculency, can it be imagined that men (such as are Phisitians or Gaolers) should be more barbarous then bruit beasts, more salvage then Satyres, more cruel then Caniballs, and more inhumane then Incubuses, have I clench'd the nayle, what sayest thou?
Very sleightly,, nay, now I perceive thou beginnest to yeeld, I have beat thee out of thy play; run thee off o'thy legges, put thee besides thy Text, turn'd thee out of tune, and whipt thee to confession of thy folly, yeeld up thefor in truth thou art utterlyfoyl'd in thy argument, art thou not?
Ne're the sooner for a hasty word,, I confesse that I doubt some of this is too true, but howsoever,, let mee have tryall by thy own Law, thou didst put me to particular proofes in a generall plain case, the like I claime of thee.
Very willingly,, but let one include many as thou servedst mee (about) there is an honest man, a very good friend of mine, and one whom thou knowest very well (but he shall now goe namelesse) he is (by many) accounted to have an indifferent portion of wit, but in this sad predicament being a close prisoner in, belonging to) he is altogether destitute of mony, and consequently of friends; all shunning him (as a man utterly forlorn and forsaken;) nay, which is most (and worst) of all: Some to whom the key of his wit (when he was at liberty) did, in a manner, open the doore to their earthly happinesse (I think they expect no heavenly) now in his distressed captivity, doe utterly abandon his sight not vouchsafing to visit him with money due to him, nor giving him former imployment, what sayest thou to this,, wilt thou yet grant me the Victory?
Truely I am heartily sorry, that thou givest mee such (a failing) occasion; especially considering that he is an intimate acquaintance of mine (as thou sayest he is) tush, I am not absolutely induced to beleeve it; yet indeed this present age hath gotten the start of all precedent times for ingratitude, hypocrisie, hardnesse of heart, neglect of lawdable Arts (and Customes,) and indeed want of common honesty; but let mee see, I was about to ask thee how the Gaolers use him (for that was our argument before) but 'tis needlesse discourse for if his professed and obliged friends, are so ingratefully cruell, a man may almost conclude it as an Article that his wit or honesty will but little prevaile with the Keepers without that which makes the Mare to goe.
Why so I said before, and yetin troth,, I must needs (in his case) vary something from my first principle: for his particular hee hath found unexpected favour from his Keepers (whether wone by his wit, honesty, or both, I question not) for were not their hearts softned in consideration of his condition which is without paralell) he had been cast into the common Gaole before this time, there to have perished without any remedy.
Well,, me thinks yet I smell the victory as hot in my nostrils as a Beare does honey in a marrow-bone: hast not thou confest it thy self? dost not thou (with pitying his case, withall) conclude that his wit and honesty procure him favour without money? what can be more cleare? a ha? have I taken you tardy ath' last? come yeild, yeild.
Well: I perceive that if I give thee an Inch thou'lt take an Ell: but I prithee don't vaunt before the victory: suppose I have granted that the Keepers are kind to him beyond customary use? wilt thou therefore runne away with the argument, as though the poore man might not be better us'd for money, if he had it? away with thee, thou a, thou a, (as thou call'st me) thou hast absolutely brought thy self into a Meander of folly; from which all thy pretended Wit cannot deliver thee.
O brave, I protest I think the rich fool will carry't when all is done.
Rich fool quotha, marry,, as the world goes now adaies, he's most wise (or wity, or what thou wilt call it) that can keep a penny for a rainy day (as the Proverb sayes) come, come, have thou wit to save thy money when thou hast it, thou'lt brook thy name the betterby't, doe not stand upon a vain opinion of living by thy wit, I tell thee thou mayest as well turn Chamelion and live by the aire, consider with thy self, the condition of people though they speak faire in prosperity, while the golden sun or the silver Moon of thy fortunes, reflect upon them, what will they doe, or what will they say when those refulgent Luminaries are set or eclipsed, Faith if thou wantst either meat, drink, or apparell, so thou mayst, till new Lights be recovered, if thou owe money, wit will not pay it, thats certaine.
Then,, it seems all these reasons don't move thee to retract thy sayings.
Well, thou hast got two strings to thy bow, what thou canst not get with reason thou'lt have in rime, well, Ile yeeld on one condition.
What's that, a request that is reasonable, or rimeable, speak?
Both, I desire a Song before we part, that shall end our controversie.
Wilt thou not be angry? may I sing what comes at my tongues end.
I, I, what comes next let's have it, I prethee honest.
Then have at it, 't shall bee extempore,
a tryall of Wit.