You cannot deny the Premisses, but that you have done these things; but you deny the Conclusion that you are a Traitor.
You would make a better Secretary of State, than a Logician; for they never deny the Conclusion.
The labour lies upon their hands; the Proof belongs to them to make out these Intrigues of yours; therefore you need not have Counsel, because the Proof must be plain upon you, and then it will be in vain to deny the Conclusion.
England,.
You need not make any preparations for us in this matter, you shall have a fair, just, and legal Trial; if Condemned, it will be apparent you ought to be so; and without a fair Proof, there shall be no Condemnation. Therefore you shall find, we will not do to you, as you do to us, blow up at adventure, kill people because they are not of your perswasion; our Religion teacheth us another Doctrine, and you shall find it clearly to your advantage. We seek no mans blood, but ourown safety. But you are brought here from the necessity of things, which your selves have made; and from your own actions you shall be condemned, or acquitted.
It is all true that you say: but did you tell all that vvas true?
Mr., I'll tell you when you will be apt to gain credit in this matter: You say, that you told all things that you knew, the Truth, and the whole Truth. Can Mankind be persuaded, that you, that had this Negotiation in 74. and 75. left off just then, at that time vvhen your Letters vvere found according to their Dates? Do you believe, there vvas no Negotiation after 75. because vve have not found them? Have you spoke one vvord to that? Have you confessed, or produced those Papers and Weekly Intelligence? When you ansvver that, you may have credit; vvithout that, it is impossible: For I cannot give credit to one vvord you say, unless you give an account of the subsequent Negotiation.
Whether you had or no, you shall have the fairest Trial that can be. And we cannot blame the Gentleman, for he is more used to greater Affairs, than these Matters or Forms of Lavv. But (my Lord) I desire to go unto Evidence, and vvhen that is done, he shall be heard, as long as he pleaseth, vvithout any interruption. If he desire it, before I give my Evidence, let him have Pen, Ink, and Paper (vvith your Lordships leave) .
Help him to Pen, Ink, and Paper.
Then we desire to go on in our Evidence. We desire that Mr.may not be interrupted.
He shall not be interrupted.
The first thing we will inquire, what account he can give of the Prisoner at the Bar, whether he was any way privy to the murther of the King?
Mr., we leave it to your self to take your own way, and your own method: only this we say, here's a Gentleman stands at the Bar for his life; And on the other side, the King is concerned for His life: you are to speak the truth and the whole truth; for there is no reason in the world that you should adde any one thing that is false. I would not have a tittle added for any advantage, or consequences that may fall, when a man's bloud and life lieth at stake: Let him be condemned by truth: you have taken an Oath, and you being a Minister, know the great regard you ought to have of the sacredness of an Oath; and that to take a man's life away by a false Oath is murther, I need not teach you that. But that Mr.may be satisfied in the Trial, and all people else be satisfied, there is nothing required or expected, but downright plain truth, and without any arts either to conceal, or expatiate, to make things larger then in truth they are; he must be condemned by plain Evidence of Fact.
My Lord, Mr.in the Month oflast, did entertain in his own House, whichwas a Father Confessor to certain persons that were Converted, amongst which I was one. My Lord, I went and visited thisat Mr.House then in. Mr.inquiring ofwho I was? He said, I was one that designed to go over upon business to St.. My Lord, Mr.told me then he should trouble me with a Letter or two to St., but he told me he would leave them with onethat was Procurator for the Society of Jesuits in. I went on MondayMorning and took Coach, went to, and had his Pacquet with me, which Pacquet when I came to St.I opened. The out-side sheet of this Paper was a Letter of news which was called Mr.Letter; and at the bottome of this Letter there was this Recommendation, Pray Recommend me to my Kinsman. In this Letter of news there were expressions of the King, calling him Tyrant, and that the Marriage between the Prince ofand the Ladythe Duke ofEldest Daughter would prove the Traytour's and Tyrant's ruine.
In what language was it written?
In plain English words at length.
Directed to whom?
It was directed to the Rectour of St., to give him intelligence how affairs went in.
Did you break it open?
I was at the opening of it, and saw it and read it. There was a Letter to Father, which was superscribed by the same hand that the treasonable Letter of news was written, and the same hand that the recommendation towas written in. When this Letter was open there was a Seal fixt, a flying Seal and no mans Name to it.
What was the Contents of that Letter to?
My Lord, to give you an account of the import of this Letter, it was writ in, and in it there were thanks given to Fatherfor the Ten Thousand Pounds which was given for the propagation of the Catholick Religion, and that it should be imployed for no other intent and purpose but that for which it was sent, now that was to cut off the King of; those words were not in that Letter, butLetter, to which this was an Answer I saw and read: It was dated the Month of, and as near as I remember there was this instruction in it, That the Ten Thousand Pound should be employed for no other intent and purpose but to cut off the King of. I do not swear the words, but that'sthe sense and substance; I believe I may swear the words.
To whom was that directed?
To onethat was then Provincial of the Society in, which Mr.answered.
How came Mr.to answer it?
having run a Reed into his Finger, had wounded his Hand, and Secretarywas ill, so he got Mr.to write an Answer unto it.
Did he write it as from himself?
Yes, by order of the Provincial.
What was the substance of that Answer?
That thanks was given to him in the Name of the whole Society for the Ten Thousand Pound which was paid and received here, and that it should be employed to the intent for which it was received. It was superscribed from Mr..
Was it subscribed?
It was not subscribed; I did not see him write it, but I really believe it was by the same hand. I went and delivered this Letter.
I understood you because of the accident of his Hand he had employed Mr.to write this for him.
He did write this Letter then, the Body of the Letter was written by Mr.. I did not see him write it, but I shall give an account how I can prove he wrote it. I delivered this Letter tohis own hand. When I opened the Letter he asked me how a Gentleman (naming a French name) did doe.
When you carried this Letter, you carried it to, and delivered it to him; then he asked you of the Gentleman of the French name, whom meant he by that name?
I understood it to be Mr..
Did he know him by some French name? What said you?
I could say little to this.
Could you guess whom he meant?
He told me he was sometime Secretary to the Dutchess of, which I understood to be Mr.. I stuck at it, and when he said he was sometime Secretary to the Dutchess of, I spoke in Latine to him, and asked whether he meant Mr., and his Answer I cannot remember. He sends an Answer to this Letter. I brought it to St., and there it was inclosed in the Letter from the Society to; wherein the Society expresly told him this Letter was delivered and acknowledged. I saw the Letter at St., and the Letter was sent to him. Mr.did acknowledge the Receit of this Letter fromin the same hand with that of the News Letter, and so it was understood by all, I saw it.
How came you to see it?
I by a Patent from them was of the Consult.
You saw the Letter of the same hand which the News Letter was of with Mr.name subscribed?
The contents of the Letter did own the Letter fromwas received; this Letter was presumed to be the Hand-writing of Mr., and it was understood to be Mr.Letter.
You say the Letter was thanks for the Ten Thousand Pound; what was the other Contents?
That all endeavours should be used to cut off the Protestant Religion Root and Branch.
You say you delivered this Letter, from whom had you it?
From, it was left in his hand, and he accompanied me fromto the Coach, and gave it to me.
Did you hear him speak to Mr.to write for him?
told me he had spoke to him.
He doth suppose it was Mr.hand because it was just the same hand that the News Letter was. Are you sure the Letter was of his hand?
It was taken for his hand.
Had he such a Kinsman there?
Yes he hath confessed it.
We desire your Lordship he may give an account of the Consult here inlast, and how far Mr.was privy to the murthering of the King.
In the Month ofOld-Stile, in the Month ofNew-Stile, there was a Consult held, it was begun at the, it did not continue there. After that there they had consulted to send one Fatherto be Agent and Procurator for, they did adjourn themselves to several Clubs in Companies; some met at, and some atLodging in; some met atLodging in; and some inLodging in. They were ordered to meet by virtue of a Brief from, sent by the Father Generall of the Society: They went on to these Resolves, Thatandshould go on and continue in attempting to Assassinate the King's Person by Shooting, or other means.was to have Fifteen Hundred Pounds.being a Religious man was to have Thirty Thousand Masses, which at Twelve Pence a Mass amounted muchwhat to that money. This Resolve of the Jesuits was communicated to Mr.in my hearing at. My Lord, this was not onely so, but in several Letters he did mention it; and in one Letter (I think I was gone a few miles out of) he sent to me by a Messenger, and did desire the Duke might be trappan'd into this Plot to Murther the King.
How did he desire it?
In a Letter, that all means should be used for the drawing in the Duke. This Letter was written to one. I saw the Letter and read it.
How do you know it was his Letter?
Because of the Instructions, which I sawMr.take a Copy of and write, which was the same hand with the News Letter, and what else I have mentioned, the Subscription was,, and it was the same hand whereof I now speak.
What was the substance of the Letter?
Nothing but Complement, and Recommendation, and that all means might be used for the trappanning the Duke of(as near as I can remember that was the word.)
You did say positively that Mr.did consent and agree to what was consulted by the Jesuits, which was to kill the King, andandwere the two persons designed to do it. Did you hear him consent to it?
I heard him say at, hethought it was well contrived.
Do the Gentlemen of the Jury hear what he saith?
Gentlemen of the Jury, do you hear what he saith?
Yes.
What do you know of any Rebellion to have been raised in? and what was to be done with the Duke of?
In the Month ofthere was a Consult with the Jesuites, and with the Benedictine Monks at the. In this Month ofthere was a Letter writ from Arch-Bishop, the Titular Arch-Bishop of; wherein he gave an account of a Legate from the Pope, anBishop, (the Bishop ofI think) who asserted the Pope's Right to the Kingdom of. In this Letter (to mention in special) there were Four Jesuits had contrived to dispatch the Duke of(these were his words) To find the most expedient way for his death, andwas to be sent to do it by Poyson, if these Four good Fathers did not hit of their Design. My Lord,was present. And when the Consult was almost at a period, Mr.cameto theto the Consult, and was mighty forward to have Fathersent toto dispatch the Duke by Poyson. This Letter did specify they were there ready to rise in Rebellion against the King for the Pope.
Do you know any thing of Arms?
There were 40000 Black Bills, I am not so skilfull in Arms to know what they meant (Military Men know what they are) that were provided to be sent into; but they were ready for the use of the Catholick Party.
Who were they provided by?
I do not know.
How do you know they were provided?
That Letter doth not mention who they were provided by, but another Letter mentioned they were provided by those that were Commission Officers for the aid and help of the Pope; the Popish Commissioners they were provided by, and they had them ready in.
Who wrote this Letter?
It came from, I might forget the day of the Month because my Information is so large, but it was the former part of the Year, I think eitheror, (77) (78) lastor.
Was this Consult but inlast?
I am forced to run back from that Consult to this; Mr.was privy, and was the main Agent, and did in the Month oflast past say to, he had found a way to transmit the 200000for the carrying on of this Rebellion in.
Did you hear him say so?
I did, a Week before.
You say he was very forward to sendintoto kill the Duke of.
Yes that I say; and that he had found a way to transmit 200000to carry on the Rebellion in.
Who was by besides?
My self and no body else.
Where was it said?
InChamber in.
Do you know any thing of transmitting the money to, or perswading any to be sent thither, and the time when?
In the Month ofthere were four Ruffians procured by Dr.. These Four were not nominated in the Consult with the Benedictine Convent, but (My Lord) these four Ruffians without names were accepted of by them.
Who proposed them?
. These four Irish men were sent that night to. How they went I know not, but the next day there was a provision of 80ordered to them by the Rector of, which is a Jesuite, onein the name of the Provincial, because he acted in his name and authority, the Provincial being then beyond the Seas, visiting his Colledges in.
Did he order the 80
Mr.came to thisHouse, then lying in, andwas not within; but he was directed to come to, and athe found.
How do you know that?
He said he had been at his House, and was not within, finding him at, he asked what care was taken for those four Gentlemen that went last night to? he said there was 80ordered.
Who said so?
. And there was the Messenger that was to carry it, I think the most part of this 80was in Guineys: Mr.gave the Messenger a Guiney to be nimble, and to expedite his Journey.
How know you they were Guinies?
I saw the money upon the Table before, not in his hand.
Were the Fourmen there?
No, they were gone before I came.
Who was to carry it after them, what was his name?
I never saw him before or since; the Money was upon the Table: when Mr.came in, he gave the messenger a Guiney to expedite the business.
You say Mr.inquired what Care was taken for those Ruffians that were to Assassinate the King; pray, Mr., tell my Lord and the Jury what you can say concerning Mr.discourse with one.
In the Moneth of, one, who was sometimes Rector of St., being ill of the Gout was ordered to go to the; thisbeing in, Mr.came to attend him; thisbrought with him Treasonable Instructions in order to expedite the King by Poison, providedanddid not do the Work: Ten thousand pound should be proposed to Sirto Poison the King, in case Pistol and Stab did not take effect, and opportunity was to be taken at the Kings taking Physick. I could give other Evidence but will not, because of other things which are not fit to be known yet.
Who wrote this Letter?
It was under the hand ofthe Provincial beyond the Seas, whomleft; it was in the name of Memorials to impowerand the rest of the Consulters atto propound Ten thousand pound to Sirto take the opportunity to Poison the King. These Instructions were seen and read by Mr., by him Copied out, and transmitted to several Conspirators of the Kings death, in this Kingdom of, that were privy to this Plot.
Know you of any Commission? We have hitherto spoken altogether of the work of others; now we come to his own work a little nearer.
Who sawread these Instructions? what said he?
He said he thought it was too little, I heard him say so.
Did you see him take a Copy of these Instructions?
Yes, and he said he did believe Sirwould scarce take it, and thought it necessary the other Five thousand pound should be added to it, that they might be sure to have it done.
Where was it he said this?
It was in the Provincials Chamber, whichhad taken for his convenience at, until he went down to the, it was at, athouse.
was imployed by his Instructions to acquaint the Consult of the Jesuits, that there should be Ten thousand pound advanced, if Doctorwould Poison the King, nowcomes and acquaints him with it. Why shouldtake Copies?
Because he was to send Copies to several Conspirators in the Kingdom of.
To what purpose shouldtake a Copy of these Instructions?
The reason is plain, they were then a gathering a Contribution about the Kingdom, and these Instructions were sent that they might be incouraged, because they saw there was incouragement from beyond Seas to assist them. And another Reason was, because now they were assured by this their business would quickly be dispatched, and by this means some Thousands of pounds were gathered in the Kingdom of.
To whom wasto send them?
I know not any of the Persons, butdid say he had sent his Suffrages (which was a Canting word for Instructions) to the Principal Gentry of the Catholicks of the Kingdom of.
How know you this, thatdid take a Copy of these Instructions for that purpose as you say?
Because he said so.
Did any body ask him why he took them?
Saith, you had best make haste and Communicate these things.answered, I will make haste withmy Copies, that I may dispatch them away this night.
Was he not to be one of the Principal Secretaries of State?
In the Month oflast New Stile,the Old Stile, I think within a day after our Consult, I was atChamber, he had several Commissions, which he called Patents: among his Commissions I saw one from the General of the Society of, by vertue of a Brief from the Pope by whom he was enabled.
Did you know his hand?
I believe I have seen it Forty times, I have seen Forty things under his hand, and this agreed with them , but I never did see him write in my life, we all took it to be his hand, and we all knew the hand and Seal.
What Inscription was upon the Seal?
I. H.with a Cross, in English it had the Characters of I. H. S. This Commission toin the Month of, I saw inpresence, and at his Chamber in, where thendid acknowledge the Receipt of this Patent, opened it and said, It was a very good exchange.
What was the Commission for?
It was to be Secretary of State. I saw the Commission, and heard him own the Receipt of it.
What other Commissions were there atChamber?
A great many, I cannot remember, there was a Commission for my Lordof, the Lord, and several other persons. But this belongs not to the Prisoner at the Bar: I mention his Commission.
Were you acquainted with?
Yes, I'le tell your Lordship how I was acquainted, I was in, he had there two Sons; to shew them special favour and kindness (being meer strangers at the Colledge) I did use to transmit some Letters for them to the Kingdom ofin my Pacquet. When I came out of, I did receive Recommendations from them to their Father, and in great civility he received me. This was inthat I came to his house. He lived inor thereabouts. I understood that his Wife was a zealous Protestant; therefore he desired me not to come any more to his house, but for the future to come to his Chamber in the.
Had you ever seen Mr.inbefore?
I never saw him till(77.) to my knowledge. I was several times in his company at his chamber, and he brought me there to shew me some kindness upon the account of his Sons. It was at the, for his Wife being a Protestant was not willing any Jesuits should come to the house. I was to carry him a summary of all the results and particulars of the Consult at theand. The Provincial ordered me to do it, he knowing me, being in that affair often imployed.
Was it the second time you saw him, that you saw the Commissions?
I saw him several times in the month of.
When did you see the Commissions?
In the month ofold stile,new stile.
How came he to shew you the Commissions?
I hearing of their being some, had a curiosity to see them, and he knew me to be privy to the concerns.
How did you know he had the Commissions?
By Letters.
From whom?
From those of the Society at, wherein oneone of the Fathers was certified, that the Commissions were come to, and were in his hand, I saw the Letters at St.before they came to, we read the Letters there before they came to, I had power to open them.
Did you open the Letters?
Yes?
When saw you the Letters at St.?
I saw the Letters at St.in the month of; then they came from; and after I received summons to be at this Consult in the month of; and accordingly we came over.
VVhat time did you come over?
In the month of.
VVhat time went you tochamber? I cannot reconcile the months together.
Did you not say you came toin?
Yes, before I went to St..
How many came over with you?
I cannot tell how many came over together; there were nine of us all Jesuits.
Did you not say you went toin?
That was before I went to St..
Tell how many Priests or Jesuits were lately in, that you know of, at one time.
There was, and have been to my knowledge in the Kingdom of, Secular Priests eightscore, and Jesuits fourscore, and by name in the Catalogue, I think three hundred and odd.
How long had you been inbefore you were at Mr.Chamber?
Not long; because I had Letters in my Pacquet from his Sons, assoon as I had rested a little, I went to him.
What said Mr.to you about the Commissions in his chamber?
Not a word; but seem'd glad.
Did you see them open upon his Table? or did you ask to see them?
They did not lye open upon the Table, but the Commissions were before him; I asked to see them. Mr.(said I) I hear you have received the Commissions from; he said, he had. Shall I have the honour to see some of them? He said, I might; he thought he might trust me; and so he might, because that very day I gave him an account of the Consult.
When was it you gave him an account of the Consult?
In the morning.
You say you were twice there that day.
I was there the whole Forenoon.
That day you saw the Commissions.
I had been there several times the same day, and meeting him at last, he asked me how often I was there before, I said said twice or thrice; but that day was the last time ever I saw him; I have not seen him since to my knowledge.
Was that the first time that you saw him after you came from?
I saw him thrice in, then I went to St., the first time I saw him after I came from thence I saw the Commissions.
What were the Names of those men that came over from St.besides your self?
As near as I can remember, the Rector ofwas one; Father; Sir; the Rector of; one; SirBaronet ; one Father; one, a; I think I made the ninth.
If the Prisoner at the Bar be minded, he may ask him any Question.
I am mighty glad to see that Gentleman Sirin the Court, for I think he was upon my Examination before the Councel, and this man that gives now in Evidence against me, there told the King, he never saw me before; and he is extreamly well acquainted with me now, and hath a World of Intimacy.at that time gave such an Account of my Concern in this matter, that I had orders to go to, I never sawsince I was born, but at that time.
You shall have as fair a Search, and Examination in this matter for your Life as can be, thereforeanswer to whatsaith.
My Lord, whenwas upon his Examination before the Council-board, he saith, I said there that I never saw him before in my Life: I then said I would not swear that I had seen him before in my Life, because my sight was bad by Candle-light, and Candle-light alters the sight much, but when I heard him speak I could have sworn it was he, but it was not then my Business. I cannot see a great way by Candle-light.
The Stress of the Objection lyeth not upon seeing so much, but how come you that you laid no more tocharge at that time?
I did design to lay no more to his Charge then, than was matter for Information. For Prisoners may supplant Evidence when they know it, and bring Persons to such Circumstances, as Time, and Place. My Lord, I was not bound to give in more than a general Information against Mr.;did deny he had Correspondence with Fatherat any time, I did then say he had given him an account of several transactions. And (my Lord) then was I so weak, being up two nights, and having been taking Prisoners, upon my Salvation, I could scarce stand upon my Legs.
What was the Information you gave at that time to the Council against Mr.?
The Information I gave at that time (as near as I can remember, but I would not trust to my memory) was for writing of, in which I did then excuse the Treasonable Reflexions, and called them Base Reflexions at the Council-board; the King was sensible, and so was the Council. I was so wearied and tyred (being all that Afternoon before the Council, and Sunday night, and sitting up night after night) that the King was willing to discharge me. But if I had been urged, I should have made a larger Information.
The thing you accused him of was his own Letter.
He doth not believe it was my Letter.
You here charge Mr.to be the man that gave a Guinny to expedite the business atat the time when you were Examined at the Council-Table, you gave a particular account of attempting to take away the Kings life at, and raising twenty thousand pounds and all those great Transactions; why did you not charge Mr.to be the man that gave the Guinny to the Messenger to expedite the business, when the 80 pounds was sent? that he found out a way of transmitting 200000 pounds to carry on the Design? he consulted the killing the King, and approved of it very well. And of the Instructions for 10000 pounds, and said it was too little for to poyson the King. When you were to give an account to the Council of the particular Contrivance of the Murther of the King at, with a Reward, you did mention one Reward of 10000 pounds to Dr., and would you omit the Guinny to expedite the Messenger, and that he said that 10000was too little; would you omit all this?
I being so tyred and weak that I was not able to stand upon my Legs, and I remember the Council apprehended me to be so weak that one of the Lords of the Council said, that if there were any occasion further to examine, thatshould be ready again, and bid me retire.
You was by when the Council were ready to let Mr.go almost at large.
No; I never apprehended that, for if I did, I should have given a further Account.
What was done to Mr.at that time? was he sent away Prisoner?
Yes, at that time to the Messengers house, and within two dayes after he was sent to, and his Papers were seized.
Why did you not nameat that time?
Because I had spent a great deal of time in accusing other Jesuites.
What time was there betwixt the first time you were at the Council before you told of this matter concerning the King?
When I was first at the Board (which was onnight) I made Information, which began between six and seven, and lasted almost to ten. I did then give a general Account of the Affairs to the Council without the King. Then I went and took Prisoners, and beforenight, I said, I thought if Mr.Papers were searched into, they would find matter enough against him in those Papers to hang him; I spake those words, or words to the like purpose. After that Mr.Papers were searched, Mr.was not to be found; but he surrendred himself the next day.So that onI was commanded to give His Majesty a general Information, as I had given to the Council on; and the next day again, I took Prisoners that night five, and next night four.
How long was it betwixt the time that you were examined, and spoke only as to the Letters, to that time you told to the King & Council or both of them, concerning this matter you swear now?
My Lord, I never told it to the King and Council, but I told it to the Houses of Parliament.
How long was it between the one and the other?
I cannot tell exactly the time; it was when the Parliament first sate.
How came you,to omit yourof it to the Council and to the King at both times?
spoke little of the Persons till the persons came face to face.
Why did you not accuse all those Jesuits by name?
We took a Catalogue of their names, but thosedid accuse positively and expresly we took up.
Did you not accuse Sirby name, and that he accepted his Reward?
Yes, thendid accuse him by name.
Why did you not accuse Mr.by name?
ColemanColeman.
How long was it between the first charging Mr., and your acquainting the Parliament with it?
30thSeptember, until the Parliament sate.
Mr., will you ask him any thing?
Oats,?
Coleman.
He names several times that he met with me in this place and that place, a third and fourth place about business.
Coleman.
Did you hear him speak? How were the Questions asked? Were they thus? Was that the Person? Or, how often had you seen Mr.?
When the Question was asked by my Lord Chancellour, Mr., when were you last in? He said at such a time. Did you see Father? He said he gave him an accidental visit, My Lord Chancellor asked him whether or no he had a Pass? He said, No. Then he told him, that was a fault for going out of the Kingdom without a Pass. Have you a Kinsman whose name isat S.? He said he had one ten years old, (who is in truth sixteen.) That question I desired might be asked. Then the King bade me go on.
Did the King, or Council, or Lord Chancellor ask you whether you knew Mr., or no?
They did not ask me.
Mr., answer the question in short, and without confounding it with length. Were you demanded if you knew M.?
Not to my knowledge.
Did you ever see him? or how often?
He said, he did not know me.
You seemed, when I asked you before, to admit, as if you had been asked this question, how often you had seen him, and gave me no answer, because you were doubtful whether it was the man, by reason of the inconveniency of the light, and your bad sight.
I must leave it to the King what answer I made Mr., he wonders I should give an account of so many intimacies, when I said I did not know him at the Council Table.
It is very strange Mr.should swear now, that he was so well acquainted with me, and had been so often in my company, when upon his accusation at the Council-Table, he said nothing of me more than the sending of one Letter, which he thought was my hand.
I did not say that.
And he did seem to say there, he never saw me before in his life.
Was he asked whether he was acquainted with you? (for those words are to the same purpose) .
I cannot answer directly, I do not say he was asked if he was acquainted with me, but I say this, that he did declare he did not know me.
Can you prove that?
I appeal to Sir, who is now in Court, and was then present at the Council-Table.
Sir, you are not upon your Oath, but are to speak on the behalf of the Prisoner: what did he say?
That he did not well know him.
Did he add, that he did not well know him by the Candle-light? But Mr., when you heard his voice, you said you knew him; why did you not come then, and say you did well know him?
Because I was not asked.
But, Sir, did he say he did not well know him after M.spake? Was Mr.examined before Mr.spake?
Yes.
Mr., you say you were with him at theand, pray, Sir, did he say he did not know him, or had seen Mr.there?
He did not know him as he stood there.
Knowing, or not knowing is not the present question; but did he make an answer to the knowing, or not knowing him?
Did he say he did not well know Mr., or that he did not well know that man?
He said he had no acquaintance with that man (to the best of my remembrance.)
Sir, you were present at Mr.his Examination before the Council; in what manner did he accuse Mr.then?
The question is so particular, I cannot give the Court satisfaction; but other material things then said are now omitted by Mr.; for he did declare against Sir, that five thousand pounds was added, in all fifteen thousand pounds, and that Mr.paid five of the fifteen to Sirin hand.
This answers much of the Objection upon him. The Court has asked Mr.how he should come now to charge you with all these matters of poysoning and killing the King, and yet he mentioned you so slightly at the Council-Table; but it is said by Sirhe did charge you with five thousand pounds (for poisoning the King) to be added to the ten thousand pounds, and hecharged you expresly with it at the Council Table.
The Charge was so slight against me by Mr., that the Council were not of his Opinion: For the first order was to go to, and Sircame with directions to the Messenger not to execute the Order. I humbly ask whether it was a reasonable thing to conceive that the Council should extenuate the punishment, if Mr.came with such an amazing account to the Council,
Mrgave so large and general an Information to the Council, that it could not easily be fixed. Mr.came voluntarily in upon Monday morning. The Warrant was sent out on Sunday night for Mr.and his Papers: His Papers were found and seized; but Mr.was not found at that time, nor all Night, but came on Monday morning voluntarily, and offered himself at SirHouse, hearing there was a Warrant against him: By reason of so many Prisoners that were then under Examination, he was not heard till the Afternoon, and then he did with great Indignation and Contempt hear these vile things, as thinking himself innocent.
If I thought my self guilty, I should have charged my self: I hope his Majesty upon what hath been said, will be so far satisfied as to discharge me.
Mr.then made so good a discourse for himself, that though the Lords had filled up a blank Warrant to send him to, that was respited, and he was only committed to a Messenger. I did say to the Messenger, be very civil to Mr.for things are under Examination, but you must keep him safely. Saith the Messenger, pray let me have a special Warrant, that doth dispence with the Warrant I had to carry him to, and such a Warrant he had. The King went away on Tuesday morning to, and appointed a particular Committee to examine the Papers brought of Mr.and others. His Papers were found in a Deal box, and several of these Papers and Declarations sounded so strangely to the Lords, that they were amazed; and presently they signed a Warrant for Mr.going to.
Did Mr.give a round Charge against Mr.?
He had a great deal to do, he was torepeat in the Afternoon on Sunday when the King was present, all he had said to the Lords on Saturday. He did say of Mr., that he had corresponded very wickedly and basely with the French King's Confessor, and did believe if Mr.Papers were searched, there would be found in them that which would cost him his Neck. And did declare that the fifteen thousand pounds was accepted for the murther of the King, and that five thousand pounds was actually paid by Mr.to Sir. But Mr.at the same time did also declare that he did not see the mony paid, he did not see this particular action of Sir, because at the time he had the Stone and could not be present.
I was not present at that Consult, where the fifteen thousand pounds was accepted, but I had an account of it from those that were present.
It appears plainly by this Testimony, that he did charge you Mr.home, that fifteen thousand pounds was to be paid for poysoning the King, and that it was generally said among them (though he did not see it paid) that it came by your hands,five thousand pounds of it, which answers your objection as if he had not charged you, when you see he did charge you home then for being one of the Conspirators, in having a hand in paying of money for poysoning the King: he charges you now no otherwise than in that manner. He doth not charge you now as if there were new things started, but with the very conspiracy of having a hand in paying the money for murthering the King. What consultation was that you had at the Savoy, in the Month of?
It was about the business of the four Irish Ruffians proposed to the Consult.