Mr., Pray do you direct your Discourse to the Jury.
Mr., Pray do you Ask him your Questions, that you may put him in that Method you would have him take, to give his Evidence.
My Lord, I would first Ask him this Question: What Conference he had with any persons, Priests or Others, about Murdering any body?
My Lord and the Jury, I have at other times, and in other places, proved what Familiarity I have had with the Priests and Jesuits; and if I have not satisfied the Court, and Others, about it, yet I have done my Duty in endeavouring so to do. My Lord, I have been several times Treated with, not only about the Plot, but by several Persons about Murdering of a Gentleman. They never told me who it was that was to be Murdered; but if I would Undertake it, they, that is,, and, and Mr., and several other, who discoursed with me about it, would find out some to Assist me, and my Reward should be very Considerable.
When was this?
It was inlast, about the beginning, or latter end of.
Well Sir, Go on.
I did Adhere to them all along, for I had a mind to Discover two Years ago, but was prevented; and I only drill'd them on, to know the Party, that I might prevent them. But they would never Discover the Party.
Prithee come to this particular part of the Story.
Afterwards they set me to insinuate my self into the Acquaintance of Sir, not telling me they had any design upon him.
Who did?
, and, and.
was not one, was he?
No my Lord. But they told me that afterwards they would have me introduce them into his Acquaintance. And I had been, I think, Six or Seven dayes together with Sir, at his House, and had got much into his Acquaintance.
By what means did you get into his Acquaintance?
Why, I pretended to get Warrants for the Good Behaviour against persons, that there were none such.
Well, and what then?
This was the Week before the Saturday that he was Kill'd; and I was there every day but Saturday. On theI went to the, and I sent my Boy to see if Sirwere at Home. Sirwas not at Home then.
When was that?
The very Day before he was Kill'd. If he had been at Home, I would have gone over to him, and would have desired him to come over to them.
Were the Priests there?
Yes, my Lord, there was, and, and, and, and another; five: and, as I said, I sent my Boy to see if he were at home, and he brought me word he was not; and if he had, I was to have gone to him, to have fetch'd him thither, that they might Insinuate themselves into his Acquaintance. And indeed, they had Tongue enough tothemselves into any ones Acquaintance. So he not being at home, we came into the City, two of theand I.
Which two.
and. The next Morningcame to my Chamber, and I was not then within; but by Accident I met him, about four of the Clock, in. We went to theTavern; where falling into Discourse, he told me there vvas a Gentleman that vvas to be put out of the vvay; that vvas the Phrase he used, he did not really sayhim; for they don't count it Murther.
No, No, they put it into softer Termes.
They told me it vvas to be done to Night. I asked vvho it vvas, they said it vvas a very material Man: For he had all the Informations that Mr.and Dr.had given in; that several had been imployed in the doing of it, that several Attempts had been made, and that they had miss'd several Opportunities, and had not done it till then; but if he should not be taken out of the way, and the Papers taken from him, the business would be so Obstructed, and go near to be Discovered, to that Degree, that they would not be able to bring this Design to pass, but must stay till another Age before they should Effect it. I asked him again, who it was, he sayd he would not tell me, but it was a very material Man. I told him, that according to my Promise I would Assist; but in such a Case, I should need a great many Men to be with me, he being so considerable a Person. I asked him then, where the Money was, that was formerly promised? he told me no worse a Man was Engaged for it, than my Lord, and Mr.had order to pay it.
What was that Reward?
Four Thousand pound.
Who was it that first named this Gentleman to you to be Sir?
They never named him to me at all.
Let us know when you first knew it to be Sir.
I parted with him then, but came not according to my Promise. I was to meet him at the Cloysters atthat night; but I knew their Design was to Murder some body, and I would not come.I saw him no more till Monday Night, then I met him in Red-Lyon-Court, where he put up his Cane to his Nose; as who should say, I was to blame in not keeping my Promise. And we went together to thein, where he charged me with my breach of Promise. I told him I was taken up by other Company, and unless they would tell me who it was I was to Kill, I would have no hand in it: For I did not know but that it might be my own particular Friend. And I would not murther any private person, unless I knew who it was, and for what Reason. Well, says he, we will tell you more anon if you meet me to night at, at nine a Clock. I did meet him exactly at that time in the Cloysters, where we walk't and talk't a great while. And then he took me into the middle of the Court, and told me, you have don ill, that you did not help in this business; but if you will help to carry him off, you shall have half the Reward. Why said I,?, said he;, sayd I?, sayd he: and so took me by the hand, and led me into the Room through a dark Entry. In the Room were a great many, I can't tell who they all were.
How many were there?
There might stand a great many behind one another. I saw Four or Five.
What kind of Light had they, Mr.?
It was a middle-sized Lanthorn.
Was it a small Light, or a great Light?
It was a small Light.
Had they no Light, but that Lanthorn?
No: And they did not open it till I had had a turn about in the Room.
Did they discourse of carrying him away then?
Yes, they did.
Did you know him, when he lay Dead there?
Yes, your Lordship shall hear how I came to know him. One stept to the Body, and threw off the thing that laid upon him, and I went and Lookt upon him;and he had got about his Neck, such a kind of a fashion'd Cravat as this about my Neck; and I went to try, and could not get my Finger in betwixt. So I saw him, his Bosome was all open, and I knew him presently: For those Jesuits that were there, were not those who had employed me to insinuate my self into his Acquaintance; and so they thought I had not known him. I Asked who it was, they said it was a man that belong'd to a person of Quality. I was mightily struck and daunted, when I knew him: I would fain have perswaded them to have Tyed Weights at his Head and Feet, and Thrown him into the River; and afterwards I would have dragg'd for him, and took him up there. But they did not think that so safe:(said they). I Asked, how they would get him out? They said,. Then I Asked them, which way they would get him into the Chair, and out of the Gate. They said.
What Porter?
The Porter of the House.
Who,?
Yes. As for that, or the Old Man, I do not know that I ever had any particular knowledge of them; but only I looked upon them as ill-designing men, seeing them in the Chappel.
Did you see ere a one of the Three Prisoners there at that time?
No my Lord: But I have such a Remembrance of Faces, that I could tell, if I saw them again, any that I did see there, though the Light was but small. They told me; but how, I did not know. When they press'd me to help to carry him out, I then Excused my self, and said, It was too Early to carry him out yet; but aboutora Clock would be a better time. And I assured them I would come again. Saidto me,. I promised him I would. And he went away, and left me there. I made what speed away I could, for I was very Unsatisfied in my self,having so great a charge upon me, as the Sacrament of the Altar, which after the discovery of the Plot, was Administred to me twice a Week to conceal it, I could not tell how to discover: I went then to, but very restless and disturbed in my mind; and being perswaded by what God was pleased to put into my mind, calling to remembrance that some Murders had been already committed, and greater ones were dayly intended, I was at last convinc't, and could no longer forbear discovery. I wrote to the Secretary of it, and went to the Parliament and gave in my information. And one day I met with Mr.in the Lobby, and knew him, and apprehended him.
I will ask you one question, Had you any discourse with Mr.between the time you saw him with the Body, and the day he was apprehended.
No, I never saw him to this day, to have any converse with him.
Did not you seethat night when you were to have carried him away?
No my Lord.
Nor, nor?
I did see about the Court, andI was told was to open the Gate thatnight. But my Lord, when they found I did not come again, they desisted that night, and kept it off longer, for fear I should come again to stop them.
He did not refuse to help them, but promised to do it and failed: and they finding that he had failed them, would not let the body lye where it was for fear of discovery, but removed back again.
What didsay, when you first took notice of him?
I understood afterwardsthat he was taken upon suspicion, because at that time, his Maid had made a discovery, that he was about that time out of his Lodgings. And while he was there in the Constables Hands Mr.came by, and he desired to see him; and presently after I came thither, and the Constable asked him, Mr., will you see Mr.? No, he said, he would not: Then he put his Hat over his eyes that I might not see his face, and keptit so. The press being great, and being desirous to be private my self, I spoke to the Guard to put all out that had no business there, and they cried out, that all should avoid the Room but Mr.and his Friends. And when he was going out with the rest, he lift up his Hat to see his way; and though before I did not mind him, yet I happened at his passing by me to cast my eyes upon his face, and presently knew him, and cried, Oh! pray Sir stay, you are one of my friends that must stay here. And I presently charged my Guards to take charge of him. Saith the Constable, he is my Prisoner: Is he so, said I? Then you have a very good Prisoner, and pray look safe to him. And then when I went into the House of Lords, I made out my charge against him.
Now if the Prisoners have any questions to ask Mr., they may have free liberty to do it.
I never saw him before in my life.
Do you know any of them?
I know, andvery well.
Pray Mr., was the Dark-Lanthorn atLodging, or at the other place?
At the other place.
Look you here Mr., They carried him toonnight, and he lay there tillnight: What time onwas it that they removed him into?
I was not there when they did remove him.
What time did you see him there?
About Nine or Ten a Clock.
What time was it that you saw him there Mr.?
It was after Nine my Lord.
They had then removed him to, and Mr.asked what they intended to do with the Body? They said, they would carry it out that night, but they did not. But there the Dark-Lanthorn was, and onthey removed him back again.
Now my Lord, if you please, we shall go on to call some Witnesses that were not present at the Murder; for direct Evidence, as to that, can come only out of themouth of some that were concerned in it; but to corroborate by concurrent circumstances, the Testimony which hath been already given. And first we shall call the Constable, to prove that he found Sirin the Fields, in the same manner in which Mr.says they told him they left him.
Mr. Attorney, you promised you would prove, that when these persons were examined, they did deny before the House of Lords, that they knew.
My Lord, in that we were mistaken, I understand now, it was onlydenied that he did know.
Why, did you never know Mr.?
Never in my life.
Mr., have not you seenwith?
Yes, I have, but they usually went by several Names.
Did you ever seeincompany?
Yes, that I have.
Was there no Sentinel set that, that, and that?
My Lord, I am not certain, I took notice of none; if there were any, they were atHouse, and he opened the Gate, when we came out with the Sedan.
Mr., I suppose, could take order with the Sentinel, and give them some entertainment in his own Lodg.
Pray, in what posture did you find Sir?
I found him, my Lord, in a Ditch, with his Sword through him, and the end of it was two handfulls out of his back.
Was he Bloody?
There was no Blood at all, there was no Blood in the Ditch.
Was the Sword sticking in his Body?
Yes, My Lord, but there was no Blood at all when it was taken out; they had run it into another place, but that happened to be against a Rib, and so it could not go through; but there was no blood there.
Was there any bruises on his Breast?
He did look black about the Breast.
My Lord, I would ask, whether his Neck were broken?
Yes, I suppose it was.
How do you know it?
It was very weak, and one might turn his Head from one Shoulder to the other.
Where was his Stick and Gloves?
They were on the Bank-side.
Whose Sword was it?
His Servants said it was his own.
Pray, had he any Money in his Pocket?
Yes, a great deal of Gold and Silver.
Ay, Ay, for they count Theft Sin, but not Murder.
They left that, to let men think he murdered himself.
Well, will you ask this Witness any questions before he goes?
They say they will ask him none.
Then we desire to call the Chyrurgeons that view'd and opened the Body, Mr., and Mr.; both whom were Sworn.
We begin with Mr., Pray, Sir, inform my Lord and the Jury, Did you see the Body of Sir?
Yes, I did view the Body.
When? what time did you see it?
About Twelve of the Clock.
What day of the Week was it?
On, the next day after he was found.
Did you observe his Breast? how was it?
His breast was all beaten with some obtuse weapon, either with the feet or hands, or something.
Did you observe his neck?
Yes, it was distorted.
How far?
You might have taken the Chin and have set it upon either Shoulder.
Did you observe the wound?
Yes, I did. It went in at one place and stopt at a Rib, the other place it was quite through the Body.
Do you think he was killed by that wound?
No, for then there would have been some evacuation of Blood, which there was not. And besides his bosome was open, and he had a Flannel Wastcoat and a Shirt on; and neither those, nor any of his Clothes were penetrated.
But are you sure his neck had been broken?
Yes, I am sure.
Because some have been of opinion, that he hanged himself, and his Relations to save his estate run him through; I would desire to ask the Chyrurgeon what he thinks of it.
There was more done to his neck than an ordinary suffocation; the wound went through his very heart, and there would have appeared some blood, if it had been done quickly after his death.
Did it appear by the view of the body that he was strangled or hanged?
He was a lean man, and his muscles if he had died of the wound, would have been turgid: and then again all strangled people never swell, because there is a sudden deprivation of all the spirits, and a hindring of the Circulation of the blood.
How long do you believe he might be dead before you saw him?
I believe four or five days. And they might have kept him a week and he never swell'd at all, being a lean man. And when we ript him up, he began for to putrify, we made two incisions to give it vent, and the liquor that was in his body did a little smell. The very lean flesh was sonear turned into putrefaction, that it stuck to the Instrument when we cut it.
My Lord here is another Chyrurgeon, Mr.; Pray, Sir are you sworn.
Yes, I am.
When did you see the body of Sir?
Upon friday, the very same day the Gentleman did. I found his neck dislocated, and his breast very much beaten and bruised. And I found two punctures under his left Pap, the one went against the Rib, the other quite through the body under the left Pap.
Do you believe that wound was the occasion of his death?
No, I believe it was given him after his death.
And his neck was broke?
His neck was dislocated, Sir.
Why, that is broken. Now my Lord we shall call SirMaid,. Swear her.
Your Lordship knows that Mr.did say in the beginning, that they had been several times at his House inquiring for him: now we call this person to tell you what she knows about that.
, look upon the Prisoners, and tell my Lord and the Jury whether you know any of them or no.
This man that I now hear called, my Lord, was at my Masters about a fortnight before he died.
What to do?
I don't know, but he asked for Sir.
What time of the day was it?
It was in the morning.
What did he say?
He asked for Sir, and when he came to him, he said, Good morrow, Sir, in, and afterwards spoke to him in, I could not understand him.
I desire she may consider well, and look upon him.
That is the man.
Upon my Soul I never saw him in all my life.
He had a darker coloured Perriwig when he was there, and was about a quarter of an hour talking with my Master.
Are you sure this was the man?
Yes, I am, and that other manwas there that Saturday morning, and did speak with him before he went out.
That you will deny too?
Yes, I do.
How do you know he was there?
I was in the Parlor at that time, making up the fire.
Had you ever seen him before that time?
No, never before that time. I went into the Parlor to carry my Master his Break-fast, and brought a bunch of Keys with me in, and therewas with him. And I went up stairs about some business, and came down again wanting the Keys, which I had left upon the Table; andwas all that time with my Master.
How do you know he was there?
I was in the Parlor and stirred up the fire, and he was there a good while.
How long after did you see him again?
Not till I saw him in.
How long was that afterwards?
A month ago. But it is not the man that brought the note to my Master.
What note?
A note that a man brought to my Master that night before.
What is become of that Note?
My Lord, I cannot tell, my Master had it.
Prithee, tell us the story of it.
There was a man came to my Masters House, and asked if Sirwere within. He said he had a Letter for him; and shewed it me, it was tied up in a knot.I told him my Master was within, but busy; but said I, if you please I will carry it into him: he did so, and I gave it to my Master; when I went out again, the man staid and asked for an Answer: I went in again and told my Master that the man required an Answer. Prithee, said he, tell him I don't know what to make of it.
When was that?
On Friday night.
When? The Friday night before he was murdered?
Yes.
But you Swear thatwas there the Saturday morning.
Yes, he was.
In what Clothes was he then?
The same Clothes that he hath now.
Are you sure they are the same Clothes?
Yes.
Here is a great Circumstance my Lord. I asked her what Clothes he was in when he came to Sir; and she saith, the same that he hath now.
Have you ever shifted your Clothes?
No indeed, I have not.
But for the man that brought the Note, I cannot Swear it is he.
But she did say when she came to see me in, that she never saw me in my life; and my Lord I hope I have sufficient VVitnesses to prove where I was that morning.
She says, she cannot Swear you were the man that brought the Note.
My Lord, I desire she will tell me about what time it was I was there.
It was about nine or ten a Clock.
That agrees with Mr.exactly in point of time. Now if your Lordship please, we will proceed and call Mr., and Mr..
My Lord, we do call these Witnesses to prove, that these men had meetings with Mr.at the Plow.
Pray tell my Lord and the Jury whether you know Mr..
Yes, Sir, I do.
Have you seen him at theat any time?
Yes, Sir, I have.
In what company there? Was Mr.there?
Yes, he was.
Which was he?
And who else?
There was that.
How often?
Several times.
How long before Sirwas murdered?
I cannot tell, my Lord.
Do you remember any other company was with him?
Yes, there were several other company.
Name them.
There was Mr.and Mr..
And yetsaith he never saw.
And there was, he was another of them, and.
Did you know?
Yes, my Lord.
How now? What say you to it Mr., and Mr.? Were you never at the, drinking with Mr.?
Yes, my Lord, several times.
What say you, Mr.?
I have drank with him there.
Do you know?
I know one?
Now will your Lordship please to let me prove, that at the Council he owned he knewand, and now 'tis proved he hath been incompany, he says he does not know.
My Lord, that was a mistake, for I do knowby sight, that is, I knew two Men that used the Chappel very much, and he was one of them.
But you, Witness, say you have seenand them together?
Yes, I have.
How many times?
I cannot tell how many, my Lord, several times.
Have you seen them twice together?
Yes, I have.
Now to settle it I would ask him, with your Lordship's favour, when he came to live with his Master. You, young Man, when did you come to live with your Master at the?
Why, I have been with him two years.
But when was it you came last to live at the?
Inlast.
It was but five Weeks before Sirwas Murdered.
Do you,, know Mr.?
Yes, I do.
Then pray Swear Mr..
Come, pray Sir, do you live at the?
Yes, Sir, I do.
Then pray, do you tell my Lord, and the Jury, if you know any of the Prisoners at the Bar, and which of them.
I know Mr..
Do you know anybody else?
Yes, I know, and I know Mr..
Have you seen these persons at your House?
Yes, I have.
With whom?
I can't tell every body with whom they were.
Were they there with?
Yes, Sir.
Did you know one?
Yes, Sir.
Hath he been at your house?
Yes, Sir, he hath.
Who was with him?
I can't tell justly.
Did you know?
Yes, I did.
Hath he been there?
Yes, he hath.
In what Company?
With.
And with any of the Prisoners?
Yes, but I can't tell particularly with whom.
Now, my Lord, as these were meetings before the fact was committed to consult how to do it; so we at the beginning told you of a meeting after it was done, and that was at. We shall therefore call some Witnesses as to that; and they are, and. First swear.
Do you remember you were sent of a message from theat, and whether? Pray tell my Lord, and the Jury.
I remember it very well; there were three Gentlemen that sent for me to the, and I being sent for did come, and when I came up stairs, they asked me if I knew, I said I knew it very well. Then they asked me if I knew Mr., I told them I thought I did. Then said they, you must carry this Letter to, Esq; at, and deliver it to his own hands, and to no body else. Accordingly away I went, and carried the Letter: I went to the door, and asked if he were within; his Man said he was above stairs, but they would call him to me; and calling him to me, Sir, said I, there are some Gentlemen at theatthat have sent me with a Letter to you. So he looked upon the Letter, and, saith he, go and tell them I will be with them presently. So, may it please you, my Lord, I came again, and when I came, the Gentlemen were there still. Well, said they, go and drink a Glass of Claret, which stood upon the Table, and they gave me Six-pence, and I went away.
Pray look upon Mr., can you remember whether that man was there?
There were three of them, and he looks like one.
Mr., do you remember this was the man you sent?
Yes, my Lord, this was the same Man that was sent.
Well, call the other.
Hark you, do you remember any Company that was at your Masters house two or three Months agon?
Yes, I do.
Do you remember that you heard them talk any thing there?
They pull'd out a Paper and read it.
You Boy, do you know Mr.?
Yes, I do.
Was he there?
He did come to them, my Lord.
What had they to Dinner there?
They had Flounders.
Who bought them?
One of them, I can't tell who.
What had they else?
A Barrel of Oysters.
Pray give my Lord an accompt what you observed and heard.
Sir, I know nothing but that they pull'd out a Paper, and read it, and named SirName. And while I was at the door, some body came and threatned to kick me down stairs.
He saith just as Mr.said in every particular.
Now if it please your Lordship, we desire to call Sir, to prove what Mr.said before the Council, and how particular he was; and did to some of the Lords, who were sent with him to, point out the places.
We call him to shew, that whenwas examined before the King, he was sent with some of the Lords, and Sir, to, where he pointed with his Finger, and shewed the places where all was done; and so we shall shew your Lordship and the Jury, how exact he was in every thing.
Pray Sir, will you tell your knowledge?
My Lord, I was upon the twenty fourth ofwaiting upon his Majesty in Council, and Mr.was sent for, to speak his knowledge concerning this Murder, and he then gave a general Account of things, which, because it did relate to that Bench, and this Corner, and that Room, and that Passage, and that Gallery, it was not understood by the Board, and thereupon his Majesty thought fit to appoint my Lord Duke of, and the Earl of, and Mr.to the Queen, to go thither, and take the Examination upon the Place, and Report it to the Board: And I, being Clerk of of theCouncil, though not in waiting at that time, and having taken notice of what Mr.had there deposed, I did wait upon those Lords, and took the Examination upon the Place. And what I did take upon the place, This was done here, and that there, I drew up into a Report, and the Report is Signed by those two Noble Lords, and was read that Afternoon at the Board; and to that I referr my self.
Pray Sir, Did he shew the particular places to those Lords?
Yes, he did. First, the Bench whereon they were sitting when Sirwas coming down; then the Corner into which they drew him when they had strangled him; then the Place where onewent to stay, which was at the Stairs that lead to the Upper Court, then a little door at the end of the Stables, which lead up a pair of Stairs, and at the head of the Stairs a long dark Entry, and at the top of those Staires, a door on the left hand, which being opened, shew'd us eight steps, which lead up to the Lodgings that were Dr.: In whichwas said to be inhabitant for seven years before. Andassoon as we were gone two steps, there was a little Closet or Cabinet on the right hand, in which there was a Bed, and there he shewed my Lords, This is the Place where we handed him up first, and here we left him, said he, in the care offor two nights.
You were there, Sirupon the place, when he shew'd them these things?
Yes Sir, I was there.
Was it answerable to what he had declared to the King and Council?
Yes, it was answerable to all things he had said in the morning.
And suitable to what he says now?
Yes, suitable to what he sayes now, but only now he sayes more than he said then. And as to what he sayes about the Chambers of Sir, they could not be SirLodgings, for they were not capable of receiving a Person of that Quality.
I said, I did believe they did belong to Sir.
They were Lodgings perhaps that belong'd to his Servants, though not to him.
Sir, I desire to know, whether Mr., when he shew'd these places, and made these Descriptions, did he do it with any hesitancy, or did he do it readily?
Hitherto, my Lord, he went directly and positively, as if any body should walk todoor. But afterwards, when the Lords did desire to know whither the Body was carried, he said, it was into some Room of the house by the Garden; for this is an Outer part of the House, which any body may do any thing in, without their knowledge that are within. And he undertook to lead themto the place as well as he could; and so away we went through the long dark Entry that leads into the Outer Court of the Great House; and crossing the Quadrangle, he leads us to the, and down a pair of Stairs, and so far, said he, I am sure I went; then, assoon as we were down the Stairs, there is a great Square Court, then he began to stagger, as if he did not know his way, but there was no way but to go on hovvever, and on vve vvent, and coming cross the Court, vve came into several Rooms, and going through them, vve came up Stairs again, and so into several other Rooms again. Sure, said he, vve vvere here, but I can't tell, and he vvas in a great Distraction vvhat Room he savv the Body in; but, said he, thus far, I am certain I am right; vvhich vvas according to the Paper, and I refer my self to that.
But, you say, that what he had said to the Lords in the Council, was the same that he said when you were by upon the place?
Yes.
His doubtfulness of the Room does assert, and give Credit to his Testimony, and Confirms it to any honest man in. Here, saith he, I will not be positive, but having sworn the other things which he well remembred, positively, he is made the more Credible for his doubtfulness of a thing which he does not remember, which a man that could swear any thing would not stick at.
Besides, he was not there but by night, and all the Light he had was a dark Lanthorn.
Now, Sir, I would ask you one Question, if you please, Do you remember thatwas Examined at the Council about this matter?
My Lord, these are the Notes that I took upon these Mens Examinations, if your Lordship pleases they may be read.
, We ask you but as to one particular thing, therefore if you please to look upon it, and refresh your Memory, you may read it to your self, and tell us only the substance;
Now Sir, if you please, Do you remember thatwas there?
Yes, I find he was Examined.
Did not he deny there that he knew, but that he knew?
Yes, I do find it here set down that he did deny he knew, but that he knew.
I said I knew one, but not that.
But before the Council he said he knew, not one.
This way of Answering is like the Examination that was taken lately amongst some of them. A Person was asked when he saw such a Priest? He denied that he had seen him in fourteen dayes. But then comes one and proves to his face, that he was with him in Company all Night, within a Week and less. I, sayes he, that's true, but I said I had not seen him in Fourteen Dayes. And so they may take Oaths to serve the King faithfully all the Dayes of their Lives, but in the Nights they may murther him, and keep their Oaths for all that.
I would know, whether theyou know be a Priest or no?
He is not.
Then you do not knowthe Priest?
No, I do not.
Call Mr..
Pray Mr., will you tell my Lord and the Jury what it was that Mr.said about any directions he had to keep all Persons out of, about the twelfth or fourteenth oflast?
My Lord, upon his Examination before the Lords of the Committee,did say he had Orders from the Queen, or in the Name of the Queen, That he should suffer no Strangers, nor any Persons of Quality to come into.
When was it he was to keep them out?
The 12th 13th and 14th of.
What, three days?
Two or three days. And he said that the Prince did come, and he did refuse him, and sent him back again.
Did he say he ever had any such Directions before?
No: he said he never before had any.
It was a very unlucky thing that he had it then.
The Prince might have gone in if he would.
You said you did refuse him, you had order to let none come in.
Had you any such Order?
Yes, my Lord, I had such an Order from the Queen's Gentleman-Usher.
Had you never had such before?
Yes, I have had before, since the Queen came to.
Mr.swears you said you had not any before.
Yes, I had.
Why did you deny it then?
I did not deny it; besides, there were several went in.
We have proved indeed five or six did go in.
For how many days had you that Order?
Two days.
Which two days?
The eleventh and twelfth, I think thereabouts.
Did you say before the Lords, that you never had such Orders before?
No, I did not.
Mr., When you were examined before the Lords, Did you not say you never had such Orders before?
No, I did not say so, my Lord, as I know of; for they did not examine me about that.
You said you would prove it under his own Hand. Prove that.
Mr., Did he write his Name to his Examination?
Yes, he did to one Examination.
Pray look upon that, Is that his Hand?
This was read to him before he Signed it, and then he did Sign it.
I would fain shew it to him, to see whether he Would own it or no.
Yes, that is my Hand.
This is subscribed by.The Information of, Porter at the Gate of; taken before the Right Honourable the Marquess of. This Deponent saith, That about the 12th, 13th, and 14th oflast, he had Order to tell all Persons of Quality, that the Queen was private, and that they were not to come in; and this Deponent saith, The Queen continued so private for two days.
Where is that part of the Examination wherein he said, he never had any such Order before?
He did say so, but it is not in that that hath his Hand to it.
Pray, my Lord, observe this is a kind of reflecting Evidence, and I Would have no more made of it than the thing will bear.
They only bring it, and make use of it against, as a pretence of his.
But it is a very reflecting Evidence.
Surely there is no body here that offers it as such: We use it only to this purpose, to shew that, who was a Party to this Murder, did use all the means that he could to keep it private; and endeavoured to prevent Strangers coming in that Night to discover it, and therefore pretended these Orders. If he had any such Orders, I suppose he will prove them, we do not say he had them; but 'tis a great Evidence, when he pretended to such privacie, that he and his Fellows had something to do that was not fit to be known by every body.
He may make use of any body's Name, and pretend what he will; but I suppose he will prove it from the Gentleman-Usher, if it be true.
We have one Witness more to call, my Lord, and that is one. Call.
He is a Neighbour to, and will give your Lordship an Account what Applications have been made to him, to tamper with him for Money, to keep away, and not give Evidence in this Cause. Pray Sir, are you Mr.Neighbour?
Yes, Sir, I am.
Pray then tell what you know.
I know him very well, his Wife hath been with me last Week, and asked me if I knew what time he was with me on, the 16th of. I desired time to recollect my self: And she called four or five times after, and I did recollect my Memory and told her, That I was not with him at all that.
Why, this was reasonable, and fair enough to do.
It was so, my Lord, but pray had you no Money offered you?
No Sir, none at all; and I told hercould not remember thatwas with him that day.
But you may remember it very well, whencame from the Queen,came to you.
My Lord,was out of Town that, from two a Clock in the Afternoon, till nine at Night.
Well, well, this is nothing: The Woman was willing if she could, to have counterproved the Evidence, and what she did was fair; she offered no Money, nor did it in an indirect way.
My Lord, We have now done with our Evidence for the King, and leave it till we hear what they say.
What do you say for your selves, you shall have all the free liberty you will desire?
In the first place,take God to be my Witness, thatam wholly innocent, as to the Matter that is charged upon me: And as to what is said, that I dogg'd Sir; I can prove that I went into my Lodging at eight a Clock, and did not stir out.
Come, call your Witnesses.
,, Mrs., and.
Let them come in there.
This is DoctorNiece, and his House-keeper.
Well, what do you ask her?
I desire to know what you can say about my being in my Lodging, and not going out.
He hath lived in our Family seven or eight Years.
Your Family, What is your Family?
With my Uncle.
Who is your Uncle?
Doctor; we left him in the House always when we were absent from it, he was always a trusty Servant, never kept ill hours, always came home by eight a Clock at Night.
Always, For how long?
Ever since we came over last into.
When was that?
Inlast.
Were you there that Night Sirwas kill'd?
I was.
VVhat Night was that?
I don't know, my Lord, I heard of it in the Town.
VVhen did you first hear of it?
Thethat he was found.
Did you not hear of it on the?
Yes, I did.
VVho could tell you thebefore?
Why, my Lord, in the Town it was said he was missing from Saturday, and a Thursday he was found.
What can you say concerning, that he was not out after eight a clock that night?
He was a very good Servant to my Unkle, and never kept ill hours, but always came in by eight a clock or before.
Were not you out your self that night?
No not I, never out after that hour.
Pray how can you give such an accompt of Mr., as if he was always in your company?
He came in to wait at Table, and did not stir out afterwards.
Pray what Religion are you of? are you a Papist?
I know not whether I come here to make a profession of my Faith.
Are you a Roman Catholick?
Yes.
Have you a dispensation to eat Suppers on Saturday-nights?
I hope you did not keep him company after Supper all night.
No I did not, but he came in to wait at Table at Supper.
I thought you had kept fasting on Saturday-nights.
No, my Lord, not on Saturday-nights.
How many Dishes of Meat had you to Supper?
We had no Meat, though we did not fast.
Can you speak positively as to this night, the Saturday that he was kill'd?
He was at home that night.
And where was he the Sunday?
He was at home.
And you are sure he was at home every night?
Yes, while we were in Town.
Where was you all that Wednesday-night you speak of?
I was at home in my Lodging.
How is it possible for you to say, that, who was not your constant Companion, did not go out afterwards?
No, he was not my constant Companion.
How then can you charge your Memory that he was at home?
Come, you are to speak truth, though you are not upon your Oath. Can you charge your memory to say, that he came in constantly at eight a clock at night?
Yes, I can, because I saw him come in constantly; and when he came in, I always sent my Maid to bar the door.
Maid, can you say that he was always at home at night?
I can say he never was abroad after eight at night.
Why you did not watch him till he went to bed, did you?
We were always up till eleven a clock at night.
Was he in your company all that while?
I beg your pardon; if your Lordship saw the Lodgings, you would say it were impossible for any to go in or out, but that they must know it within. We were constant in our hours of going to Supper; our doors were never opened after he came in to wait at Supper.
You may say any thing to a Heretick for a Papist.
This is a mighty improbable business.
Where was he a Wednesday-night?
At home.
They have a general Answer for all Questions.
Who kept the Key of your Lodgings?
The Maid.
Hathnever kept the Key?
No, my Lord, the Maid.
How do you know but that the Maid might let him out?
My Lord, Mrs.said at first there was but one Key; but before the Duke ofshe said there was six or seven Keys.
Look you what tricks you put upon us to blindus. You come and tell us that he was every night at home by eight a clock, and did not stir out, for there was but one Lock, and the Maid kept the Key; and yet there were three or four Keys to it.
There was but one Key to that which kept the door fast.
, how many Keys were there?
She confessed there were four or five.
What time was it that you carried him out ofon Wednesday-night?
It was about ten or eleven of the clock.went to fetch the horse.
We had never been out of our Lodgings after eight a Clock, since we came to Town.
When were you out of Town?
In.
Nay, now, Mistris, you have spoil'd all; for inthis business was done.
You have undone the man, instead of saving him.
Why, my Lord, I only mistook the Month.
You Woman
what Month was it you were out of Town?
In.
'Tis apparent you consider not what you say, or you come hither to say any thing will serve the turn.
No, I do not, for I was out of Town in, came to Town the latter end of.
You must remember what you said, that you came toinlast, and from that time he was always within at eight a clock at night.
Except that time that we were out of Town, which was inthe Summer-time. And it is impossible but if the Body was in the House, assaid it was, but I must see him, or some of us must. I used to go every day into that little Room for something or other, and I must needs see him if he were there.
You told me just now you were not upon Confession; and I tell you now so, you are not.
Well, Woman, what say you?
We came to Town upon a Monday,was the Sunday following; and from that time neither he nor the Maid used to be abroad after eight a clock: we kept very good hours, and he always waited at Supper, and never went abroad after he came in to wait at Supper: and the Lodging was so little, that nothing could be brought in, but they must know that were within.
This is a lower Room than the Chamber, is it not?
'Tis even with the Dining-Room, my Lord.
What say you, Sir?
My Lord, it is an extraordinary little place; as soon as you get up eight steps, there is a little square Entry, and there is this Room on the one Hand, and the Dining-Room on the other. I think there is a pair of staires to go down at one Corner of the Entry, as I think, but the Body was laid in a little square Room at the head of the steps.
And must you go into the Room to go to the Dining-Room?
No, 'tis a distinct Room; but the Key was always in the door, and every day some body went into it for something or another.
Will you undertake to say it was always in the door?
Yes, it constantly was.
For my own part I will not judge you: but that his Body should be carried there about nine a clock at night a Saturday-night, and remain there till Monday-night, 'tis very suspitious, that if you were in the House, as you say you were, and used to go into that Room every day, you must either hear it brought in, or see it.
But we did neither, my Lord.
It is well you are not Indicted.
Mr., you know all these things to be false,.
I lay nothing to your charge; but you said before the Duke of, thatwas gone from his Lodgings before that time.
What say you, Sir?
There arose a little quarrel between them about the time that Mr.did leave those Lodgings.said it was a Fortnight after;said when he was upon his Examination, that the same Saturday that Sr.was missing, he was treating with his Landlord, and from that time, to the time he went to his new House, it was about a Week or a Fortnight.
But he did pretend he was gone before?
No my Lord, I did not.
Two Witnesses upon Oath Sware it, and you said it your self, and gave it under your Hand.
My Lord? --
Nay you will not hear, but you will talk, you say one thing now, and you set another under your Hand.
Have you not a Brother that is in the Proclamation, onea Priest?
I have a Brother whose name is.
Is he not a Priest, and in the Proclamation?
I hope, I must not Impeach my Brother here I said upon my Oath he came to Town a Monday, andday was the Sunday following, andwent away a Fortnight after.
She Swore then two or three Days afterDay.
You must know we can understand you through all your Arts. It was not convenient for you at that time to say, that Mr.went away about a Fortnight after, for then the thing that was charged to be done part of it in your House, would have been within the Fortnight, for it was theof, but then you said only two or three Days.
She did say my Lord, that abouttwo or three or four Days after he went away.
I begg your pardon, I only said I could not tell the time exactly.
Well have you any more to say.
There was never a Day but I went into that Room for something or other, and if any body came to see me, there was so little space that the Footmen were always forced to be in that Room.
Were you there upon Sunday?
Yes, my Lord, I was.
Well I will say no more, call another Witness.
What can you say, Maid?
My Lord, I did never miss him out of the House at those Hours.
May be you did not look for him.
I did go down every Night to the Door to see if it were lockt, and I went into the Parlor to see that things were safe there.
You are a Roman Catholick, are you not?
Yes, I am.
Might not he go out of the House, and you never the wiser?
Yes, for I did not watch him continually.
All that she says may be true by the Place. The Servants keep down a paire of Stayres in the Kitchin, and any one may come in or go out having so many Keys, and they not know it that are below.
I went into the Chamber every morning as I went to Market.
Have a care what you say, and mind the Question I ask you, Were you there on the Sunday in that Room where they say Sr.Body was laid?
I cannot say that I was in that Room, but I called in at the Door every Day, and I was the last up every Night.
Ile say that for thee, thou hast spoke
with more care then any of them all.