Knight,.
My Lord, I cannot say, I am not guilty.
Yes my Lord, I am guilty.
Thomas Harison,.
If I should say I am not guilty, I should wrong my own conscience, yet in matter and form as it is laid down in this Indictment, I am not guilty.
Then you plead not guilty.
My Lord, I desire I may have counsell afforded me, and time to make my defence, for I have been kept close prisoner in a dark Chamber, and had no notice of my Tryal till five of the clock in the morning, that I am altogether unprepared.
I am not guilty.
By the Lords Lawes, and by the good and wholesome Laws of the Land.
God send thee a good deliverance,
Henry Heveningham,.
Not guilty.
I will present an humble Petition to His Majesty and the Parliament, and desire your Lordships to let me return to my lodgings in the Tower, for I have some infirmities upon me.
How wilt thou be tryed?
God send thee a good deliverance.Isaac Pennington, Henry Martin, Gilbert Millington, Robert Tichborn, and Robert Lilborn.
Henry Martin,.
My Lord, I desire the benefit of the Act of Indempnity.
My Lord, If I plead, I loose the benefit of that Act.
My name is not there my Lord, my name is, not,
there is no difference betweenandin Law, the difference is very little in the sound,
art thou guilty or not guilty.
.
Are you guilty or not guilty.
What do you desire counsel for? you are indicted for matter of Treason, for Contriving and Composing the Kings death: you have justification to plead if it be Treason, it is not justifiable; or if it be justifiable, it is not Treason.
How will you be tryed?
God send thee a good deliverance.
, Hold up thy hand, what sayst thouart guilty of this horrid Act of Treason or not guilty.
Sir we must do in this case as in all other cases, either you must plead guilty or not, if you plead not guilty, you shall be heard hereafter: but you must plead guilty or not guilty.
Then plead not guilty.
How wilt thou be tryed?
God send thee a good deliverance.
Robert Tichborn,.
My Lord, I have for some space been kept close prisoner, and I am altogether unable in the Law to speak for my self.
Spare me one word, if the Tryal be matter of Law, give leave for Counsel to plead for me: if I should plead my own case in Law, I might be overpowred, since there are many persons of great eminency and honour will plead against me, but I will not trouble you long if this be the case in matter and form as I am here Indicted, I am not guilty.
By God and the Country.
Owen Roe, Hold up your hand, art thou guilty of this horrid act of Treason or not guilty.
How wilt thou be try'd?
God send thee a good deliverance.
Robert Lilburn,?
I have been close Prisoner my Lord these twenty dayes, and none suffered to come to me, and I am told that I ought to have counsel before I plead.
My Lord, if you over rule me, I cannot help it.
My Lord, I must say in matter and form as I stand indicted, I am not guilty.
By God and the Country.
Call,
are ye guilty or not guilty?
How wilt thou be tryed.
;
Art thou guilty or not guilty.
How wilt thou be tryed.
God send thee a good deliverance.