Thou here standest charged for High-Treason; This Court requires that thou give a positive answer, whether guilty or not guilty.
There is matter of Fact laid to your charge, which amounts to Treason, and there is no Law allowed in matters of Fact.
We are all here your Jury as well as your Judges; we are the number of two or three Juries, and your Jury is well known, for they are chosen by the Parliament; you are to plead to your Indictment.
If you had looked upon the Act of Parliament, that would have told you; it speaks of examination of witnesses, it speaks of your confession, and answer, and of your Default; and if you do not plead to it, will be very penal to you.
Acts of Parliament make Justice and Law, they are both; they think fit to change the custom of Trials that have been in former times, and all persons must submit to it: And the Parliament hath thought fit to make this Court both Jury and Judges; and therefore I require that you answer, whether Guilty or not Guilty.
You are before your Jury and Judges; Parliaments have great care of the Rights of the people, and have appointed this Court, and His Highness hath appointed you to be tried by us, you ought therefore to plead to your Indictment.
If you have any particular Exception to any man, you may make it; you were Sir of the Parliament, when this Act was made
Although a Prisoner, yet you are bound by Act of Parliament.
You have heard your Charge read, and Plea demanded; the Court again requires of you, that you give a positive Answer, whether Guilty or not?
All the People ofmust submit to the Laws of, to the Authorities of, all must submit to my Lord Protector and Acts ofParliament: We sit here by Authority of his Highness, by a Commission under the great Seal of, and by Authority of Parliament, and you must submit to our Authority.
;.
He may enjoy as much benefit by the Laws as any, if he have not forfeited it, and I desire he may be put to answer.
The Court again require you to plead to you Indictment.
Your Plea then is, that you are not Guilty.
Yes.
What discourse had you with Sirtouching the delivering up of?
What Officer were you Mr.?
I have the command of a Company, and of the.
Mr., what Letter was that Sirsent to his Son?
The Contents were thus, Thatwould speak to the two men to be very importunate with the Twelve. Sirpromised so many men. That he offered Capt.20to raise Forty men.
How many men did he tell you should be atnear?
600 to march into.
What men did he tell youwould raise?
He saidwould raise 50 or 60 men when he pleased; and that Captshould have a deputation to command the Castle under me, he said he had good hopes of Col., and that he had a Commission for him if he would accept of it.
There ought to be no good fellowship in Treason.
I never visited him but by ColCommission. Siraccording to his Engagement upon receit of a Piece gave me another Commission running thus;took it again and burned it.
Sir, was it you that filled up that blank Commission?
Waterhouse12 March, 1657.
Did you see that Commission delivered toby Sir?
Yes, I did, he delivered it to him in the Castle, about the second oflast.
Overton,.
This is the same Commission, and
I here see it is dated 12., 1657.
My Lord, We are upon our Oaths.
I saw Sirgive it to Majorin his own Chamber in the Castle of, and Maj.bid me read it, which I did.
MajAprilMarch.
What Treaty was between Sirand you at? are you an Officer there?
Yes.
How long have you been an Officer there?
About ten years.
What proceedings was there betweenand you? What meetings had you?
was he your prisoner?
Ifhath any thing to object, he may.
I am a Lieutenant to Major, I was desired to go and see16, who told me That he had great confidence in me, I said to him, why? He told me he thought I had good thoughts of the King; his Son told me he heard the King was to come in, and to bring in a considerable Army, but knew not when. Next day I went again to Sirand asked him if he would walk on the Leads, which he did, and there I told him I had been pondering on the words he last spoke to me, who then hugging me said, I have a great deal of confidence in you, there is a design in agitation to bring in the King with a considerable Army, but he did not know how soon it would be, but told me I should have notice of it, and said that the King had promised pardon to all Officers but the Lord Protector and Lord.
-- WaterhouseThomson. WaterhouseThomson,WaterhouseThomsonWaterhouseThomson?Thomson.
Sirhave you any thing else to say?
D. D. Thou standest here charged of High Treason: this Court requires you to give your positive Answer, whether guilty or not guilty.
AustinCoke,Fathers,Rastal's Reports,Plowden's Commentaries.
Dr., I am sorry, truly, very sorry, to see such an one as you in that place; but you are impeached of High Treason: All favour will be shewn you according to the rules of Justice. I think you desire Counsel.
The Court is Counsel for you, your business is to plead to the Indictment; you are required by the Court to answer whether guilty or not guilty.
Dr., we sit here by a Commission under the Great Seal of, in pursuance of an Act of Parliament; that's our Commission.
D.We know our owne Authority, it is not usual to read Commissions to Prisoners; the Laws ofand Acts of Parliament are to be submitted to.
Those that are to judge you are very well known, you consented your self to the Judges, we are all chosen by Act of Parliament, the Parliament hath consented to it; we are chosen Judges, and are your Judges by Act of Parliament.
Here be very many, and we have been all called this morning, as the course is, and we sit now as your Judges.
Dr., I must tell you theis any seventeen, or more of them; if we are here seventeen, or more, we are aby that Commission: We are here I believe forty or fifty.
You are a person of parts, and therefore we may delight to hear you, but we must keep our selves to the business of the Court: You are required by the Court to answer the Impeachment.
Eliz.Leicester'sPlowden
The Doctor did profess his ignorance in the Laws, yet pretends more knowledge than the Court: The Court are here, and know themselves lawfully authorized to try you. Dr., if you please to proceed to give your Answer whether guilty or not, you will find the Justice of the Court to be according to the Laws of.
This Gent. hath it by Tradition, not by his owne knowledge; but the Case he mentions cannot parallel this: The Act of Parliament saith, an hundred and fifty, or any seventeen; here are three seventeens.
I think the Commission is directed to your Lordships, or any seventeen:, &c.The meaning whereof is, that those seventeen, or more respectively, should hear,There were severalforand: 17 for, 13 for, &c. That Case out of, differs clearly from this: For, if a Commission be directed, and there be no, then the Commissioners must all certifie. We humbly conceive that if your Lordships be here seventeen, or more, you are fully authorized to proceed.
In many Cases you have aof persons, such and such men: It's true, here is noof persons, but aof the number; and if there be aof seventeen it is warrantable.
You have heard the words of the Act of Parliament read, Authority is given to the Commissioners, or any seventeen or more of them:; that is, forseventeen, or more of them; and you have heard the judgement of the Court upon that. That which you speak of in relation to my Lord ofCase is true; if a Commission be directed to Commissioners, and noappointed, then all must certifie: But by the Act of Parliament, and the Commission made in pursuance of it, theis seventeen: But here are three.
We did not call our selves to be your Judges, by being named your Judges by Act of Parliament, we have power to declare to you what the Law is by that Act of Parliament, I have declared it.
.
, what you say now, or what you say hereafter besides this, you have time to speak to, as to matter of Law, after matter of fact hath been tryed; if you plead to matter of fact, what you say to the Court as to matter of Law, we shal be ready to heare it, apply your selfe to the Court in matter of fact. The Court asks you whether guilty or not.
, you have offered very much touching the jurisdiction of the Court, in conclusion you must acquiesce; I must put you up to plead, you know the danger if you doe not plead being required; you stand mute and doe not plead, it is as equally dangerous to you as if you had confessed the crimes.
You speak of common friendship; what is common friendship, but to be a friend to the publick Government? if you have been a friend to the Government and peace of this Nation, you need not fear to plead to the Indictment: And therefore I require you to plead to it.
God forbid.
If you please, the Dr. knows that there must be a Judgment in which we must acquiesce: This is that Judicature that calls you before them; you sit by the highest Authority of, an Act of Parliament in the first place, a Commission under the great Seal in the second place, and a Commission of his Highness, against whom, of which the Doctor is one; I desire he may give an Answer to the Impeachment, that being done, we shall have liberty on both sides to speak to what is Justice, and Law, and Fact; if you are not guilty, be you assured that this Court will not take your blood upon them, you have a very fair Court.
The Court hath had much patience in hearing of you thus long, you having not so much as owned their Authority; if you will not own us, we will own you; therefore I require the Clerk to enter it, that we have required you to plead.
, you here stand charged of High Treason against his Highness the Lord Protector, and the Common-wealth; the charge hath been readto you, the Court have demanded whether guilty or not guilty, they again demand of you whether guilty or not guilty.
My Lord, you was pleased to tell the Doctor, that you will own him when he doth not own you, but, my Lord, his flying in your faces, and taxing you this is not to be endured; I wish he would have that consideration of himself, that if he doth not own your Authority, you expect to be owned, and by it he will be supposed to be guilty of all those Crimes that are laid to his charge, and by not pleading he doth confess them; that will be an high scandal to Mr. Doctor; Therefore to vindicate your self, I desire you to answer.
I beseech Mr. Doctor to consider his case, he is not brought as a Champion for the people of, as he stands charged he appears to you to be contrary affected; I humbly beg that he would be pleased to plead, that so his innocency may be clear'd.
My Lord, some of his own Coat have acknowledged the like Authority before him; but if Mr. Doctor be peremptory in this that he will not own your Authority, and plead to his charge, I must do my duty, that is, humbly to pray the Court, that if he refuse to answer, I must pray their Judgment, and acquaint him with the words of the Act;
So that, my Lord, in default of Answer, if Mr. Doctor will not plead to this, my Lord I must thereupon pray that you will proceed according to the Act, as in cases of High Treason which is very penal. I have no more to say.
TrecillaRich. 2.Shipmoney.
, you have heard the Clause of the Act of Parliament read to you, whereby you may understand, either we must proceed upon your Answer, or else to Judgment upon your refusal; if upon your answer you clear your innocency, then those freemen that you speak of may faithfully embrace you; but if you will not answer, we must proceed to Judgment; I am sorry for your Robe sake, but if you will not answer, you cannot acquit your self, you thereby confess it: therefore let me advise you for your Robe sake to follow the best Counsel, that is, to put yourself upon that which Prisoners must do: Answer to it, guilty or not guilty.
Pray who is the Judge? you must clear your self to him.
If there be any here that are of another opinion, let him declare himself:you lose your self mightily in saying this one thing so often, and we lose our time; I require you again to plead.
I can say no more but pray your justice.
Doctor, I am called upon by the Court, because of your refusal to answer, but I pity you very much, and therefore desire once more the patience and favour of the Court, that they would give you leave to answer; therefore Mr. Doctor, that we may not record your standing mute and refusing to answer, I shall once more in favour to you require you to answer. Clerk, stay your hand a while.
you stand here charged on behalf of his Highness the Lord Protector, of Treason against him and this Common-wealth, you have heard the Charge, the Court hath several times demanded your answer, and you refuse; they the third time require your answer whether guilty or not guilty.
Edward?
You have a very great Grand Jury, forty persons, and we have power upon a special Act of Parliament to give order for a Charge to be brought in against you, and we have according to that power and Authority given order for this Charge to be brought in against you, and you are to answer to it.
My Lord, now it is the second part to the same tune; I know there are many others upon the same string when this is resolved; Sir, This is the Grand Jury, the Petty Jury, and your Judge; they require you to give your Answer, whether guilty or not guilty.
For the copy of your Charge it was never granted to any Prisoner indicted for High Treason; For Counsel, you are now upon matter of Fact, whether guilty or not guilty.
I have a word to inform him, I would not press any thing against him which in my Judgment I thought not legal, you have given him your resolution as to the Jurisdiction, there is nothing now to say but guilty or not guilty; he must bring himself to be a party or else nothing can be asked.
Calway'sPortugal.
You are not upon your Triall, you must plead and joyn issue, and then we will consider whether we will try you now or no; Yet there is many a man hath been brought to prison the same day, found the same day, and tryed the same day.
Humphry StaffordHenryLilburn.Nicholas,MaynardRolph,Cook --Dyerfol.: Arundell.
For matter of fact it was never allowed; but if he plead, and if any matter of Law doe arise, that's doubtfull to the Court, then the Court if they doubt of it, assigne Counsell; but the prisoner must plead first to the matter of fact. For a man to be accused the same day, and tryed the same day, is no new thing: For Counsell, if any thing arise in matter of Law then it may be considered: TheEmbass. Brother came, and was accused and tryed the same day. We shall humbly pray that he may plead guilty or not guilty; if any matter of Law arise your Lordships may doe him justice.
England;.
You are now in generals, you speak of several Acts of Parliament, and you would have Counsel to plead, Counsel was never allowed in this case upon such a general desire; Many that stand about you may have a prejudice to you, and think you are loth to plead; I have called upon you often: if we should once record the refusall, it would be very penall. I would advise you to plead to the Indictment.
This is a very ill President to the justice of; I suppose that you will allow him all favour, but the justice ofmust be prefer'd against all persons whatsoever: The jurisdiction is setled to the satisfaction of the Dr. himselfe; if he will bring himselfe a party and aske any thing of you, that must be by pleading, till then he can aske nothing.
I shall desire it may be no more thus.
I shall say no more to you, we must make our Authority appear to you either by trying of you, or judging of you; will you be try'd?
My Lord we must not suffer this, pray if he will not be otherwise satisfied I must require your strict justice. Your words they are seditious: this shews the spirit of the man.
Truly my Lord this is insufferable; Mr. Doctor hath had as much respect as ever any had. I have attended many, I never saw the like in my time; you have had the patience to heare him oppose your selves, your Authority, your persons, and to strike at the root of all. Mr. Doctor I would have you to carry your selfe with more respect. This shews that much of what is charged against him is true: If you will scorn the Court say it positively.
--
Mr. Doctor pray remember that Text,. Will you plead or not?
My Lord, if you please, I did receive your comands to prepare this charge against this Doctor; in obedience to you I have done it, not willingly against your person Mr. Doctor; I have some others to proceed against, if you will please that Mr. Doctor may dispatch one way or other. I must pray your final sentence if you doe not plead immediately.
You have heard that I must require your answer; you must plead guilty or not guilty.
We shall then take consideration of it, now is not a time.
England;.
I am required by the Court, before I enter your refusall I require your answer.
England.
I shall desire, because you may see what I say comes from the Act of Parliament, I shall desire the words may be read to him, what is to be done if he refuse to answer.
I must take you off, you have been required to answer, often required, and having refused, in the name of the Court I require the Clerk to record it, and pray take away your prisoner.
Take him away, take him away.
Esq; Thou standest here charged with High Treason against his Highness the L. Protector and the Common-wealth: You have heard the Charge read; the Court demands your positive answer thereto, whether guilty or not guilty.
You are impeached of High Treason: We require your Answer.
You are to be tryed by the Laws of, Act of Parliament, and Commission under the Great Seal of, in pursuance of that Act.
It is not granted to any.
It is visible who are your Judges, they are named by Act of Parliament: We are your Judges.
The Act of Parliament doth not require it.
You shall have all the privileges that may be; but you must first plead.
My Lord, Pray let him know what is done, to warn him, lest he fall into the same condemnation. There was one but a little before you that demanded the same thing, and the Court hath ruled it otherwise, and he hath received his Sentence. I tell you of it that you may beware, and know how to carry your self. If Mr.will be pleased to answer whether or no guilty of those Crimes, then he shall have a fair Trial, and full Examination: If otherwise, the same Sentence must be required as before; that is, upon refusall, the Judgement pronounced for High Treason.
The Act is publick; the Court are not to give you an account of their authority, or the way of their proceedings; they require your Answer.
You seem to be a young Gentleman; I wish rather you would plead Not guilty, or make an ingenuous Confession.
My Lord President, You have offered that Gent. very seasonable advice, I wish he may be capable of it: And, in these debates, I wish he doth not lose those advantages that are really intended for him. For the Court, it is by Act of Parl. and no Judicature incan require any account of their proceedings.
By way of advise I do acquaint you that there is no Judicature insuperiourto this, but the Parliament immediately; You are here Impeached of a very high Crime, High Treason, it may be a strain of youth, the first step to mercy is confession.
My Lord, this Gent. was a fellow-prisoner with one that went before him, he walks after the same steps, I wish he may not run into the same Error; these things were urged by Dr., and the Court hath ruled that their Authority is sufficient, and therefore my Lord be pleased that this Gent. may plead.
I am afraid you have received ill advise from others, possibly you know what is become of that Prisoner that spake of Counsel; we cannot assign you Counsel as to matter of Fact; the Law and Act of Parliament have made us your Judges, and therefore you are to plead.
I doubt the Gent. is in jest, we are here to attend by command of his Highness the L. Protector; these Gent. are all sworn by Act of Parliament: it is a little slighting of the Court, to appeal from the Court to the Counsel; but (my Lord) I beseech you he may forbear to say he is overborn. You shall have Justice done if you will plead, if not there was a President but now; if you please to put your self upon the Trial, you shall have a fair Trial.
I do tell you the Court hath given Judgment just now in the like case.
I tell you a President, Sirand Dr..
I humbly conceive that this Court is your Court, and you ought to plead it.
All this that you ask of us now we have declared this morning already to one who was before you at the Bar; theof this Commission is seventeen or any more of them: we must require you again to plead.
That is when there is matter of Law, you have alledged nothing, you are now upon matter of Fact.
Your reason and my reason and all reason must submit to the Law: you are now upon matter of Fact, the single question is, guilty or not guilty.
My advise to you is, that you would put your self upon your Tryal.
The Parliament hath thought fit to go this way, and it is not to be disputed, they that live in this nation are not to dispute it: if that Gent. will please to recollect himself, and not (my Lord) thus expostulate and dispute with the Court of Justice, if he please to put himself upon a Tryal, if he thinks himself innocent, I think it is best; and if he refuse it, his sentence is from himself.
We are clearly of opinion, we have not power in this case to appoint any other Jury, not to summon a Jury, we our selves have taken an oath; you would do well to plead.
They do not.
If you will deal ingenuously with the Court, I think that is best.
It was never done; for any Indictment of High Treason was never delivered to any Prisoner.
Cooke.
, you stand here charged of High Treason; to this charge you plead not guilty, is this your Plea?
Do you stand to your Plea not guilty?
I wish Mr.had done this before, and made himself capable of more favour.
We produce this Gent. (I suppose he is well known to the Prisoner) to prove the Charge; I desire he may declare what he knows.
What do you know concerning the discourses of Mr.with you, touching the bringing in of?
I have been in Mr.company several times, and what I can say will not be much; Mr.did once tell me there was such a design as the bringing in of the King, and he did ask me if I did not know of such a thing; I told him no; he was pleased to tell me somewhat of it: I asked him if he was engaged in it; he told me he was not.
What did he tell you concerning his being entrusted by the King therein?
He told me the King wrote to him, to speak to his friends that they would be ready to assist him when he should come intowith force, which he told me was with 7000 men; this was the chief of all.
Did he not say that he had Commissions from the King?
He did not tell me so, but I have heard him say others had had Commissions, two other Gent. in.
Did he not encourage you thereto? what Arguments did he use?
He spoke to me of it several times.
After what manner?
Onely in commendation of the thing; I heard him say that if there were a necessity,folks would come intoto assist them.
Who was present at any of these discourses?
There was none but him and my self.
At what place, and at what time?
Near his own house at several times; I have told you the main of the discourses.
Mr.?
Above a year since.
Mr.?
I do not know what he means by Encouragement, he onely told me of it.
There was no body by.
About what time did he tell you of this Letter?
About half a year since.
Who was by?
No body my Lord.
Did he tell you it was the King that wrote to him, and therefore it was just to assist him.
I think I heard him say so, I cannot take my Oath of it.
Did he tell you what considerable persons were concerned?
I have heard him speak of some persons that were ingaged in this design, Sir, and one; he said that Sirspake to him to speak to me.
When?
Above a year since, it was since the Parliament.
W. Waller.