On theof this instant, I received the annexed Note from Mr.; on theI went to him; as soon as I came, he told me, he had something to impart to me in private; we went into a Room alone, and he asked me if I did not hear that there were persons making inquiry to find out some that would amuse those that had impeached the Lords, and those concerned about the Plot. I told him I heard nothing of it. He told me there were such, and that I should find the Game would turn another way; and that I might do my self a kindness, if I pleased. I told him my affairs called me for, that I must be gone on thefollowing. He told me it would be worth my while to stay, and asked me if I could not prove that one Mr.had meetings with Mr., and Mr.. I told him no, for he knew there had been no great friendship of late betwixt us (this I look't upon as an Introduction to the design); but he came close to me, and told me, a person had been with him concerning this matter, and that indeed they had a jealousie of Mr.; and if I would discover any thing of that nature against him, I should have 4 or 500for my pains. To this I seemed to hearken (but was much surprized at this unexpected discourse), and did plainly see their design was to turn the Game another way, as he said before. I did not discourage him, but told him I would consider of it; and if I did not go on, I would see him again; and that he knew well I was very hard to believe this Plot; and then he told methat he could bring a Prisoner in that place to drink a Pot of Ale with me, that could give me an account what a Rogue Mr.was; but I being in haste, took my leave of him, he injoyning me to secresie. At my return I could not meet with Mr., but having some business with Sir, and the Ladyhis Daughter, and being full with this Devilish design, I told the story to them, and said, When I was in, I should hear, and they should find that this was the Game they intended to play, To turn the Plot from themselves, and doubted not they would find some to carry it on. On the(in the morning) I went to Mr.house, and acquainted him with it; he desired me to meet him in the evening, because he desired to consider of it; but told me then, he had no reason to slight it, because the morning before, a Knight
had been with him, and told him there was a design against him of the same kind, and desired him to inquire after it. In the evening I met with Mr., who desired me to keep my Correspondence with the said, and to know of him how I should be secured my payments, and what it was they would have me do. On theI went accordingly to him, and told him I had considered of what we had discoursed before, and had stopt my Journey as to that day; he was very glad to see me, and told me, that the party
had been with him again about the business, and I might get 500without any prejudice to my self; I told him that Money would do me a great kindness at this time (for he knew I had waited a long time here, and that it was very hard with me), therefore desired to know what they would have me to do, and how I should be sure of the 500for I expected it should be a person of good credit that would lay down the 500he told me I should not need to question that, for they were of credit enough. But he that came to him
was only imployed to pay the Money; and if I shall tell him that you will do the business, you shall be sure of the Money; not so, said I, First let me know what it is distinctly, and how I shall be sure of the 500or else I will not stir a foot in it, but be gone on. Saith he, Would you have the Money before-hand? then it may be you will not do it. No, said I, that I do not desire. But will you deposite it in a third hand? Truly, said he, that is very fair, anddoubt not but they will do it (fortold him none wasbetter able to carry it on than you; for Mr.Man was formerly your Servant, and preferred by you to him), and told me, that on, by two or three of the Clock, his friend would be with him again; but that he would be shy of discoursing with me; and desired thatwould come to him
on, and thenshould understand more. Upon my return I acquainted Mr.with the whole discourse, and that I was to leave the Town on, having stayed my utmost time, because I had a Suit depending in Chancery, at; and that if I were not there the beginning of the, it would be great damage to me, because my absence would be looked upon as a Contempt; but Mr.requested me to stay until he had acquainted His Majesty, or one of his Secretaries with it, to know his pleasure as to my going, or stay.
theday of, I was within the Evening; he told me his friend
had left him about half an hour before I came, and that he acquainted him with what I propounded (to wit) that 500should be deposited in a third persons hand; and he told me his friend was contented it should be so, and thought it but reasonable, and therefore was willing to put it into a Goldsmiths hand. I asked him if they had considered the method we should carry this on? and whether they had drawn up the Heads of what I was to swear? He told me, no; but his friend would be with him again upon, and that all things should be prepared and ready for me bymorning. I asked him if it would be convenient for me to meet his friend? he told me not as yet, for he was very wary, shy, and fearful of being betrayed. I told him I thought my meeting with him was not material; only, said I, let him be sure to secure the Money, and he needs not doubt of effecting the business: But, said I, 500is not all that I expect from him for this service, that is but a melting Cash, and I have a great charge, and a Wife and six Children, and you know I have lyen a longer time waiting here, almost to my utter ruin, and have been very hardly dealt with. Now, if I accomplish this, I shall lose my interest in all other Parties, and therefore expect he should make me a very good interestwith that Party. Never fear that, said he, you shall have interest enough with them; and if we can but turn off this Plot, there is no danger of effecting our business; for, saith he, the King will believe nothing of it. Well, said I, I must trust to you to make my interest; but I partly see how things are like to go, and think it wisdom to come in with the beginning of the Game. Saith he (Swearing by his Maker) Never fear, if we turn off this Plot, we do our business, and you will be made for ever. But, said I, Why will you defer this while? That is a great while, and delays are not good. Said he, I did not expect you till: But ifhear any thing in the mean time,will write to you, and it shall be left at Mr.Lodging. I hear, said I, the Parliament is Prorogued; and that is true enough, said he; and till they meet again, we can receive no great damage: But, said he, I hear the Apprentices are ready to rise and pull down. Said I, then I suppose that is, because the men
are not executed; What else, said he? and that is our great danger, that the people should run into a Rebellion before we accomplish our business: I asked him if he had taken an Abstract, as he said he would, of what that man in the Prison could Swear, to take off Mr.Evidence; I have not yet, said he, but we are sure enough of him, and shall makeRogue enough. Pray, said I, what will he Swear? That the very morning the Proclamation came forth concerning Sir, Mr.came to his Chamber, and asked him if he had ever seen Sir; For, said he, if I knew what a like man he was, I could easily get 500and however, I am resolved to hazard my Neck, but I will have it; and that he would have had this man go with him toto see the Rooms, and promised to get him Money, if he would go with him. But, said I, Mr., it is said Mr.was out of Town before the Proclamation came out; that is not so, saith he, for this mans Wife went into the Countrey with him. A great deal of discourse more we had, all tending to the incouraging of me to carry on this business, to turn this Plot to be afor the destruction of the, and then I should be made for ever. When I paid the Reckoning, and was coming away, said he, you will always come to your charge, but I hope the end will pay for all.Onthe, at Night, I went to Mr., expecting to have the Moddel how they would have me Swear, and in what Goldsmiths hand they would put the 500But as soon as ever I came to him, he told me that he had been put into such a fright, that he was never in all his life before; for, said he, Mr., Mr., Sir, and another Justice have been with me; they called for Irons, one would have fifty pound weight, another would have an hundred pound weight put upon me. At length Sirbegan to examine me, and told me, he knew I could discover a great deal; for I desired the rest might be put out of the room, and I confest all to him and the other Justice, they both promising me my pardon. Have you confest all, said I? how could I help it, said he? I was never in such a fright in all my life; and they promised me my pardon. What have you confest, said I? I have told them, said he, That 500was to be deposited in a Goldsmiths hand, and that I had sent for a Gentleman, and treated with him about it. Have you told them my name, said I? He paused at that; No, said he; but I must tell them, but I thought first to acquaint you with it. Then said I, it seems you have left me in the lurch, and have made no provision for me; therefore since it is so, you will give me leave to play my own Game; and seeing you have confest, let us now play our Game as well as we can on the other side, and be sure to be ingenuous, and confess whatever we know. I will immediately to Sir, and declare the whole Story. Pray do so, saith he, neglect no time, but go this night. And so we parted.
on or about theof, 1678, I was at thein, where was one, a prisoner there for debt; who desired me to do so much for him, as to carry a Note for a friend of his that was a prisoner also, unto one, that lived in, near my Lodging; and said, If I would procure any of his friends to come to his friend there, he would have Money enough, whereof he should have a share; and also it would be a great kindness to him; whereupon I told him I would, provided he would write it quickly. Whereupon he called forth his friend, and they two consulted together, and he wrote two or three Lines, and gave them me for the said. But whencame to the placewas directed, they told me he was gone out of Town in obedience to the Kings Proclamation. And sotroubled my self no further, but put the Note in my pocket: The next Morning he sent a Messenger to me, to know whathad done in it;desired him to tell the said Mr., that the said Mr.was gone out of Town in Obedience to His Majesties Proclamation. About Ten days afterhad occasion for some waste-paper; and putting my hand in my pocket,lit on this Note thatshould have delivered to, and opened it, and read it, and found in it these words written, or to this effect.This run in my mind, till about theinstant at night; and then being at Mr.Coffee-house at,there met with a paper, intituled, Mr.Edmondbury Godfreys; wherein (amongst other things) there was mentioned twoPriests to be guilty, the one named, and the other;whereupon it came into my mind, that the Man thatcarried the Note for into, must be the same, because by that Note he was committed by the name of, and his name was. The next morning being the 16 of this instant(thinking to have found the samethere),came there; and coming to the aforesaid, and after some secret discourse, I asked him how his friend did thatcarried the Note for? he told me he procured Bail. Thenasked him what he was? he told me that he was a, and one of those that(that Rogue) had impeached.asked him how he could get Bail, being a? he told me, they did not know that he was a; and those that were his Bail, would be Bail for any for money; and he gave them Ten Shillings a piece, and the fellow that procured them Five Shillings; and he got them the Copy of his Commitment for them to move by; and thepromised him, the said, seven pounds. But he had not left it him as yet, and so we left this discourse, and came to other.
he having sent by me a Letter, and a Petition to Mrs., a Gentlewoman that belongs to the Dutchess of(whom he calls Cozen), whereby to get him some money for his present supply: buthaving no opportunity to meet with her, could give him no account of that matter; whereupon he said, that he was in such want, that if he had not help speedily, he should be turned into the Common-side:told him that money was so scarce with me, thatcould not lend him any; but ifcould,would. Whereupon he called me aside into the corner of the Yard, by the Gate, and told me, That ifwould be rul'd by him, he would put me into a way whereby we should have money enough.asked him how? he told me, ifwould but joyn and assist to villify the evidence ofand, those two Rogues; whereuponlaughed at him, and said, It is impossible; their evidence was grounded upon too good a foundation: he told mewas mistaken, andshould hear otherwise in a little while. Upon theofwent again to him, thinking to have gained something of him, what was become of this, but could not; and was taking my leave of him, saying,must go home, forhad some business to write for, to send by Captain, who was to go on; hetold me, he believed he should stop CaptainJourney; I told himhoped not so; he answered, it should not be to his prejudice. To whichanswered, why then with all my heart, forwould not be against any thing that should be for his good. And so there came in onean, that had some business with him. And so we parted.
I being with Mr.at thein, Mr.desired me I would do him the kindness as to
carry another Letter for his Friend to one Capt., who had 
three
or four Employments in theof. I told him I 
would
if it was any kindness to him. Sowithwent together, and wrote a Letter to this Capt.of
the; the Contents were much the same with that I carried
to. I carried it to the, and Capt.was
not at home; so I delivered it to his Wife. As soon as she read
it, the tears were in her eyes; she struck her hand on her breast,
saying,. She thankt me very kindly, and told me, as
soon as her Husband came home, she would give it him. When
I went to Mr.again, he thankt me for carrying the
Letter for his Friendto the; and told 
me
Capt.had been with them, and treated them very civilly
with wine and meat, and had spent five shillings upon them. I
askedwhat Capt.was? He told me he was a
trueman. I asked him if he was a Papist. He hath taken
the Oaths, said he; but he is a well-wisher to us. Onthe 16 of,desired me to carry a Letter 
from
himself to Capt., which Letter signified to him that his
Friendwas gone, and how that he had
promised him 7to discharge himself out of the prison, but 
had not
yet been so good as his word; therefore desired that he would
take some speedy course that he may have the 7to discharge
himself out of prison. This Letter I delivered to Capt.own hand in the. He read it, and told me he was very
glad his Friend was out; but that he had never seen him since;
pray, says he, remember me kindly to, and tell
him, For his kindness to my Friend, I will do him all the
service I can.Upon theofI was desired by Sir, to go to Mr., to try what more I 
could get
out of him. On theI went to him, and told him,
that I had met with Sir; and he seemed to
be angry, and thought we had not discovered all we knew.
And I told, that although he had promise of his
pardon, yet it was expected he should do more for it than
he had done: As for my part, said I, you know I could
discover nothing, but what discourse passed betwixt you and I,
and that I have done to the full. Therefore, if you know
any more, I would advise you to discover it; for since you
have gone thus far,think you ought not to conceal any
thing of what you know more. The Grand thing I perceive
they desire of you, and that which I think is all they can
expect from you, is, That you would declare from whom the
500was to come. He thankt me for my advice, and told
me, that he believed Sirhad not perused
all his Examinations, for he had Answered all the Questions
they had asked him. And if they had any thing more to ask
him, he would Answer them.
 Upontheof, I acquainted Sirwith what he said; he ordered him to be brought to
the Council onmorning, where I met him at the door,
before he was call'd; I told him, I supposed the chief Question
that would be put to him, would be, Whose this 500was?
and begged of him that he would discover what he knew of it.
Upon his coming out from the Council, I asked him if that was
not the question they put to him? he told me it was: I asked
him what account he had given them? he told me he thought
they were satisfied, for they were very kind to him, and promised
him, that so long as they lived, he should have the protection of
that Board.
 On, theoffollowing, Sirseeing me at the Council-door, called me in, and asked
me if I thought I could get any more out of? I told
him I thought he had given him satisfaction when he was before
them, concerning whose the money was. I told Sirthe
discourse I had withat his going into the House, and 
at
his coming back; then he told me, that he had not been
ingenuous with them, for he would confess nothing at first; but after
some Questions being asked in general terms, he told them that
it was to come from some of the Lords in the Tower; anddesired me that I would go once more to see if I could get any thing
from him.
 The next morning the Earl ofdesired to speak with me;
I waited upon him at the Council-Chamber; and he desired me
also, that I would go to Mr.to see what I could get
further from him.
 So ontheof, I did go to Mr., and told him I was not come on a bare visit; but I 
was
commanded by the Earl of, and Sir(whom
he knew had both been very kind to him) to advise him, that
he would be ingenuous, and discover what further he knew in
this business. Truly, said I, I suppose all they do expect from
you, is, that you would make some clear discovery unto them
whose money this 500was; saith he (Swearing by his Soul)did tell them all I knew,thought they had been 
satisfied; no,
said, they are not; and Sirsaith, you 
were
not ingenuous; for you only in general terms told them it was
some of the Lords money in the Tower. Now if you can
remember which of the Lords money it was, it may satisfie them; for
they judg, and so do, and every one else, thatwould
as easily tell you whose it was, as to tell you it was some of the
Lords in the Tower. I could get no more from him a great while;
but after we had sate and discoursed some time, he told me thatwas to be before the Council the next day, and he
believed he should be sent for too; I suppose not, said, 
unless I
have some better account to give them from you: so just upon
my coming away I told him; Mr., I am sorry I can give
no better account of my Journey to you; therefore pray, if you
have any thing more to say, let me know it before I go. After he
had paused a while, By my Soul, said he; I cannot
remember the particular name of any Lord but one. Who is that,
said I? my Lord, saith he; but all the rest were to
contribute to it; fortold me he was to go immediately to 
the
Tower, to get the Money raised; and that it was a difficult thing
to get all the Lords together; and if he should go to them
apart, they might make scruples, and so delay the business;
and therefore he should make all the haste he could to get
the Money ready.