,, whither so fast? What, turn'd flincher! Why, you wo' not leave us?
Where are the Women? Pox I'm weary of guzling, and begin to think them the better Company.
Then thy Reason staggers, and thou'rt almost drunk.
No faith, but your Fools grow noisy -- and if a man must endure the noise of words without Sence, I think the Women have the more Musical Voices, and become Nonsence better.
Why, they are at that end of the Gallery; retired to their Tea, and Scandal; according to their Antient Custome, after Dinner. -- But I made a pretence of following you, because I had something to say to you in private, and I am not like to have many opportunities this Evening.
And here's this Cox-Comb most Critically come to interrupt you.
Boys, Boys, Lads, where are you? What do you give ground? Mortgage for a Bottle, ha?, this is your trick; you're always spoiling Company by leaving it.
And thou art always spoiling Company by coming into 't.
Pooh, ha, ha, ha, I know you envy me. Spite, proud spite, by the Gods! and burning envy. -- I'le be judged byhere, who gives and takes Raillery better, you or I. Pox, Man, when I say you spoil Company by leaving it, I mean you leave no body for the Company to Laugh at. I think there I was with you, ha?.
O' my word,, that was a home thrust; you have silenc'd him.
Oh, my dear, let me perish, if thou art not the Soul of Conversation, the very Essence of Wit, and Spirit of Wine, -- the Deuce take me if there were three good things said; or one, understood, since thy Amputation from the body of our Society. -- He, I think that's pretty and Metaphorical enough: I' Gad I could not have said it out of thy Company. --, ha?
Hum, ay, what is't?
O,! What is't! nay gad I'll punish you for want of Apprehension: The Deuce take me if I tell you.
No, no, hang him, he has no tast, -- but dearexcuse me, I have a little business.
Prithee get thee gone; thou seest we are serious.
We'll come immediately, if you'll but go in, and keep up good Humour and Sense in the Company, prithee do, they'll fall asleep else.
I'gad so they will -- well I will, I will, Gad you shall Command me from theto the. -- But the Deuce take me if I say a good thing till you come. -- But prithee dear Rogue, make haste, prithee make haste, I shall burst else. -- And yonder your Uncle my Lordswears, he'll Disinherit you, and Sirthreatens to disclaim you for a Son-in-Law, and my Lordwon't Dance at your Wedding to Morrow; nor the Deuce take me, I won't Write your Epithalamium -- and see what a condition you're like to be brought to.
Well, I'll speak but three words, and follow you.
Enough, enough,, bring your Apprehension along with you.
Pert Cox-Comb.
Faith 'tis a good natur'd Cox-Comb, and has very Entertaining follies -- you must be more humane to him; at this Juncture it will do me Service. -- I'll tell you, I would have mirth continued this day at any rate; tho' Patience purchase folly, and Attention be paid with noise: There are times when Sense may be unseasonable, as well as Truth. Prithee do thou wear none to day; but allowto have Wit, that thou may'st seem a Fool.
Why, how now, why this extravagant proposition?
O, I would have no room for serious design; for I am Jealous of a Plot. I would have Noise and Impertinence keep my LadyHead from Working: ForHell is not more busie than her Brain, nor contains more Devils, than that Imaginations.
I thought your fear of her had been over -- is not to Morrow appointed for your Marriage with, and her Father Sir, come to settle the Writings, this day, on purpose?
True, but you shall judge whether I have not reason to be allarm'd. None besides you, and, are acquainted with the Secret of my Auntviolent Passion for me. Since my first refusal of her Addresses, she has endeavour'd to do me all ill Offices with my Uncle; yet has managed 'em with that subtilty, that to him they have born the face of kindness; while her Malice, like a Dark Lanthorn, onely shone upon me, where it was directed. Still it gave me less perplexity to prevent the success of her displeasure, than to avoid the importunities of her Love; and of two evils, I thought my self favour'd in her aversion: But whether urged by her despair, and the short prospect of time she saw, to accomplish her designs; whether the hopes of her revenge, or of her Love, terminated in the view of this my Marriage with, I know not; but this Morning she surpriz'd me in my Bed. --
Was there ever such a Fury! 'tis well Nature has not put into her Sexes power to Ravish. -- Well, bless us! Proceed. What follow'd?
What at first amaz'd me; for I look'd to have seen her in all the Transports of a slighted and revengful Woman: But when I expected Thunder from her Voice, and Lightning in her Eyes; I saw her melted into Tears, and hush'd into a Sigh. It was long before either of us spoke, Passion had ty'd her Tongue, and Amazement mine. -- In short, the Consequence was thus, she omitted nothing, that the most violent Love could urge, or tender words express; which when she saw had no effect: but still I pleaded Honour and nearness of Blood to my Uncle; then came the Storm I fear'd at first: For starting from my Bed-side like a Fury, she flew to my Sword, and with much ado I prevented her doing me or her self a mischief: having disarm'd her; in a gust ofPassion she left me, and in a resolution, confirm'd by a Thousand Curses, not to close her Eyes, till she had seen my ruin.
Exquisite Woman! But what the Devil does she think, thou hast no more Sense, than to get an Heir upon her Body to Disinherit thy self: for as I take it this Settlement upon you, is, with a Proviso, that your Uncle have no Children.
It is so. Well, the Service that you are to do me, will be a Pleasure to your self; I must get you to engage my Ladyall this Evening, that my Pious Aunt may not work her to her Interest. And if you chance to secure her to your self, you may incline her to mine. She's handsome, and knows it; is very silly, and thinks she has Sense, and has an old fond Husband.
I confess a very fair Foundation, for a Lover to build upon.
For my Lord, he and his Wife will be sufficiently taken up, with admiring one another, andGallantry, as they call it. I'le observe my Uncle my self; andhas promised me, to watch my Aunt narrowly, and give me notice upon any suspicion. As for Sir, my wise Father-in-Law that is to be, my Dearhas such a share in his Fatherly fondness, he would scarce make her a Moment uneasy, to have her happy hereafter.
So, you have Mann'd your Works: But I wish you may not have the weakest Guard, where the Enemy is strongest.
, you mean; prithee why should you suspect him?
Faith I cannot help it, you know I never lik'd him; I am a little Superstitious in Physiognomy.
He has Obligations of Gratitude, to bind him to me; his Dependance upon my Uncle is through my means.
Upon your Aunt, you mean.
My Aunt!
I'm mistaken if there be not a Familiarity between them, you do not suspect: For all her Passion for you.
Pooh, pooh, nothing in the World but his design to do me Service; and he endeavours to be well in her esteem, that he may be able to effect it.
Well, I shall be glad to be mistaken; but, your Aunts Aversion in her Revenge, cannot be any way so effectually shown, as in bringing forth a Child to Disinherit you. She is Handsome and cunning, and naturally wanton.is Flesh and Blood at best, and opportunities between them are frequent. His Affection to you, you have confessed, is grounded upon his Interest, that, you have transplanted; and should it take Root in my Lady, I don't see what you can expect from the Fruit.
I confess the Consequence is visible, were your suspicions just, -- but see the Company is broke up, let's meet 'em.
Out upon't, Nephew -- leave your Father-in-Law, and me, to maintain our ground against Young People.
I beg your Lordships Pardon. -- We were just returning. --
Were you, Son? Gadsbud much better as it is -- good, strange! I swear I'm almost Tipsy -- t'other Bottle would have been too powerful for me, -- as sure as can be it would. -- we wanted your Company, but Mr.-- where is he? I swear and vow, he's a most facetious Person -- and the best Company. -- And, my Lord, your Lordship is so merry a Man, he, he, he.
O foy, Sir, what do you mean? Merry! O Barbarous! I'd as lieve you call'd me Fool.
Nay, I protest and vow now, 'tis true; when Mr.Jokes, your Lordships Laugh does so become you, he, he, he.
Ridiculous! Siryou're strangely mistaken, I find Champagne is powerful. I assure you, Sir, I Laugh at no bodies Jest but my own, or a Ladies; I assure you, Sir.
How? how, my Lord? What, affront my Wit! Let me perish, do I never say any thing worthy to be Laugh'd at?
O foy, don't misapprehend me, I don't say so, for I often smile at your Conceptions. But there is nothing more unbecoming a Man of Quality, than to Laugh; Jesu, 'tis such a Vulgar Expression of the Passion! every body can Laugh. Then especially to Laugh at the Jest of an Inferiour Person, or when any body else of the same Quality does not Laugh with him. Ridiculous! To be pleased with what pleases the Croud! Now when I Laugh, I always Laugh alone.
I suppose that's because you Laugh at your own Jests, I'gad, ha, ha, ha.
He, he, I swear tho', your Raillery provokes me to a smile.
Ay, my Lord, it's a sign I hit you in the Teeth, if you show 'em.
He, he, he, I swear that's so very pretty , I can't forbear.
I find a Quibble bears more sway in your Lordships Face, than a Jest.
Sir, if you please we'll retire to the Ladys, and Drink a Dish of Tea, to settle our Heads.
With all my heart. -- Mr.you'll come to us, -- or call me when you're going to Joke, I'll be ready to Laugh incontinently.
But does your Lordship never see Comedies?
O yes, sometimes, -- but I never Laugh.
No?
Oh, no. -- Never Laugh indeed, Sir.
No, why what d'ee go there for?
To distinguish my self from the Commonalty, and mortify the Poets; the Fellows grow so Conceited, when any of their foolish Wit prevails upon the side Boxes. -- I swear, -- he, he, he, I have often constrained my Inclinations to Laugh. -- He, he, he, to avoid giving them encouragement.
You are Cruel to your self, my Lord, as well as Malicious to them.
I confess, I did my self some violence at first, but now I think I have Conquer'd it.
Let me perish, my Lord, but there is something very particular and novel in the Humour; 'tis true, it makes against Wit, and I'm sorry for some Friends of mine that Write, but -- I'gad, I love to be malicious. -- Nay, Deuce take me, there's Wit in't too -- and Wit must be foil'd by Wit; cut a Diamond with a Diamond; no other way, I'gad.
Oh, I thought you would not be long, before you found out the Wit.
Wit! In what? Where the Devil's the Wit, in not Laughing when a Man has a mind to't.
O Lord, why can't you find it out? -- Why there 'tis, in the not Laughing -- don't you Apprehend me? -- My Lord,, is a very honest Fellow, but harkee, -- you understand me. Somewhat heavy, a little shallow, or so. -- Why I'll tell you now, suppose now, you come up to me -- nay, pritheebe instructed. Suppose, as I was saying, you come up to me, holding your sides, and Laughing as if you would bepiss your self -- I look grave, and ask the cause of this Immoderate Mirth. -- You Laugh on still, and are not able to tell me -- still I look grave, not so much as smile. --
Smile, no, what the Devil should you smile at, when you suppose I can't tell you?
Pshaw, pshaw, prithee don't interrupt me. -- But I tell you, you shall tell me -- at last. -- But it shall be a great while first.
Well, but prithee don't let it be a great while, because I long to have it over.
Well then, you tell me, some good Jest, or very Witty thing, Laughing all the while as if you were ready to die -- and I hear it, and look thus. -- Would not you be disappointed?
No; for if it were a witty thing, I should not expect you to understand it.
O foy, Mr., all the World allow Mr.to have Wit; my Wife says, he has a great deal. I hope you think her a Judge?
Pooh, my Lord, his Voice goes for nothing. -- I can't tell how to make him Apprehend, -- take it t'other way. Suppose I say a witty thing to you?
Then I shall be disappointed indeed.
Let him alone,, he is obstinately bent not to be instructed.
I'm sorry for him, Deuce take me.
Shall we go to the Ladies, my Lord?
With all my heart, methinks we are a Solitude without 'em.
Or, what say you, to another Bottle of Champaign?
O, for the Universe, not a drop more I beseech you, O Intemperate! I have a flushing in my Face already.
Let me see, let me see, my Lord, I broke my Glass that was in the Lid of my Snuff-Box. Hum! Deuce take me, I have encourag'd a Pimple here too.
Then you must mortifie him, with a Patch; my Wife shall supply you. Come, Gentlemen,.
I'll hear no more. -- Y' are False and Ungrateful; come, I know you false.
I have been frail, I confess, Madam, for your Ladyships Service.
That I should trust a Man, whom I had known betray his Friend!
What Friend have I betray'd? Or to Whom?
Your fond Friend, and to me; can you deny it?
I do not.
Have you not wrong'd my Lord, who has been a Father to you in your wants, and given you being? have you not wrong'd him in the highest manner, in his Bed?
With your Ladyships help, and for your Service, as I told you before. I can't deny that neither. -- Any thing more, Madam?
More! Audacious Villain. O what's more, is most my Shame, -- have you not Dishonoured me?
No, that I deny; for I never told in all my Life: So that Accusation's Answer'd; on to the next.
Death, do you dally with my Passion? Insolent Devil! But have a care, -- provoke me not; For, by the Eternal Fire, you shall not scape my Vengance. -- Calm Villain! How unconcern'd he stands, Confessing Treachery and Ingratitude! Is there Vice more black! -- O I have Excuses, Thousands for my Faults; Fire in my Temper, Passions in my Soul apt to every provocation; oppressed at once with Love, and with Despair. But a sedate, a thinking Villain, whose Black Blood runs temperately bad, what excuse can clear? one, who is no more moved with the reflection of his Crimes, than of his Face; but walks unstartled from the Mirrour, and streight forgets the hideous form.
Will you be in Temper, Madam? I would not talk, not to be heard. I have been
a very great Rogue for your sake, and you reproach me with it; I am ready to be a Rogue still, to do you Service; and you are flinging Conscience and Honour in my Face, to rebate my Inclinations. How am I to behave my self? You know I am your Creature, my Life and Fortune in your power; to disoblige you, brings me certain Ruin. Allow it, I would betray you, I would not be a Traytor to my self: I don't pretend to Honesty, because you know I am a Rascal: But I would convince you, from the necessity of my being firm with you.
Necessity, Impudence! Can no Gratitude incline you, no Obligations touch you? Have not my Fortune, and my Person, been subjected to your Pleasure? Were you not in the nature of a Servant, and have not I in effect made you Lord of all, of me, and of my Lord? Where is that humble Love, the Languishing, that Adoration, which once was paid me, and everlastingly engaged?
Fix'd, Rooted in my Heart, whence nothing can remove 'em, yet you. --
Yet, what yet?
Nay, Misconceive me not, Madam, when I say I have had a Generous, and a Faithful Passion, which you had never favour'd, but through Revenge and Policy.
Ha!
Look you, Madam, we are alone, -- pray contain your self, and hear me. You know you Lov'd your Nephew, when I first Sigh'd for you; I quickly found it, an Argument that I Lov'd; for with that Art you veil'd your Passion, 'twas imperceptible to all but Jealous Eyes. This discovery made me bold; I confess it; for by it, I thought you in my Power. Your Nephew's Scorn of you, added to my hopes; I watch'd the Occasion, and took you, just Repulsed by him, warm at once with Love and Indignation; yourDisposition, my Arguments, and happy Opportunity, accomplish'd my Design; I prest the yielding Minute, and was blest. How, I have Lov'd you since, Words have not shown, then how should Words express.
Well, mollifying Devil! -- And have I not met your Love with forward Fire?
Your Zeal I grant was Ardent, but misplac'd; there was Revenge in view; that Womans Idol had defil'd the Temple of the God, and Love was made a Mock-Worship, -- a Son and Heir, would have edg'd Youngupon the brink of Ruin, and left him nought but you to catch at for Prevention.
Again, provoke me! Do you wind me like a Larum, only to rouse my own still'd Soul for your Diversion? Confusion!
Na, Madam, I'm gone, if you Relapse, -- what needs this? I say nothing but what your self, in open hours of Love, have told me. Why should you deny it? Nay, how can you? Is not all this present Heat owing to the same Fire? Do you not Love him still? How have I this day Offended you, but in not breaking off his Match with? Which e're to Morrow shall be done, -- had you but Patience.
How, what said you-- another Caprice, to unwind my temper.
By heaven, no; I am your Slave, the Slave of all your Pleasures; and will not rest till I have given you peace, would you suffer me.
O', in Vain I do disguise me from thee, thou know'st me, know'st the very inmost Windings and Recesses of my Soul. -- Oh! I burn; Married to Morrow! Despair strikes me. Yet my Soul knows I hate him too: Let him but once be mine, and next immediate Ruin seize him.
Compose your self, You shall Enjoy and Ruin him too, -- Will that please you?
How, how? Thou Dear, thou precious Villain, how?
You have already been tampering with my Lady?
I have: She is ready for any Impression I think fit.
She must be throughly perswaded, thatLoves her.
She is so Credulous that way naturally, and likes him so well, that she will believe it faster than I can perswade her. But I don't see what you can propose from such a trifling design; for her first Conversing with, will convince her of the contrary.
I know it. -- I don't depend upon it. -- But it will prepare some thing else; and gain us leasure to lay a stronger Plot: if I gain a little time, I shall not want Contrivance.
Indeed, Madam! Is it Possible your Ladyship could have been so much in Love?
I could not sleep; I did not sleep one wink for Three Weeks together.
Prodigious! I wonder, want of sleep, and so much Love, and so much Wit as your Ladyship has, did not turn your Brain.
O my Dear, you must not rally your Friend, -- but really, as you say, I wonder too, -- but then I had a way. -- For between you and I, I had Whymsies and Vapours, but I gave them vent.
How pray, Madam?
O I Writ, Writ abundantly, -- do you never Write?
Write, what?
Songs, Elegies, Satyrs, Encomiums, Panegyricks, Lampoons, Plays, or Heroick Poems.
O Lord, not I, Madam; I'm content to be a Courteous Reader.
O Inconsistent! In Love, and not Write! if my Lord and I had been both of your Temper, we had never come together, -- O bless me! What a sad thing would that have been, if my Lord and I should never have met!
Then neither my Lord and you would ever have met with your Match, on my Conscience.
O' my Conscience no more we should; thou say'st right -- for sure my Lordis as fine a Gentleman, and as much a Man of Quality! Ah! Nothing atall of the Common Air, -- I think I may say he wants nothing, but a Blue Ribbon and a Star, to make him Shine, the very Phosphorus of our Hemisphere. Do you understand those Two hard Words? If you don't, I'll explain 'em to you.
Yes, yes, Madam, I'm not so Ignorant. -- At least I won't own it, to be troubled with your Instructions.
Nay, I beg your Pardon; but being Derived from the, I thought you might have escap'd the Etymology. -- But I'm the more amazed, to find you a Woman of Letters, and not Write! Bless me! how canbelieve you Love him?
Why Faith, Madam, he that won't take my Word, shall never have it under my Hand.
I Vowa pretty Gentleman, but Methinks he wants a Manner.
A Manner! what's that, Madam?
Some distinguishing Quality, as for example, theorof Mr.; the Solemnity, yet Complaisance of my Lord, or something of his own, that should look a little; he is too much a Mediocrity, in my mind.
He does not indeed affect either pertness, or formality; for which I like him: Here he comes.
And my Lord with him: pray observe the difference.
Impertinent Creature, I could almost be angry with her now.
My Lord, I have been telling my dear, how much I have been in Love with you; I swear I have; I'm not asham'd to own it now; ah! it makes my heart leap, I vow I sigh when I think on't: my dear Lord! ha, ha, ha, do you remember, my Lord?
Pleasant Creature! perfectly well, ah! that look, ay, there it is; who could resist! 'twas so my heart was made a Captive first, and ever since 't has been in Love with happy Slavery.
O that Tongue, that dear deceitful Tongue! that Charming Softness in your Mien and your Expression, and then your Bow! Good my Lord, bow as you did when I gave you my Picture, here suppose this my Picture --
Pray mind, my Lord; ah! he bows Charmingly; nay, my Lord, you sha'n't kiss it so much; I shall grow jealous, I vow now.
I saw my self there, and kissed it for your sake.
Ah! Gallantry to the last degree -- Mr., you're a Judge; was ever any thing so well-bred as my Lord?
Never any thing; but your Ladyship, let me perish.
O prettily turn'd again; let me die, but you have a great deal of Wit: Mr., don't you think Mr.has a World of Wit?
O, yes, Madam.
O Lord, Madam --
An infinite deal!
O Jesu, Madam --
More Wit than any Body.
I'm everlastingly your humble Servant, Deuce take me, Madam.
Don't you think us a happy Couple?
I vow, my Lord, I think you the happiest Couple in the World, for you are not only happy in one another, and when you are together, but happy in your selves, and by your selves.
I hopewill make a good Husband too.
'Tis my Interest to believe he will, my Lord.
D'e think he'll Love you as well as I do my Wife? I'm afraid not.
I believe he'll Love me better.
Heavens! that can never be; but why do you think so?
Because he has not so much reason to be fond of himself.
O your humble Servant for that, dear Madam; well,, you'll be a happy Creature.
Ay, my Lord, I shall have the same reason for my happiness that your Lordship has, I shall think my self happy.
Ah, that's all.
Your Ladyship is in the right; but I'gad I'm wholly turn'd into Satyr. I confess I Write but seldom, but when I do -- keenI'gad. But my Lord was telling me, your Ladyship has made an Essay toward an Heroick Poem.
Did my Lord tell you? Yes I vow, and the Subject is my Lord's Love to me. And what do you think I call it? I dare Swear you won't guesse --, ha, ha, ha.
Because my Lord's Title's, I'gad, ha, ha, ha, Deuce take me veryand Surprizing, ha, ha, ha.
He, Ay, is not it? -- and then I call my Lord; and my self, what d'e think I call my self?
may be, -- 'gad I cannot tell.
, that's all; just my own Name.
I'gad very pretty -- Deuce take me if your Ladyship has not the Art of Surprizing the most Naturally in the World, -- I hope you'll make me happy in Communicating the Poem.
O, you must be my Confident, I must ask your Advice.
I'm your Humble Servant, let me perish -- I presume your Ladyship has Read?
O yes, and, anduponand. -- My Lord you must not be Jealous, I'm Communicating all to Mr..
No, no, I'll allow Mr.; have you nothing about you to shew him, my Dear?
Yes, I believe I have. -- Mr., comewill you go into the next Room? and there I'll shew you all I have.
I'll walk a turn in the Garden, and come to you.
You're thoughtful,?
I'm thinking, that tho' Marriage makes Man and Wife One Flesh, it leaves 'em still Two Fools; and they become more Conspicuous by setting off one another.
That's only when Two Fools meet, and their follies are oppos'd.
Nay, I have known Two Wits meet, and by the opposition of their Wits, render themselves as ridiculous as Fools. 'Tis an odd Game we're going to Play at: What think you of drawing Stakes, and giving over in time?
No, hang't, that's not endeavouring to Win, because it's possible we may lose; since we have Shuffled and Cutt, let's e'en turn up Trump now.
Then I find its like Cards, if either of us have a good Hand, it is an Accident of Fortune.
No, Marriage is rather like a Game at Bowls, Fortune indeed makes the match, and the Two nearest, and sometimes the Two farthest are together, but the Game depends entirely upon Judgment.
Still it is a Game, and Consequently one of us must be a Loser.
Not at all; only a Friendly Tryal of Skill, and the Winnings to be Shared between us. -- What's here, the Musick! -- Oh, my Lord has promised the Company a New Song, we'll get 'em to give it us by the way.
Pray let us have the Favour of you, to practice the Song, before the Company hear it.
You shall have my thanks below.
Gads bud! I am provoked into a Fermentation, as my Ladysays; was ever the like read of in Story?
Sirhave patience, let me alone to rattle him up.
Pray your Ladyship give me leave to be Angry -- I'll rattle him up I Warrant you, I'll firk him with a.
You firk him, I'll firk him my self; pray Sirhold you Contented.
Bless me, what makes my Father in such a Passion! -- I never saw him thus before.
Hold your self Contented, my Lady, -- I find Passion coming upon me by inspiration, and I cannot submit as formerly, therefore give way.
How now! will you be pleased to retire, and --
No marry will I not be pleased, I am pleased to be angry, that's my pleasure at this time.
What can this mean!
Gads my life, the man's Distracted, why how now, who are you? What am I? 'Slidikins can't I govern you? What did I Marry you for? Am I not to be absolute and uncontroulable? Is it fit a Woman of my Spirit, and Conduct, should be contradicted in a matter of this Concern?
It concerns me, and only me; -- besides, I'm not to be govern'd at all times. When I am in Tranquility, my Ladyshall Command Sir; but when I am provoked to fury, I cannot incorporate with Patience and Reason, -- as soon may Tygers Match with Tygers, Lambs with Lambs, and every Creature couple with its Foe, as the Poet says. --
He's hot-headed still! 'Tis in vain to talk to you; but remember I have a Curtain-Lecture for you, you disobedient, headstrong Brute.
No, 'tis because I won't be headstrong, because I won't be a Brute, and have my Head fortifi'd, that I am thus exasperated, -- but I will protect my Honour, and yonder is the Violater of my Fame.
'Tis my Honour that is concern'd, and the violation was intended to me. Your Honour! You have none, but what is in my keeping, and I can dispose of it when I please -- therefore don't provoke me.
Hum, gads bud she says true, -- well, my Lady, March on, I will fight under you then: I am convinced, as far as Passion will permit.
Inhuman and Treacherous.
Thou Serpent and first Tempter of Womankind. --
Bless me! Sir; Madam; what mean you?
, come away, touch him not, come hither Girl, go not near him, there's nothing but deceit about him; Snakes are in his Peruke, and the Crocodile ofin his Belly, he will eat thee up alive.
Dishonourable, impudent Creature!
For Heaven's sake, Madam, to whom do you direct this Language!
Have I behaved my self with all the decorum, and nicety, befitting the Person of SirWife? Have I preserved my Honour as it were in a Snow-House for this three year past? Have I been white and unsulli'd even by Sirhimself?
Nay, she has been an impenetrable Wife, even to me, that's the truth on't.
Have I, I say, preserv'd my self, like a fair Sheet of Paper, for you to make a Blot upon --
And she shall make a Simile with any Woman in.
I am so amazed, I know not what to speak.
Do you think my Daughter, this pretty Creature; gads bud she's a Wife for a Cherubin! Do you think her fit for nothing but to be a Stalking-Horse, to stand before you, while you take aim at my Wife? Gads bud I was never angry before in my Life, and I'll never be appeased again.
Hell and Damnation! this is my Aunt; such malice can be engendred no where else.
Sir, takefrom his sight; leave me to strike him with the remorse of his intended Crime.
Pray, Sir, stay, hear him, I dare affirm he's innocent.
Innocent! why heark'ee, come hither, heark'ee, I had it from his Aunt, my Sister, -- gadsbud he does not care a Farthing for any thing of thee, but thy Portion, why he's in Love with my Wife; he would have tantalized thee, and made a Cuckold of thy poor Father, -- and that would certainly have broke my Heart -- I'm sure if ever I should have Horns, they would kill me; they would never come kindly, I should dye of 'em, like any Child, that were cutting his Teeth -- I should, indeed,-- therefore come away; but providence has prevented all, therefore come away, when I bid you.
I must obey.
O, such a thing! the Impiety of it startles me -- to wrong so good, so fair a Creature, and one that lov'd you tenderly -- 'tis a barbarity of barbarities, and nothing could be guilty of it --
But the greatest Villain imagination can form, I grant it; and next to the Villany of such a fact, is the Villany of aspersing me with the guilt. How? which way was I to wrong her? for yet I understand you not.
Why, gads my life, Cousin, you cannot be so peremptory as to deny it; when I tax you with it to your face; for now Sirgone, you are.
By Heaven, I love her more than life, or --
Fiddle, faddle, don't tell me of this and that, and every thing in the World, but give me Mathemacular Demonstration, answer me directly -- but I have not patience -- oh! the Impiety of it, as I was saying, and the unparallell'd wickedness! O merciful Father! how could you think to reverse Nature so, to make the Daughter the means of procuring the Mother?
The Daughter procure the Mother!
Ay, for tho' I am notown Mother, I am her Father's Wife; and that's near enough to make it Incest.
Incest! O my precious Aunt, and the Devil in Conjunction.
O reflect upon the horror of that, and then the guilt of deceiving every body; Marrying the Daughter, only to make a Cuckold of the Father; and then seducing me, debauching my purity, and perverting me from the road of Virtue, in which I have trod thus long, and never made one Trip, not one; O consider it, what would you have to answer for, if you should provoke me to frailty? Alas! Humanity is feeble, Heaven knows! very feeble, and unable to support it self.
Where am I? sure, is it day? and am I awake, Madam? --
And no body knows how Circumstances may happen together, -- to my thinking, now I could resist the strongest Temptation, -- but yet I know, 'tis impossible for me to know whether I could or no, there is no certainty in the things of this life.
Madam, pray give me leave to ask you one question. --
O Lord, ask me the question, I'll swear I'll refuse it: I swear I'll deny it, -- therefore don't ask me, nay you shan't ask me, I swear I'll deny it. O Gemini, you have brought all the Blood into my face; I warrant, I am as red as a Turky-Cock; O fie, Cousin!
Nay, Madam, hear me; I mean --
Hear you, no, no; I'll deny you first, and hear you afterwards: For one does not know how ones mind may change upon hearing -- hearing is one of the Senses, and all the Senses are fallible; I won't trust my Honour, I assure you; my Honour is infallible and uncomatible.
For Heaven's sake, Madam. --
O name it no more -- bless me, how can you talk of Heaven! and have so much wickedness in your Heart? May be you don't think it a sin, -- they say some of you Gentlemen don't think it a sin, -- may be it is no sin to them that don't think it so; -- indeed, if I did not think it a sin, -- but still my honour, if it were no sin, -- but then, to Marry my Daughter, for the Conveniency of frequent Opportunities, -- I'll never consent to that, as sure as can be, I'll break the Match.
Death and amazement, -- Madam, upon my knees. --
Nay, nay, rise up, come you shall see my good Nature. I know Love is powerful, and no body can help his passion: 'Tis not your fault; nor I swear it is not mine, -- how can I help it, if I have Charms? And how can you help it, if you are made a Captive; I swear it's pity it should be a fault, -- but my honour -- well, but your honour too -- but the sin! -- well but the necessity -- O Lord, here's some body coming, I dare not stay. Well, you must consider of your Crime; and strive as much as can be against it, -- strive besure -- but don't be melancholly, don't despair, -- but never think that I'll grant you any thing; O Lord, no; -- but besure you lay aside all thoughts of the Marriage, for tho' I know you don't Love, only as a blind for your Passion to me; yet it will make me jealous, -- O Lord, what did I say? Jealous! no, no, I can't be jealous, for I must not Love you, -- therefore don't hope, -- but don't despair neither, -- O, they're coming, I must fly.
So then, -- spight of my care and foresight, I am caught, caught in my security, -- yet this was but a shallow artifice, unworthy of my Matchiavilian Aunt: There must be more behind, this is but the first flash, the priming of her Engine; destruction follows hard, if not most presently prevented.
, welcome, thy presence is a view of Land, appearing to my Shipwrack'd hopes: The Witch has rais'd the Storm, and her Ministers have done their Work; you see the Vessels are parted.
I know it; I met Sirtowing away: Come, trouble not your head, I'll joyn you together e're to Morrow Morning, or drown between you in the attempt.
There's comfort in a hand stretch'd out, to one that's sinking; tho' ne'er so far off.
No sinking, nor no danger, -- come, cheer up; why you don't know, that while I plead for you, your Aunt has given me a retaining Fee; -- nay, I am your greatest Enemy, and she does but Journey-Work under me.
Ha! how's this?
What d'e think of my being employ'd in the execution of all her Plots? Ha, ha, ha, by Heaven it's true; I have undertaken to break the Match, I have undertaken to make your Uncle Disinherit you, to get you turn'd out of Doors; and to -- ha, ha, ha, I can't tell you for Laughing, -- oh she has open'd her heart to me, -- I am to turn you a Grazing, and to -- ha, ha, ha, Marrymy self; there's a Plot for you.
Ha! O I see, I see my Rising Sun! Light breaks thro' Clouds upon me, and I shall live in Day -- O my! how shall I thank or praise thee; Thou hast outwitted Woman. -- But tell me, how could'st thou thus get into her Confidence? -- Ha! How? But was it her Contrivance to perswade my Ladyto this extravagant belief?
It was, and to tell you the truth, I encouraged it for your diversion: Tho it made you a little uneasy for the present, yet the reflection of it must needs be entertaining, -- I warrant she was very Violent at first.
Ha, ha, ha, I, a very Fury; but I was most afraid of her violence at last, -- if you had not come as you did; I don't know what she might have attempted.
Ha, ha, ha, I know her temper, -- well, you must know then, that all my Contrivances were but Bubbles; till at last I pretended to have been long Secretly in Love with; that did my business; that convinced your Aunt, I might be trusted; since it was as much my interest as hers to break the Match: Then she thought my Jealousie might qualifie me to assist her in her Revenge. And, in short, in that belief, told me the Secrets of her heart. At length we made this agreement, if accomplish her designsshe has ingaged to putwith all her Fortune into my Power.
She is most gracious in her Favour, -- well, and dear, how hast thou Contrived?
I would not have you stay to hear it now; for I don't know, but she may come this way; I am to meet her anon, after that I'll tell you the whole matter; be here in this Gallery an hour hence, by that time I imagine our Consultation may be over.
I will; till then, success attend thee.
Till then, Success will attend me; for when I meet you, I meet the only Obstacle to my Fortune., let thy Beauty gild my Crimes; and whatsoever I commit of Treachery or Deceit, shall be imputed to me as a Merit -- Treachery, what Treachery? Love cancels all the Bonds of Friendship, and sets Men right upon their first Foundations. Duty to Kings, Piety to Parents, Gratitude to Benefactors, and Fidelity to Friends, are different and particular Ties: But the Name of Rival cuts 'em all asunder, and is a general acquittance -- Rival is equal, and Love like Death an universal Leveller of Mankind. Ha! but is there not such a thing as Honesty? Yes, and whosoever has it about him, bears an Enemy in his Breast: For your honest man, as I take it, is that nice, scrupulous, conscientious Person, who will cheat no body but himself; such another Coxcomb, as your wise man, who is too hard for all the World, and will be made a Fool of by no body, but himself: Ha, ha, ha. Well for Wisdom and Honesty, give me Cunning and Hypocrisie; oh 'tis such a pleasure, to angle for fair-faced Fools! then that hungry Gudgeon Credulity, will bite at any thing -- Why, let me see, I have the same Face, the same Words and Accents, when I speak what I do think; and when I speak what I do not think -- the very same -- and dear dissimulation is the only Art, not to be known from Nature.
My Lord, can you blame my Brother, if he refuse his Daughter upon this Provocation? The Contract's void by this unheard of Impiety.
I don't believe it true; he has better Principles -- Pho, 'tis nonsense. Come, come, I know my Ladyhas a large Eye, and wou'd centre every thing in her own Circle; 'tis not the first time she has mistaken Respect for Love, and made Sirjealous of the Civility of an undesigning person, the better to bespeak his security in her unfeigned Pleasures.
You censure hardly, my Lord; my Sister's Honour is very well known.
Yes, I believe I know some that have been familiarly acquainted with it. This is a little Trick wrought by some pitiful Contriver, envious of my Nephew's Merit.
Nay, my Lord, it may be so, and I hope it will be found so: but that will require some time; for in such a Case as this, demonstration is necessary.
There should have been demonstration of the contrary too, before it had been believ'd --
So I suppose there was.
How! Where? When?
That I can't tell; nay, I don't say there was -- I am willing to believe as favourably of my Nephew as I can.
I don't know that.
How? Don't you believe that, say you, my Lord?
No, I don't say so -- I confess I am troubled to find you so cold in his Defence.
His Defence! bless me, wou'd you have me defend an ill thing?
You believe it then?
I don't know; I am very unwilling to speak my Thoughts in any thing that may be to my Cousin's disadvantage; besides, I find, my Lord, you are prepared to receive an ill impression from any opinion of mine which is not consenting with your own: But since I am like to be suspected in the end, and 'tis a pain any longer to dissemble: I own it to you; in short I do believe it, nay, and can believe any thing worse, if it were laid to his charge -- Don't ask me my Reasons, my Lord, for they are not fit to be told you.
I'm amaz'd, here must be something more than ordinary in this.
Not fit to be told me, Madam? You can have no Interests, wherein I am not concern'd, and consequently the same Reasons ought to be convincing to me, which create your satisfaction or disquiet.
But those which cause my disquiet, I am willing to have remote from your hearing. Good my Lord, don't press me.
Don't oblige me to press you.
Whatever it was, 'tis past: And that is better to be unknown which cannot be prevented; therefore let me beg you rest satisfied --
When you have told me, I will --
You won't.
By my Life, my Dear, I will.
What if you can't.
How? Then I must know, nay I will: No more trifling -- I charge you tell me -- by all our mutual Peace to come; upon your Duty --
Nay, my Lord, you need say no more, to make me lay my heart before you, but don't be thus transported; compose your self: It is not of Concern, to make you lose one minutes temper. 'Tis not indeed, my Dear. Nay, by this kiss you shan't be angry. O Lord, I wish I had not told you any thing. Indeed, my Lord, you have frighted me. Nay, look pleas'd, I'll tell you.
Well, well.
Nay, but will you be calm -- indeed it's nothing but --
But what?
But will you promise me not to be angry -- nay you must -- not to be angry with-- I dare swear he's sorry -- and were it to do again, would not --
Sorry, for what? 'Death you rack me with delay.
Nay, no great matter, only -- well I have your promise -- Pho, why nothing, only your Nephew had a mind to amuse himself, sometimes with a little Gallantry towards me. Nay, I can't think he meant any thing seriously, but methought it look'd odly.
Confusion and Hell, what do I hear!
Or, may be, he thought he was not enough a-kin to me, upon your account, and had a mind to create a nearer relation on his own; a Lover you know, my Lord -- Ha, ha, ha. Well but that's all -- now you have it; well remember your promise, my Lord, and don't take any notice of it to him.
No, no, no -- Damnation!
Nay, I swear you must not -- a little harmless mirth -- only misplac'd that's all -- but if it were more, 'tis over now, and all's well. For my part I have forgot it; and so has he, I hope -- for I have not heard any thing from him these two days.
These two days! Is it so fresh? Unnatural Villain! 'Death I'll have him stripp'd and turn'd naked out of my doors this moment, and let him rot and perish, incestuous Brute!
O for Heaven's sake, my Lord, you'll ruine me if you take such publick notice of it, it will be a Town-talk: Consider your own and my Honour -- nay, I told you you would not be satisfied when you knew it.
Before I've done, I will be satisfied. Ungrateful Monster, how long? --
Lord, I don't know: I wish my Lips had grown together when I told you -- almost a Twelvemonth -- nay, I won't tell you any more, till you are your self. Pray, my Lord, don't let the Company see you in this disorder -- Yet, I confess, I can't blame you; for I think I was never so surpriz'd in my Life -- Who would have thought my Nephew could have so misconstrued my Kindness -- but willyou go into your Closet, and recover your Temper. I'llmake an excuse of sudden Business to the Company, and come to you. Pray, good dear my Lord, let me beg you do now: I'll come immediately, and tell you all; will you my Lord?
I will -- I am mute with wonder.
Well but go now, here's some body coming.
Well I go -- you won't stay, for I would hear more of this.
I follow instantly -- So.
This was a Master-piece, and did not need my help -- tho' I stood ready for a Cue to come in and confirm all, had there been occasion.
Have you seen?
I have; and am to meet him here about this time.
How does he bear his Disappointment?
Secure in my Assistance, he seem'd not much afflicted, but rather laugh'd at the shallow Artifice, which so little time must of necessity discover. Yet he is apprehensive of some farther design of yours, and has engaged me to watch you. I believe he will hardly be able to prevent your Plot, yet I would have you use Caution and Expedition.
Expedition indeed; for all we do, must be perform'd in the remaining part of this Evening, and before the Company break up; lest my Lord should cool, and have an opportunity to talk with him privately -- my Lord must not see him again.
By no means; therefore you must aggravate my Lord's Displeasure to a degree that will admit of no Conference with him. -- What think you of mentioning me?
How?
To my Lord, as having been privy todesign upon you, but still using my utmost Endeavours todissuade him: Tho' my Friendship and Love to him has made me conceal it; yet you may say, I threatned the next time he attempted any thing of that kind, to discover it to my Lord.
To what end is this?
It will confirm my Lord's opinion of my Honour and Honesty, and create in him a new Confidence in me, which (should this design miscarry) will be necessary to the forming of another Plot that I have in my head -- to cheat you, as well as the rest.
I'll do it -- I'll tell him you hindred him once from forcing me.
Excellent! your Ladyship has a most improving Fancy. You had best go to my Lord, keep him as long as you can in his Closet, and I doubt not but you will mould him to what you please; your Guests are so engaged in their own Follies and Intrigues, they'll miss neither of you.
When shall we meet? -- at eight this Evening in my Chamber; there rejoice at our success, and toy away an hour in mirth.
I will not fail.
I know what she means by toying away an hour well enough. Pox I have lost all Appetite to her; yet she's a fine Woman, I lov'd her once. But I don't know, since I have been in a great measure kept by her, the case is alter'd; what was my Pleasure is become my Duty: And I have as little stomach to her now as if I were her Husband. Should she smoke my design upon, I were in a fine pickle. She has a damn'd penetrating head, and knows how to interpret a Coldness the right way; therefore I must dissemble Ardour and Ecstasie, that's resolv'd: How easily and pleasantly is that dissembled before Fruition! Pox on't that a Man can't drink without quenching his Thirst. Ha! yonder comesthoughtful. Let me think: Meet her at eight -- hum -- ha! by Heaven I have it -- if I can speak to my Lord before -- Was it my Brain or Providence? No Matter which -- I will deceive 'em all, and yet secure my self, 'twas a lucky thought! Well this Double-Dealing is aJewel,
Here he comes, now for me --
Mercy on us, What will the Wickedness of this World come to?