Morrow, my dear Sister; are you for Church this Morning?
Any where to Pray; for Heaven alone can help me: But, I think,, there's no Form of Prayer in the Liturgy against bad Husbands.
But there's a Form of Law in; and I swear, Sister, rather than see you thus continually discontented, I would advise you to apply to that: For besides the part that I bear in your vexatious Broils, as being Sister to the Husband, and Friend to the Wife; your Example gives me such an Impression of Matrimony, that I shall be apt to condemn my Person to a long Vacation all its Life. -- But supposing, Madam, that you brought it to a Case of Separation, what you urge against your Husband? My Brother is, first, the most constant Man alive.
The most constant Husband, I grant'ye.
He never sleeps from you.
No, he always sleeps with me.
He allows you a Maintenance suitable to your Quality.
A Maintenance! do you take me, Madam, for an hospital Child, that I must sit down, and bless my Benefactors for Meat, Drink and Clothes? As I take it, Madam, I brought your Brother Ten thousand Pounds, out of which, I might expect some pretty things, call'd Pleasures.
You share in all the Pleasures that the Country affords.
Country Pleasures! Racks and Torments! dost think, Child, that my Limbs were made for leaping of Ditches, and clambring over Stiles; or that my Parents wisely foreseeing my future Happiness in Country-pleasures, had early instructed me in the rural Accomplishments of drinking fat Ale, playing at Whisk, and smoaking Tobacco with my Husband; or of spreading of Plaisters, brewing of Diet-drinks, and stilling Rosemary-Water with the good old Gentlewoman, my Mother-in-Law.
I'm sorry, Madam, that it is not more in our power to divert you; I cou'd wish indeed that our Entertainments were a little more polite, or your Taste a little less refin'd: But, pray, Madam, how came the Poets and Philosophers that labour'd so much in hunting after Pleasure, to place it at last in a Country Life?
Because they wanted Money, Child, to find out the Pleasures of the Town: Did you ever see a Poet or Philosopher worth Ten thousand Pound; if you can shew me such a Man, I'll lay you Fifty Pound you'll find him somewhere within the weekly Bills. -- Not that I disapprove rural Pleasures, as the Poets have painted them; in their Landschape everyhas her, every murmuring Stream, and every flowry Mead gives fresh Alarms to Love. -- Besides, you'll find, that their Couples were never marry'd: -- But yonder I see my, and a sweet Swain it is, Heaven knows. -- Come,, don't be angry, he's my Husband, and your Brother; and between both is he not a sad Brute?
I have nothing to say to your part of him, you're the best Judge.
O Sister, Sister! if ever you marry, beware of a sullen, silent Sot, one that's always musing, but never thinks: -- There's some Diversion in a talking Blockhead; and since a Woman must wear Chains, I wou'd have the Pleasure of hearing 'em rattle a little. -- Now you shall see, but take this by the way; -- He came home this Morning at his usual Hour of Four, waken'd me out of a sweet Dream of something else, by tumbling over the Tea-table, which he broke all to pieces, after his Man and he had rowl'd about the Room like sick Passengers in a Storm, he comes flounce into Bed, dead as a Salmon into a Fishmonger's Basket; his Feet cold as Ice, his Breath hot as a Furnace, and his Hands and his Face as greasy as his Flanel Night-cap. -- Oh Matrimony! -- He tosses up the Clothes with a barbarous swing over his Shoulders, disorders the whole Oeconomy of my Bed, leaves me half naked, and my whole Night's Comfort is the tuneable Serenade of that wakeful Nightingale, his Nose. -- O the Pleasure of counting the melancholly Clock by a snoring Husband! -- But now, Sister, you shall see how handsomely, being a well-bred Man, he will beg my Pardon.
My Head akes consumedly.
Will you be pleased, my Dear, to drink Tea with us this Morning? it may do your Head good.
No.
Coffee? Brother.
Pshaw.
Will you please to dress and go to Church with me, the Air may help you.
Sir.
What Day o'th Week is this?
, an't please your Worship.
! bring me a Dram, and d'ye hear, set out the Venison-Pasty, and a Tankard of strong Beer upon the Hall-Table, I'll go to breakfast.
Stay, stay, Brother, you shan't get off so; you were very naught last Night, and must make your Wife Reparation; come, come, Brother, won't you ask Pardon?
For what?
For being drunk last Night.
I can afford it, can't I?
But I can't, Sir.
Then you may let it alone.
But I must tell you, Sir, that this is not to be born.
I'm glad on't.
What is the Reason, Sir, that you use me thus inhumanely?
Sir.
Get things ready to shave my Head.
Have a care of coming near his Temples,, for fear you meet something there that may turn the Edge of your Razor. -- Inveterate Stupidity! did you ever know so hard, so obstinate a Spleen as his? O Sister, Sister! I shall never ha' Good of the Beast till I get him to Town;, dearis the Place for managing and breaking a Husband.
And has not a Husband the same Opportunities there for humbling a Wife?
No, no, Child, 'tis a standing Maxim in conjugal Discipline, that when a Man wou'd enslave his Wife, he hurries her into the Country; and when a Lady would be arbitrary with her Husband, she wheedles her Booby up to Town. -- A Man dare not play the Tyrant in, because there are so many Examples to encourage the Subject to rebel. O! a fine Woman may do any thing in: O'my Conscience, she may raise an Army of Forty thousand Men.
I fancy, Sister, you have a mind to be trying your Power that way here in; you have drawn theCount to your Colours already.
Theare a People that can't live without their Gallantries.
And somethat I know, Sister, are not averse to such Amusements.
Well, Sister, since the Truth must out, it may do as well now as hereafter; I think one way to rouse my Lethargick sotish Husband, is, to give him a Rival; Security begets Negligence in all People, and Men must be alarm'd to make 'em alert in their Duty: Women are like Pictures of no Value in the Hands of a Fool, till he hears Men of Sense bid high for the Purchase.
This might do, Sister, if my Brother's Understanding were to be convinc'd into a Passion for you; but I fancy there's a natural Aversion of his side; and I fancy, Sister, that you don't come much behind him, if you dealt fairly.
I own it, we are united Contradictions, Fire and Water: But I cou'd be contented, with a great many other Wives, to humour the censorious Mob, and give the World an Appearance of living well with my Husband, cou'd I bring him but to dissemble a little Kindness to keep me in Countenance.
But how do you know, Sister, but that instead of rousing your Husband by this Artifice to a counterfeit Kindness, he should awake in a real Fury.
Let him: -- If I can't entice him to the one, I wou'd provoke him to the other.
But how must I behave my self between ye.
You must assist me.
What, against my own Brother!
He's but half a Brother, and I'm your entire Friend:If I go a step beyond the Bounds of Honour, leave me; till then I expect you should go along with me in every thing, while I trust my Honour in your Hands, you may trust your Brother's in mine. -- The Count is to dine here to Day.
'Tis a strange thing, Sister, that I can't like that Man.
You like nothing, your time is not come; Love and Death have their Fatalities, and strike home one time or other: -- You'll pay for all one Day, I warrant'ye. -- But, come, my Lady's Tea is ready, and 'tis almost Church-time.
And was she the Daughter of the House?
The Landlord is so blind as to think so; but I dare swear she has better Blood in her Veins.
Why dost think so?
Because the Baggage has a pert, she reads Plays, keeps a Monkey, and is troubled with Vapours.
By which Discoveries I guess that you know more of her.
Not yet, Faith, the Lady gives her self Airs, forsooth, nothing under a Gentleman.
Let me take her in hand.
Say one Word more o'that, and I'll declare my self, spoil your Sport there, and every where else; look'ye,, every Man in his own Sphere.
Right; and therefore you must pimp for your Master.
In the usual Forms, good Sir, after I have serv'd my self. -- But to our Business: -- You are so well dress'd,, and make so handsome a Figure, that I fancy you may do Execution in a Country Church; the exteriour part strikes first, and you're in the right to make that Impression favourable.
There's something in that which may turn to Advantage: The Appearance of a Stranger in a Country Church draws as many Gazers as a blazing Star; no sooner he comes into the Cathedral, but a Train of Whispers runs buzzing round the Congregation in a moment; -- Who is he? whence comes he? do you know him? -- Then I, Sir, tips me the Verger with half a Crown; he pockets the Simony, and Inducts me into thebest Pue in the Church, I pull out my Snuff-box, turn my self round, bow to the Bishop, or the Dean, if he be the commanding Officer; single out a Beauty, rivet both my Eyes to hers, set my Nose a bleeding by the Strength of Imagination, and shew the whole Church my concern by my endeavouring to hide it; after the Sermon, the whole Town gives me to her for a Lover, and by perswading the Lady that I am a dying for her, the Tables are turn'd, and she in good earnest falls in Love with me?
There's nothing in this,, without a Precedent; but instead of riveting your Eyes to a Beauty, try to fix 'em upon a Fortune, that's our Business at present.
Pshaw, no Woman can be a Beauty without a Fortune. -- Let me alone, for I am a Mark'sman.
Ay.
When were you at Church before, pray?
Um -- I was there at the Coronation.
And how can you expect a Blessing by going to Church now?
Blessing! nay,, I ask but for a Wife.
Truly the Man is not very unreasonable in his Demands.
Well Daughter, as the saying is, have you broughtto confess?
Pray, Father, don't put me upon getting any thing out of a Man; I'm but young you know, Father, and I don't understand Wheedling.
Young! why you Jade, as the saying is, can any Woman wheedle that is not young, you'r Mother was useless at five and twenty; not wheedle! would you make your Mother a Whore and me a Cuckold, as the saying is? I tell you his Silence confesses it, and his Master spends his Money so freely, and is so much a Gentleman every manner of way that he must be a Highwayman.
Landlord, Landlord, is the Coast clear?
O, Mr., what's the News?
No matter, ask no Questions, all fair and honourable, here, my dear
Two hundred SterlingPounds as good as any that ever hang'd or sav'd a Rogue; lay 'em by with the rest, and here -- Three wedding or mourning Rings, 'tis much the same you know -- Here, two Silver-hilted Swords; I took those from Fellows that never shew any part of their Swords but the Hilts: Here is a Diamond Necklace which the Lady hid in the privatest place in the Coach, but I found it out: This Gold Watch I took from a Pawn-broker's Wife; it was left in her Hands by a Person of Quality, there's the Arms upon the Case.
But who had you the Money from?
Ah! poor Woman! I pitied her; -- From a poor Lady just elop'd from her Husband, she had made up her Cargo, and was bound for, as hard as she cou'd drive; she told me of her Husband's barbarous Usage, and so I left her half a Crown: But I had almost forgot, my dear, I have a Present for you.
What is't?
A Pot of Cereuse, my Child, that I took out of a Lady's under Pocket.
What, Mr., do you think that I paint?
Why, you Jade, your Betters do; I'm sure the Lady that I took it from had a Coronet upon her Handkerchief. -- Here, take my Cloak, and go, secure the Premisses.
I will secure 'em.
But, heark'ye, where'sand?
They'll be here to Night.
D'ye know of any other Gentlemen o'the Pad on this Road?
No.
I fancy that I have two that lodge in the House just now.
The Devil! how d'ye smoak 'em?
Why, the one is gone to Church.
That's suspitious, I must confess.
And the other is now in his Master's Chamber; he pretends to be Servant to the other, we'll call him out, and pump him a little.
With all my Heart.
Mr., Mr.?
The Roads are consumed deep; I'm as dirty as oldat. -- A good pretty Fellow that; who's Servant are you, Friend?
My Master's.
Really?
Really.
That's much. -- The Fellow has been at the Bar by his Evasions: -- But, pray, Sir, what is your Master's Name?
;
This is the most obstinate Curl --
I ask you his Name?
Name, Sir, ---- I never ask'd him his Name in my Life.
What think you now?
Plain, plain, he talks now as if he were before a Judge: But, pray, Friend, which way does your Master travel?
A Horseback.
Very well again, an old Offender, right; -- But, I mean does he go upwards or downwards?
Downwards, I fear, Sir:.
I'm afraid my Fate will be a contrary way.
Ha, ha, ha! Mr.you're very arch. -- This Gentleman is only travelling towards, and wou'd be glad of your Company, that's all. -- Come, Captain, you'll stay to Night, I suppose; I'll shew you a Chamber -- Come, Captain.
Farewel, Friend --
Captain, your Servant. -- Captain! a pretty Fellow; s'death, I wonder that the Officers of the Army don't conspire to beat all Scoundrels in Red, but their own.
Gone! andhere! I hope he did not listen; I wou'd have the Merit of the discovery all my own, because I wou'd oblige him to love me.
Mr., who was that Man with my Father?
Some Recruiting Serjeant, or whip'd out Trooper, I suppose.
All's safe, I find.
Come, my Dear, have you con'd over the Catechise I taught you last Night?
Come, question me.
What is Love?
Love is I know not what, it comes I know not how, and goes I know not when.
Very well, an apt Scholar.
Where does Love enter?
Into the Eyes.
And where go out?
I won't tell'ye.
What are Objects of that Passion?
Youth, Beauty, and clean Linen.
The Reason?
The two first are fashionable in Nature, and the third at Court.
That's my Dear: What are the Signs and Tokens of that Passion?
A stealing Look, a stammering Tongue, Words improbable, Designs impossible, and Actions impracticable.
That's my good Child, kiss me. -- What must a Lover do to obtain his Mistress.
He must adore the Person that disdains him, he must bribe theChambermaid that betrays him, and court the Footman that laughs at him; -- He must, he must --
Nay, Child, I must whip you if you don't mind your Lesson; he must treat his --
O, ay, he must treat his Enemies with Respect, his Friends with Indifference, and all the World with Contempt; he must suffer much, and fear more; he must desire much, and hope little; in short, he must embrace his Ruine, and throw himself away.
Had ever Man so hopeful a Pupil as mine? come, my Dear, why is Love call'd a Riddle?
Because being blind, he leads those that see, and tho' a Child, he governs a Man.
Mighty well. -- And why is Love pictur'd blind?
Because the Painters out of the weakness or privilege of their Art chose to hide those Eyes that they cou'd not draw.
That's, my dear little Scholar, kiss me again. -- And why shou'd Love, that's a Child, govern a Man?
Because that a Child is the end of Love.
And so ends Love's Catechism. -- And now, my Dear, we'll go in, and make my Master's Bed.
Hold, hold, Mr., -- You have taken a great deal of Pains to instruct me, and what d'ye think I have learn't by it?
What?
That your Discourse and your Habit are Contradictions, and it wou'd be nonsense in me to believe you a Footman any longer.
'Oons, what a Witch it is!
Depend upon this, Sir, nothing in this Garb shall ever tempt me; for tho' I was born to Servitude, I hate it: -- Own your Condition, swear you love me, and then --
And then we shall go make the Bed.
Yes.
You must know then, that I am born a Gentleman, my Education was liberal; but I went toa younger Brother, fell into the Hands of Sharpers, who stript me of my Money, my Friends disown'd, and now my Necessity brings me to what you see.
Then take my Hand -- promise to marry me before you sleep, and I'll make you Master of two thousand Pound.
How!
Two thousand Pound that I have this Minute in my own Custody; so throw off your Livery this Instant, and I'll go find a Parson.
What said you? A Parson!
What! do you scruple?
Scruple! no, no, but -- two thousand Pound you say?
And better.
S'death, what shall I do -- but heark'e, Child, what need you make me Master of your self and Money, when you may have the same pleasure out of me, and still keep your Fortune in your Hands.
Then you won't marry me?
I wou'd marry you, but --
O sweet, Sir, I'm your humble Servant, you're fairly caught, wou'd you perswade me that any Gentleman who cou'd bear the Scandal of wearing a Livery, wou'd refuse two thousand Pound let the Condition be what it wou'd -- no, no, Sir, -- but I hope you'll Pardon the Freedom I have taken, since it was only to inform my self of the Respect I ought to pay you.
Fairly bit, by-- hold, hold, and have you actually two thousand Pound.
Sir, I have my Secrets as well as you -- when you please to be more open, I shall be more free, and be assur'd that I have Discoveries that will match yours, be what they will -- in the mean while be satisfy'd that no Discovery I make shall ever hurt you, but beware of my Father. --
So -- we're like to have as many Adventures in our Inn, ashad in his -- let me see, -- two thousand Pound! if the Wench wou'd promise to dye when the Money were spent, I gad, one wou'd marry her, but the Fortune may go off in a Year or two, and the Wife may live -- Lord knows how long? then an Inkeeper's Daughter; ay that's the Devil -- there my Pride brings me off.
Ha, ha, ha, my dear Sister, let me embrace thee, now we are Friends indeed! for I shall have a Secret of yours, as a Pledge for mine -- now you'll be good for something, I shall have you conversable in the Subjects of the Sex.
But do you think that I am so weak as to fall in Love with a Fellow at first sight?
Pshaw! now you spoil all, why shou'd not we be as free in our Friendships as the Men? I warrant you the Gentleman has got to his Confident already, has avow'd his Passion, toasted your Health, call'd you ten thousand Angels, has run over your Lips, Eyes, Neck, Shape, Air and every thing, in a Description that warms their Mirth to a second Enjoyment.
Your Hand, Sister, I an't well.
So, -- she's breeding already -- come Child up with it -- hem a little -- so -- now tell me, don't you like the Gentleman that we saw at Church just now?
The Man's well enough.
Well enough! is he not a Demigod, a, a Star, the Man i'the Moon?
O Sister, I'm extreamly ill.
Shall I send to your Mother, Child, for a little of her Cephalick Plaister to put to the Soals of your Feet, or shall I send to the Gentleman, for something for you? -- Come, unlace your Steas, unbosome your self -- the Man is perfectly a pretty Fellow, I saw him when he first came into Church.
I saw him too, Sister, and with an Air that shone, methought like Rays about his Person.
Well said, up with it.
No forward Coquett Behaviour, no Airs to set him off, no study'd Looks nor artful Posture, -- but Nature did it all --
better and better -- one Touch more -- come. --
But then his Looks -- did you observe his Eyes?
Yes, yes, I did -- his Eyes, well, what of his Eyes?
Sprightly, but not wandring; they seem'd to view, but never gaz'd on any thing but me -- and then his Looks so humble were, and yet so noble, that they aim'd to tell me that he cou'd with Pride dye at my Feet, tho' he scorn'd Slavery any where else.
The Physick works purely -- How d'ye find your self now, my Dear?
Hem! much better, my Dear -- O here comes our Mercury!
Well, what News of the Gentleman?
Madam, I have brought you a Packet of News.
Open it quickly, come.
In the first place I enquir'd who the Gentleman was? they told me he was a Stranger, Secondly, I ask'd what the Gentleman was, they answer'd and said, that they never saw him before. Thirdly, I enquir'd what Countryman he was, they reply'd 'twas more than they knew. Fourthly, I demanded whence he came, their Answer was, they cou'd not tell. And Fifthly, I ask'd whither he went, and they reply'd they knew nothing of the matter, -- and this is all I cou'd learn.
But what do the People say, can't they guess?
why some think he's a Spy, some guess he's a Mountebank, some say one thing, some another; but for my own part, I believe he's a Jesuit.
A Jesuit! why a Jesuit?
because he keeps his Horses always ready sadled, and his Footman talks French.
His Footman!
Ay, he and the Count's Footman were Gabbering French like two intreaguing Ducks in a Mill-Pond, and I believe they talk'd of me, for they laugh'd consumedly.
What sort of Livery has the Footman?
Livery! Lord, Madam, I took him for a Captain, he's so bedizen'd with Lace, and then he has Tops to his Shoes, up to his mid Leg, a silver headed Cane dangling at his Nuckles, -- he carries his Hands in his Pockets just so --
and has a fine long Perriwig ty'd up in a Bag -- Lord, Madam, he's clear another sort of Man than I.
That may easily be -- but what shall we do now, Sister?
I have it -- This Fellow has a world of Simplicity, and some Cunning, the first hides the latter by abundance --.
Madam.
We have a great mind to know who this Gentleman is, only for our Satisfaction.
Yes, Madam, it would be a Satisfaction, no doubt.
You must go and get acquainted with his Footman, and invite him hither to drink a Bottle of your Ale, because you're Butler to Day.
Yes, Madam, I am Butler every Sunday.
O brave, Sister, O my Conscience, you understand the Mathematicks already -- 'tis the best Plot in the World, your Mother, you know, will be gone to Church, my Spouse will be got to the Ale-house with his Scoundrels, and the House will be our own -- so we drop in by Accident and ask the Fellow some Questions our selves. In the Countrey you know any Stranger is Company, and we're glad to take up with the Butler in a Country Dance, and happy if he'll do us the Favour.
Oh! Madam, you wrong me, I never refus'd your Ladyship the Favour in my Life.
Ladies, Dinner's upon the Table.
, We'll excuse your waiting -- Go where we order'd you.
I shall.
Well,, I find you're a Marksman.
A Marksman! who so blind cou'd be, as not discern a Swan among the Ravens.
Well, but heark'ee,.
! call me, all that Romance can in a Lover paint, and then I'll answer. O, I read her thousands in her Looks, she look'd likein herHarvest, Corn, Wine and Oil, Milk and Honey, Gardens, Groves and Purling Streams play'd on her plenteous Face.
Her Face! her Pocket, you mean; the Corn, Wine and Oil lies there. In short, she has ten thousand Pound, that's the English on't.
Her Eyes --
Are Demi-Cannons to be sure, so I won't stand their Battery.
Pray excuse me, my Passion must have vent.
Passion! what a plague, d'ee think these Romantick Airs will do our Business? Were my Temper as extravagant as yours, my Adventures have something more Romantick by half.
Your Adventures!
Yes, The Nymph that with her twice ten hundred Pounds With brazen Engine hot, and Quoif clear starch'd Can fire the Guest in warming of the Bed -- There's a Touch of Sublimefor you, and the Subject but an Inn-keeper's Daughter; I can play with a Girl as an Angler do's with his Fish; he keeps it at the end of his Line, runs it up the Stream, and down the Stream, till at last, he brings it to hand, tickles the Trout, and so whips it into his Basket.
Mr., as the saying is -- yonder's an honest Fellow below, my LadyButler, who begs the Honour that you wou'd go Home with him and see his Cellar.
Do myto the Gentleman, and tell him I will do my self the Honour to wait on him immediately.
What do I hear? softPlay, and fairsing?
Pshaw! damn your Raptures, I tell you here's a Pump going to be put into the Vessel, and the Ship will get into Harbour, my Life on't. You say there's another Lady very handsome there.
Yes, faith.
I'am in love with her already.
Can't you give me a Bill uponin the mean time.
No, no, Friend, all her Corn, Wine and Oil is ingross'd to my Market. -- And once more I warn you to keep your Anchorage clear of mine, for if you fall foul of me, by this Light you shall go to the Bottom. -- What! makePrize of my litte Frigat, while I am upon the Cruise for you
Well, well, I won't -- Landlord, have you any tolerable Company in the House, I don't care for dining alone.
Yes, Sir, there's a Captain below; as the saying is, that arrived about an Hour ago.
Gentlemen of his Coat are welcome every where; will you make him a Complement from me, and tell him I should be glad of his Company.
Who shall I tell him, Sir, wou'd. --
Ha! that Stroak was well thrown in -- I'm only a Traveller like himself, and wou'd be glad of his Company, that's all.
I obey all your Commands, as the saying is.
S'Death! I had forgot, what Title will you give your self?
My Brother's to be sure, he wou'd never give me any thing else, so I'll make bold with his Honour this bout -- you know the rest of your Cue.
Ay, ay.
Sir, I'm yours.
'Tis more than I deserve, Sir, for I don't know you.
I don't wonder at that, Sir, for you never saw me before, I hope.
And pray, Sir, how came I by the Honour of seeing you now?
Sir, I scorn to intrude upon any Gentleman -- but my Landlord --
O, Sir, I ask your Pardon, you're the Captain he told me of.
At your Service, Sir.
What Regiment, may I be so bold?
A marching Regiment, Sir, an old Corps.
Very old, if your Coat be Regimental,
You have serv'd abroad, Sir?
Yes, Sir, in the Plantations, 'twas my Lot to be sent into the worst Service, I wou'd have quitted it indeed, but a Man of Honour, you know -- Besides 'twas for the good of myCountry that I shou'd be abroad -- Any thing for the good of one's Country -- I'm afor that.
One of the first, I'll lay my Life
You found thevery hot, Sir?
Ay, Sir, too hot for me.
Pray, Sir, han't I seen your Face atCoffee-house?
Yes, Sir, and attoo.
And where is your Company now, Captain?
They an't come yet.
Why, d'ye expect 'em here?
They'll be here to Night, Sir.
Which way do they march?
Across the Country -- the Devil's in't, if I han't said enough to encourage him to declare -- but I'm afraid he's not right, I must tack about.
Is your Company to quarter in?
In this House, Sir.
What! all?
My Company's but thin, ha, ha, ha, we are but three, ha, ha, ha.
You're merry, Sir.
Ay, Sir, you must excuse me, Sir, I understand the World, especially, the Art of Travelling; I don't care, Sir, for answering Questions directly upon the Road -- for I generally ride with a Charge about me.
Three or four, I believe.
I am credibly inform'd that there are Highway-men upon this Quarter, not, Sir, that I cou'd suspect a Gentleman of your Figure -- But truly, Sir, I have got such a way of Evasion upon the Road, that I don't care for speaking Truth to any Man.
Your Caution may be necessary -- Then I presume you're no Captain?
Not I, Sir, Captain is a good travelling Name, and so I take it; it stops a great many foolish Inquiries that are generally made about Gentlemen that travel, it gives a Man an Air of something, and makes the Drawers obedient -- And thus far I am a Captain, and no farther.
And pray, Sir, what is your true Profession?
O, Sir, you must excuse me -- upon my Word, Sir, I don't think it safe to tell you.
Ha, ha, ha, upon my word I commend you.
Well, Mr., what's the News?
There's another Gentleman below, as the saying is, that hearing you were but two, wou'd be glad to make the third Man if you wou'd give him leave.
What is he?
A Clergyman, as the saying is.
A Clergyman! is he really a Clergyman? or is it only his travelling Name, as my Friend the Captain has it.
O, Sir, he's a Priest and Chaplain to the French Officers in Town.
Is he a French-man?
Yes, Sir, born at.
A French-man, and a Priest! I won't be seen in his Company, Sir; I have a Value for my Reputation, Sir.
Nay, but Captain, since we are by our selves -- Can he speak English, Landlord.
Very well, Sir, you may know him, as the saying is, to be a Foreigner by his Accent, and that's all.
Then he has been inbefore?
Never, Sir, but he's a Master of Languages, as the saying is, he talks Latin, it do's me good to hear him talk Latin.
Then you understand Latin, Mr.?
Not I, Sir, as the saying is, but he talks it so very fast that I'm sure it must be good.
Pray desire him to walk up.
Here he is, as the saying is.
Save you, Gentlemen's, both.
A French-man! Sir, your most humble Servant.
Och, dear Joy, I am your most faithful Shervant, and yours alsho.
Doctor, you talk very good English, but you have a mighty Twang of the Foreigner.
My English is very vel for the vords, but we Foregners you know cannot bring our Tongues about the Pronunciation so soon.
A Foreigner! a down-right Teague by this Light.
Were you born in, Doctor.
I was educated in, but I was borned at, I am a Subject of the King of, Joy.
What King of, Sir, speak.
Upon my Shoul Joy, I cannot tell you as yet.
Nay, Captain, that was too hard upon the Doctor, he's a Stranger.
O let him alone, dear Joy, I am of a Nation that is not easily put out of Countenance.
Come, Gentlemen, I'll end the Dispute. -- Here, Landlord, is Dinner ready?
Upon the Table, as the saying is.
Gentlemen -- pray -- that Door --
No, no fait, the Captain must lead.
No, Doctor, the Church is our Guide.
Ay, ay, so it is.
-- Come, my dear Boy -- Let's have that Song once more.
No, no, we shall disturb the Family; -- But will you be sure to keep the Secret?
Pho! upon my Honour, as I'm a Gentleman.
'Tis enough. -- You must know then that my Master is the Lord Viscount; he fought a Duel t'other day in, wounded his Man so dangerously, that he thinks fit to withdraw till he hears whether the Gentleman's Wounds be mortal or not: He never was in this part ofbefore, so he chose to retire to this Place, that's all.
And that's enough for me.
And where were you when your Master fought?
We never know of our Masters Quarrels.
No! if our Masters in the Country here receive a Challenge, the first thing they do is to tell their Wives; the Wife tells the Servants, the Servants alarm the Tenants, and in half an Hour you shall have the whole County in Arms.
To hinder two Men from doing what they have no mind for: -- But if you should chance to talk now of my Business?
Talk! ay, Sir, had I not learn't the knack of holding my Tongue, I had never liv'd so long in a great Family.
Ay, ay, to be sure there are Secrets in all Families.
Secrets, ay; -- But I'll say no more. -- Come, sit down, we'll make an end of our Tankard: Here --
With all my Heart; who knows but you and I may come to be better acquainted, eh -- Here's your Ladies Healths; you have three, I think, and to be sure there must be Secrets among 'em.
Secrets! Ay, Friend; I wish I had a Friend --
Am not I your Friend? come, you and I will be sworn Brothers.
Shall we?
From this Minute. -- Give me a kiss -- And now Brother--
And now, Brother, I will tell you a Secret that will make your Hair stand on end: -- You must know, that I am consumedly in Love.
That's a terrible Secret, that's the Truth on't.
That Jade,, that was with us just now in the Cellar, is the arrantest Whore that ever wore a Petticoat; and I'm dying for love of her.
Ha, ha, ha -- Are you in love with her Person, or her Vertue, Brother?
I should like Vertue best, because it is more durable than Beauty; for Vertue holds good with some Women long, and many a Day after they have lost it.
In a Country, I grant ye, where no Woman's Vertue is lost, till a Bastard be found.
Ay, cou'd I bring her to a Bastard, I shou'd have her all to my self; but I dare not put it upon that Lay, for fear of being sent for a Soldier. -- Pray, Brother, how do you Gentlemen inlike that same Pressing Act?
Very ill, Brother; -- 'Tis the worst that ever was made for us: Formerly I remember the good Days, when we cou'd dun our Masters for our Wages, and if they refused to pay us, we cou'd have a Warrant to carry 'em before aJustice; but now if we talk of eating, they have a Warrant for us, and carry us before three Justices.
And to be sure we go, if we talk of eating; for the Justices won't give their own Servants a bad Example. Now this is my Misfortune -- I dare not speak in the House, while that Jadedings about like a Fury -- Once I had the better end of the Staff.
And how comes the Change now?
Why, the Mother of all this Mischief is a Priest.
A Priest!
Ay, a damn'd Son of a Whore of, that came over hither to say Grace to theOfficers, and eat up our Provisions -- There's not a Day goes over his Head without Dinner or Supper in this House.
How came he so familiar in the Family?
Because he speaksas if he had liv'd here all his Life; and tells Lies as if he had been a Traveller from his Cradle.
And this Priest, I'm afraid has converted the Affections of your.
Converted! ay, and perverted, my dear Friend: -- For I'm afraid he has made her a Whore and a Papist. -- But this is not all; there's theCount and Mrs., they're in the Confederacy, and for some private Ends of their own to be sure.
A very hopeful Family yours, Brother; I suppose the Maiden Lady has her Lover too.
Not that I know; -- She's the best on 'em, that's the Truth on't: But they take care to prevent my Curiosity, by giving me so much Business, that I'm a perfect Slave. -- What d'ye think is my Place in this Family?
Butler, I suppose.
Ah, Lord help you -- I'll tell you -- Of a, I drive the Coach; of a, I drive the Plough; on, I follow the Hounds; a, I dun the Tenants; on, I go to Market; on, I draw Warrants; and a, I draw Beer.
Ha, ha, ha! if variety be a Pleasure in Life, you have enough on't, my dear Brother -- But what Ladies are those?
Ours, ours; that upon the right Hand is Mrs., and the other is Mrs.. -- Don't mind 'em, sit still, Man --
I have heard my Brother talk of my Lord, but they say that his Brother is the finer Gentleman.
That's impossible, Sister.
He's vastly rich, but very close, they say.
No matter for that; if I can creep into his Heart, I'll open his Breast, I warrant him: I have heard say, that People may be guess'd at by the Behaviour of their Servants; I cou'd wish we might talk to that Fellow.
So do I; for, I think he's a very pretty Fellow: Come this way, I'll throw out a Lure for him presently.
Corn, Wine, and Oil, indeed -- But, I think, the Wife has the greatest plenty of Flesh and Blood; she should be my Choice -- Ah, a, say you so -- Madam -- Your Ladyship's Glove.
O, Sir, I thank you -- what a handsom Bow the Fellow has?
Bow! why I have known several Footmen come down fromset up here for Dancing-Masters, and carry off the best Fortunes in the Country.
That Project, for ought I know, had been better than ours, Brother-- Why don't you introduce me.
Ladies, this is the strange Gentleman's Servant that you see at Church to Day; I understood he came from, and so I invited him to the Cellar, that he might show me the newest Flourish in whetting my Knives.
And I hope you have made much of him?
O yes, Madam, but the Strength of your Ladyship's Liquour is a little too potent for the Constitution of your humble Servant.
What, then you don't usually drink Ale?
No, Madam, my constant Drink is Tea, or a little Wine and Water; 'tis prescrib'd me by the Physician for a Remedy against the Spleen.
O la, O la! -- a Footman have the Spleen. --
I thought that Distemper had been only proper to People of Quality.
Madam, like all other Fashions it wears out, and so descends to their Servants; tho' in a great many of us, I believe it proceeds from some melancholly Particles in the Blood, occasion'd by the Stagnation of Wages.
How affectedly the Fellow talks -- How long, pray, have you serv'd your present Master?
Not long; my Life has been mostly spent in the Service of the Ladies.
And pray, which Service do you like best?
Madam, the Ladies pay best; the Honour of serving them is sufficient Wages; there is a Charm in their looks that delivers a Pleasure with their Commands, and gives our Duty the Wings of Inclination.
That Flight was above the pitch of a Livery; and, Sir, wou'd not you be satisfied to serve a Lady again?
As a Groom of the Chamber, Madam, but not as a Footman.
I suppose you serv'd as Footman before.
For that Reason I wou'd not serve in that Post again; for my Memory is too weak for the load of Messages that the Ladies lay upon their Servants in; my Lady, the last Mistress I serv'd call'd me up one Morning, and told me,, go to my Ladywith my humble Service; tell her I was to wait on her Ladyship yesterday, and left word with Mrs., that the Preliminaries of the Affair she knows of, are stopt till we know the concurrence of the Person that I know of, for which there are Circumstances wanting which we shall accommodate at the old Place; but that in the mean time there is a Person about her Ladyship, that from several Hints and Surmises, was accessary at a certain time to the disappointments that naturally attend things, that to her knowledge are of more Importance.
Ha, ha, ha! where are you going, Sir?
Why, I han't half done. -- The whole Howd'ye was about half an Hour long; so I hapned to misplace two Syllables, and was turn'd off, and render'd incapable --
The pleasantest Fellow, Sister, I ever saw. -- But, Friend, if your Master be marry'd, -- I presume you still serve a Lady.
No, Madam, I take care never to come into a marry'd Family; the Commands of the Master and Mistress are always socontrary, that 'tis impossible to please both.
There's a main point gain'd. -- My Lord is not marry'd, I find.
But, I wonder, Friend, that in so many good Services, you had not a better Provision made for you.
I don't know how, Madam. -- I had a Lieutenancy offer'd me three or four Times; but that is not Bread, Madam -- I live much better as I do.
Madam, he sings rarely. -- I was thought to do pretty well here in the Country till he came; but alack a day, I'm nothing to my Brother.
Does he? Pray, Sir, will you oblige us with a Song?
Are you for Passion, or Humour?
O le! he has the purest Ballad about a Trifle --
A Trifle! pray, Sir, let's have it.
I'm asham'd to offer you a Trifle, Madam: But since you command me --
Very well, Sir, we're obliged to you. -- Something for a pair of Gloves.
I humbly beg leave to be excused: My Master, Madam, pays me; nor dare I take Money from any other Hand without injuring his Honour, and disobeying his Commands.
This is surprising: Did you ever see so pretty a well bred Fellow?
The Devil take him for wearing that Livery.
I fancy, Sister, he may be some Gentlemen, a Friend of my Lords, that his Lordship has pitch'd upon for his Courage, Fidelity, and Discretion to bear him Company in this Dress, and who, ten to one was his Second too.
It is so, it must be so, and it shall be so: -- For I like him.
What! Better than the Count?
The Count happen'd to be the most agreeable Man upon the Place; and so I chose him to serve me in my Design upon my Husband. -- But I shou'd like this Fellow better in a Design upon my self.
But now, Sister, for an Interview with this Lord, and this Gentleman; how shall we bring that about?
Patience! you Country Ladies give no Quarter, if once you be enter'd. -- Wou'd you prevent their Desires, and give the Fellows no wishing-time. -- Look'ye,, if my Lordloves you or deserves you, he'll find a way to see you, and there we must leave it. -- My Business comes now upon the Tapis -- Have you prepar'd your Brother?
Yes, yes.
And how did he relish it?
He said little, mumbled something to himself, promis'd to be guided by me: But here he comes --
What singing was that I heard just now?
The singing in you're Head, my Dear, you complain'd of it all Day.
You're impertinent.
I was ever so, since I became one Flesh with you.
One Flesh! rather two Carcasses join'd unnaturally together.
Or rather a living Soul coupled to a dead Body.
So, this is fine Encouragement for me.
Yes, my Wife shews you what you must do.
And my Husband shews you what you must suffer.
S'death, why can't you be silent?
S'death, why can't you talk?
Do you talk to any purpose?
Do you think to any purpose?
Sister, heark'ye;
I shan't be home till it be late.
What did he whisper to ye?
That he wou'd go round the back way, come into the Closet, and listen as I directed him. -- But let me beg you once more, dear Sister, to drop this Project; for, as I told you before, instead of awaking him to Kindness, you may provoke him to a Rage; and then who knows how far his Brutality may carry him?
I'm provided to receive him, I warrant you: But here comes the Count, vanish.
Don't you wonder,, that I was not at Church this Afternoon?
I more wonder, Madam, that you go dere at all, or how you dare to lift those Eyes to Heaven that are guilty of so much killing.
If Heaven, Sir, has given to my Eyes with the Power of killing, the Virtue of making a Cure, I hope the one may atone for the other.
O largely, Madam; wou'd your Ladyship be as ready to apply the Remedy as to give the Wound? -- Consider, Madam, I am doubly a Prisoner; first to the Arms of your General, then to your more conquering Eyes; my first Chains are easy, there a Ransom may redeem me, but from your Fetters I never shall get free.
Alass, Sir, why shou'd you complain to me of your Captivity, who am in Chains my self? you know, Sir, that I am bound, nay, mustbe tied up in that particular that might give you ease: I am like you, a Prisoner of War -- Of War indeed: -- I have given my Parole of Honour; wou'd you break yours to gain your Liberty?
Most certainly I wou'd, were I a Prisoner among the; dis is your Case; you're a Slave, Madam, Slave to the worst of, a Husband.
There lies my Foible, I confess; no Fortifications, no Courage, Conduct, nor Vigilancy can pretend to defend a Place, where the Cruelty of the Governour forces the Garrison to Mutiny.
And where de Besieger is resolv'd to die before de Place -- Here will I fix;
With Tears, Vows, and Prayers assault your Heart, and never rise till you surrender; or if I must storm -- Love and St.-- And so I begin the Attack --
Stand off -- Sure he hears me not -- And I cou'd almost wish he -- did not. -- The Fellow makes love very prettily.
But, Sir, why shou'd you put such a Value upon my Person, when you see it despis'd by one that knows it so much better.
He knows it not, tho' he possesses it; if he but knew the Value of the Jewel he is Master of, he wou'd always wear it next his Heart.and sleep with it in his Arms.
But since he throws me unregarded from him.
And one that knows your Value well, comes by, and takes you up, is it not Justice.
hold, Villain, hold.
Do you hold.
What! Murther your Husband, to defend your Bully.
Bully! for shame, Mr.; Bullies wear long Swords, the Gentleman has none, he's a Prisoner you know -- I was aware of your Outrage, and prepar'd this to receive your Violence, and, if Occasion were, to preserve my self against the Force of this other Gentleman.
O Madam, your Eyes be bettre Fire Arms than your Pistol, they nevre miss.
What! court my Wife to my Face!
Pray, Mr., put up, suspend your Fury for a Minute.
To give you time to invent an Excuse.
I need none.
No, for I heard every Sillable of your Discourse.
Ay! and begar, I tink de Dialogue was vera pretty.
Then I suppose, Sir, you heard something of your own Barbarity.
Barbarity! oons what does the Womancall Barbarity? do I ever meddle with you?
No.
As for you, Sir, I shall take another time.
Ah, begar, and so must I.
Look'e, Madam, don't think that my Anger proceeds from any Concern I have for your Honour, but for my own, and if you can contrive any way of being a Whore without making me a Cuckold, do it and welcome.
Sir, I thank you kindly, you wou'd allow me the Sin but rob me of the Pleasure -- No, no, I'm resolv'd never to venture upon the Crime without the Satisfaction of seeing you punish'd for't.
Then will you grant me this, my Dear? let any Body else do you the Favour but that French-man, for I mortally hate his whole Generation.
Ah, Sir, that be ungrateful, for begar, I love some of your's, Madam. --
No, Sir. --
No, Sir, -- Garzoon, Madam, I am not your Husband.
'Tis time to undeceive you, Sir, -- I believ'd your Addresses to me were no more than an Amusement, and I hope you will think the same of my Complaisance, and to convince you that you ought, you must know, that I brought you hither only to make you instrumental in setting me right with my Husband, for he was planted to listen by my Appointment.
By your Appointment?
Certainly.
And so, Madam, while I was telling twenty Stories to part you from your Husband, begar, I was bringing you together all the while.
I ask your Pardon, Sir, but I hope this will give you a Taste of the Vertue of the English Ladies.
Begar, Madam, your Vertue be vera Great, but 
Garzoon
your Honeste de vera little.