Good-Morrow, Madam; the Sun and you are up Betimes to Day.
Yes; but we did not go to Bed together.
No, or he had not rose so soon. But pray now was you any where late last Night?
At.
He in Town, and I not know it!
You was not to be found. Had you come, you'd been in Love with Matrimony, to have seen a Man of Sense so happy in it.
Excuse me; 'twould rather have frightn'd me, to have seen it able to impose upon the best Understanding.
He talks prodigiously of thehe owes to both our Friendships.
I owe more to your Friendship than he does, but must show my Gratitude in Silence.
Pray, does the Lady seem as much oblig'd as he?
'Tis hard to tell. You know that Fophad made great Impressions; and nothing is so difficult to get rid of as a Fool.
Except the Passion fair Ladies have for keeping 'em.
That's civil. -- ButI fear will grow impatient. I've made her wait this Hour. --
Hold, Madam! I'd forgot. -- Iscome with her Brother?
Is that all you stopt me for. She is.
Pray, Mr., How come you to enquire after?
Only to know, if after her late Illness, she's as handsome as she was.
To other People she is: But I believe she won't seem so to you.
Why d'think so?
Because she is the same. And that is what has no Charms for you, I know.
In any Body but you, I hope you mean, Madam?
No Matter what you hope, my Meaning is as easily understood as yours, Sir.
I wou'd always have my Meaning plain, Madam, that I might ever appear your Humble Servant.
And her Slave.
Do you Dream?
No, I am awake: Mine are Visions all. Come, come! Throw off the Mask. D'think I have forgot, when she was last in Town, how with an affected Negligence you Courted her, as Life; told her her Faults only to be thought sincere, when e'er you spoke your Love, and prais'd her Virtues; thou poor Dissembler!
You shall reform me then: I will dissemble no longer, since it displeases you. Pray, Madam, have you lately heard from Mr. -- him, who won a Thousand Pounds atof you, and generously forgave the Debt.
Insulting Monster! To reproach me with what Necessity, Confusion, and Surprize subdu'd me too; when Love and Choice resign'd me up to you.
Your Love resign'd to me no more than your Want did to him. And I'm not Casuist enough to decide which is best, between Two Things that generally produce the same Effect.
Then there is no deciding which is worse, the Devil or you. Since Ingratitude and Mischief, Falshood and Ruin, proceed alike from both, thou Faithless, Base, Perfidious Man.
Thou very very -- true Woman!
I begin to wish I'd had no Hand in this Marriage; but he forc'd me to use my Interest with, to influence; 'twas never my Judgment: But here he is.
, welcome, welcome to the Man that owes his Peace and Happiness to you; say, how can my Gratitude repay the Joy you gave me with.
Why, just the Way you do, by being happy with her. Believe me, Friend, I am as glad to see thee pleas'd, as Knaves wou'd be to have thee griev'd. -- I need not ask how your Wife does, since your Joys seem without Allay.
They are indeed,. And --
Hold, I guess what you would say; Rapturous Love,Fields, and all the Joys that Poets ever dream'd of, are much surpass'd by yours.
, thou art in the Right; I am happier if possible than thou hast spoken; and what's impossible to her?
That's hard to say. In the mean Time, Is it possible for you to tell me where you was a-going.
No farther, now I've met you; though I had a Compliment this Morning from my Rival, to tell me, even the Plague, much less the Summer, cou'd not empty, whilst my Wife and I were here. -- What do you think of visiting him? His Lodgings are hard by. 'Twill amuse an idle Hour.
I should readily consent, if I was not sure he had a Thousand idle Ones to be reveng'd on us.
You continue still most implacable to him, and poor.
Because they are most monstrously Incorrigible. -- The Foppery ofputs one out of Countenance Ten Times a Day. You are as dear to him one Moment as his own Affectations; and the next, he's as great aStranger to you as to true Sense or good Breeding: Then his Conversation is a perpetual War with Words, which the Ladies and their Favourites not understanding, admire for Wit. In short, he's a meer Perspective, pleases at a Distance, but when you are near, you'll find the Colours are upon an insensible Wall. -- However, if you've a Mind, I'll go, though Fifty to One he'll not be at Home.
I shou'd have thought for that very Reason, you wou'd have gone. But how come you to fancy a Man of his Fashion shou'd be Abroad so early?
Such a one would be most likely, for want of Entertainment at Home, and a Desire to trouble other People: But I have another Reason to think so; the Coxcomb, ever fertile in Foppery, has taken lately into his Head a Fancy of changing his Name, and seeing none on certain Days, but some particular People. I luckily call'd one of those Times, and his Servants told me that his Master went by the Name of, and that Day saw none but Courtiers.
He was in the right, or he would have got a new Name.
I thought so, and forgave all his other Follies for the Sake of this one, since it hinder'd my seeing him.
This is strangely absurd, and wou'd seem monstrous even upon the Stage, where 'tis lawful to represent Figures larger than the Life.
In my Opinion the Poets have no great Obligation to Mankind for that Liberty; 'tis no more than granting them what's impossible: I've seen more Gigantick Fools upon the Theatre of the World, than were ever shewn at the-- What do you think of a Coxcomb walking over an intimate Acquaintance of Six Foot High, and bowing to a Dwarf with a Nick-Name, at the further end of a Gallery; and then excusing himself to the Man he trod upon, by saying he did not see him? There is another Species not unlike these Things, who look as saucily upon you when they are in Power, as on their Footmen when they ask their Wages; and the Moment they are turn'd out, ready to go of your Errand, and professing Friendship to a Doorkeeper: Is not this as prodigious as a Man's changing his Name? Death! changing one's Nature, or having no Nature at all,is being more athan ever Fiction dream'd on -- Wretches without Honour or Sense!
You must confess this in Honour to their Sense, they all suspect one another.
And you must allow, in Reproach to it, they all trust one another.
Your Satyr turns extreamly upon great Men; 'tis lucky for the Crowd, they pass by uncensur'd.
Because little Villains are meerVermin, carry no Venom in 'em; but the Crimes of Great Men, like the poisonous Serpents, conceal Destruction under their exterior Lustre: Their Examples are so many Commands to the inferior World, and the heedless Herd are caught as Apes and Monkeys are, by an ignorant Admiration and Propensity to mimick those who only make Slaves and Jests of 'em -- But does your Indulgence for an Ass continue still? Won't this Fop cure you of your Charity for the Fool?
Nothing can cure me of the Value I have for his Truth.
Yes: Believing him will; I'll answer for it, the Rogue is as unsincere as a First Minister, and would lie as fast, if he had Language enough to be Intelligible; but want of that makes all he says neither true nor false; for Giberidge cannot properly be called either.
Fie, Fie;is a well natur'd honest Fellow; and let me tell you, good Nature and Complaisance will attone for the want of infinite good Qualities, that are requisite to excuse the Defect of them.
Pox of his Complaisance and good Nature; 'tis the Effect of Idleness, and want of Inclinations of his own: Then for being honest, 'tis Fear keeps him so.
Nay, you must allow him Courage.
Yes. If you'll try it as you do Gold, by the, he'll turn the Scale against.
There's a surer way of trying Gold, by Fire.
Which to my Knowledge he can't stand on a Training Day. I've seen him start and look Pale at a Squib at my Lord-Mayor's Show.
Involuntary Motions --, we are told, would often faint.
Ay. Butwas a Lion when he came to himself; and then 'tis the other's most an Ass. To be sincere, I hate this Fool worse than.
Come, you're too severe upon poor, in preferringto him.
I differ with you; I can forgive a Coxcomb sooner than a Fool. Fops are like those Insects that fly about in hot Weather, rather troublesome than hurtful: Creatures that in common Justice must be annihilated, for they have not Virtues enough to save 'em, nor Vices enough to damn 'em.
I always thought Coxcombs less pardonable than Fools, because their Faults are generally of their own acquiring, and the others impos'd by Nature.
So is the Cruelty of Tygers, Wolves, and Mountain Cats, natural too, and therefore in my Opinion the more to be fear'd, by as much as 'tis harder to change Nature than reform Custom. As to the Coxcomb, amuse 'em with Women; take all the Letters they receive from their Creditors for; Give 'em Ribbons, Essence, fine Cloaths and Flattery, and you may sooth the harmless Things into doing any Good that does not interrupt their Folly. But a Fool is a veryBull-dog, you may injure, but can't oblige him; they are despis'd as Dull and Little, and Men never know their Strength and Activity, till they feel it at their Throats.
Coxcombs have a flower, but full as sure a way of killing, by torturing of your Ears; though I confess bad is the best. But I've forgot, How does my friend? He's no Fool, I hope.
No; but he makes a great many by passing upon them for a Wit.
Poh. He cou'd not do that if he had not Wit.
Pardon me; 'tis but resolving, and by the help of Party, you may have a good Character as easy as a bad one: You're a Patriot at St.Coffee-House, and a Rebel at the; Fool in one Company, and a Philosopher in another. But don't imagine from this, that I think he wants plain Sense and Honesty.
Well, an useful Understanding passes most current in the World.
Ay: As Farthings do in a Market, they're the ready Change for Things of least Value there.
I grant you, Wit, like Painting, is valuable, as it entertains us; but whoever gazes all his Time away, will be left Naked, Dry and Hungry.
I'm glad Wit has any Thing in common with Virtue. But in the Pleasure of meeting you, I forgot a little Business I had to do.
Shall I see you at Dinner?
Most certainly. I intended if I had not met you.
Dear! What has kept you so long? I waited for you as impatiently as the Country Ladies do for the Assizes or a Horse-Race; you must expect for the first Month nothing but rural Similies.
For the first Month? For your whole Life, I hope; since I would always have you bring your Images from the Seat of Innocence and Quiet.
O, Yes! they're as innocent asandwithout their Aprons: But then, believe me, they're as ignorant too.
I'm glad to find neither Marriage, nor the Country, have been able to spoil thy Gaiety. You stand a little indebted to me; for sure, had you had that Creature of some Twenty several Shops, that Fop, you wou'd have been a miserable Woman.
Perhaps not. -- I can't tell whether 'twould not have been better if I had Married him, for then Fifty to One I should have dislik'd him by this Time.
And don't you, as it is?
What if I did not?
If you didn't, I should think you in the Green-Sickness, and pin'd for Trash, whilst the Luxuriousoffer'd you his Luscious Store.
Shu! 'tis but a lusty Surfeit, and one's well for ever. -- Prithee, dear, -- Why so severe? You over-rul'd my Inclinations in this Match: Besides, you know, Child, our Affections are no more in our Choice than our natural Complexions, therefore we are no more accountable for loving a Fool, than liking an ill Face; we'll be judg'd by my Sister.
I was just defending the Cause of Fools; What is your Opinion?
That 'twas generously done, Madam, to defend your greatest Enemies.
Pish -- But what do you seriously think, are they really despicable or no?
Not in their own Opinions; I'll answer for 'em, or they were not Fools.
Horrid! But answer me directly, is not a Fool as entertaining as a Farce.
I grant you. But wou'd you, because a Farce diverts you for half an Hour live with?
Nay! I vow she's in the Right on't. One goes to see Monsters or the Tombs for Amusement; but I shou'd be sorry to be lock'd up with them.
Because they can't talk to one.
In that, I think 'em preferrable to Fools.
O fye, Sister! Never go about to persuade me, that a living Fool has not more Merit with us, than the Seven Wise Masters of.
Lord! here's the more fashionable Drums and Trumpets coming in the Name of Congratulatory Visits,. Let us be gone.
To give you Joy upon your Marriage, Madam, were needless. All I can wish you, is, May your Happiness know no Change.
For Heavens sake! Why, confine me? What if I shou'd change my Inclinations?
Why, 'twoud be as unpardonable in you, as to change your Face, since you must do both for the worse.
But without changing one's Inclinations, one might be as well Ugly as Handsome; as they who have no Variety of Passions, may as well be Poor as Rich.
Sir, your humble Servant!
Madam, your Slave! You've left the Country Desart in Spight of Spring, and Winter flourishes now you are here.
It does not seem so by your Shoes.
Shoes! What do you mean?
They are not Dirty, that's all.
O! I never walk, but at Chapel, the Drawing-Room, or the House of Commons.
I thought the Members sat at the House of Commons.
Admirable! But 'tis cruel to rob me of a Pun: You might as well disrobe me, Ha! I think that was well enough.
Madam, I'm extreamly glad to see you so well in Health, and with a Husband!
I'm oblig'd to you, Sir. I'm happily possess'd of both.
O dear, I joy to see thee!
You do! -- Gad, I met you just now, and you did not know me.
I ask Ten Thousand Pardons. I was thinking, and did not see you.
I believe the latter, because you trod upon me. Prithee, What was you thinking on?
Gentlemen, you'll excuse me. We all dine together, I hope.
As I was a Saying, What was your Thoughts employ'd on?
Why? -- A Criticism on one of Mr.Plays, where he exposes Men of Quality, by making 'em Fops and Fools.
I have heard Judges say, he drew exactly after Nature.
Good,; very good. --, when shall I hear thee say such a Thing? Thy Wit is like a certain Friends of ours, who to be very sharp, bids you kiss his A---, and laughs. You know him,?
Yes, to have no Sharpness, but what he owes to his Amours. And tho' his Satyr comes from his Mouth like other Men's, 'tis not from his Brain.
But his Stomach; sweetly intimating his Breath is sowre. -- Sweet and Sowre. -- You know.
I perceive,is as well pleas'd withas Mr..
He's as pleas'd with a Fool as Mr..
What's that,?
Why, as much as to say,, I am very well pleas'd when thee and I meet. Ha!
A fair Hit. But I thought every Body knew a Jest and you were inseparable; and that 'twas impossible to find the one without the other.
I'm sure one can never find you without the obliging'st Things in Nature. I'll tell you,, a Pun I made t'other Day: I was maintaining at, that theTroops were the bravest Fellows in the World. Why so, Sir? says the Brigadier. Why so, Sir, says I, the Reason's plain, for they always Rush-on when they must go fight: So I went Abroad and told it; and Folks made me blush, by saying I had too much Wit.
O, I'm sure thou art no Cheat!
I wish he is not, for he looks like a Man.
And what then?
Nothing. But that they are too often Cheats.
Cry you Mercy! that Turn escap'd me.
No Matter what I look like, I know what you talk like.
Prithee now, What?
Why, like one that hates ev'ry Body who have not as much Wit as your self.
You wrong me, my Quarrel was only with those who have so little, that their going upon Two Legs looks like playing of Tricks. How long have we been Foes,?
I'll tell you, if you won't think me a Fool for repeating his Words.
Ay, tell him, tho' he was the only Man I desir'd you not to tell.
Then I am the only Man he ought to tell, for I hope thou never spok'st well of me.
If you're grave, I'm dumb. -- 'Twas the simplest Thing in the World: The Day we din'd last together,negligently went into the Room before, sate upon his Right Hand at Table. -- And worst of all, took the Glass of Wine he call'd for, and with it his Stomach; for he cou'd not eat out of Anger.
Is that all, I'm sorry for it, dear: To make thee amends, thou shalt go to Heaven before me, if thou canst.
Well then, Are we Friends?
Entirely. What think you of a Turn in the Park till Dinner?
Agreed. -- I find we all dine together.
Don't you come,,will go into the Room before you, and take your Glass again.
is my good Friend, I will stay and Dine, for all them. -- Beside, I have a Design to ask him for his rich Sister: I know he loves me; but then he lovesbetter. I wish I cou'd make 'em fall out, then shou'd I have her snug to my self.
How comes this Fool to stumble on this frightful Probability? I am alarm'd! And something must be done, for shou'd it be a Match,is lost! For his Behaviour just now sufficiently confirmed me, if she gives her Consent, his will not be wanting.
What's that you are resolving to try,?
To vex 'em that vex me.
Who are they?
No Matter. But mayhap I may fit 'em as well. Will you carry me up and introduce me to Mr.Sister?
With all my Heart.
Fools are often lucky at guessing. -- I must improve this Hint, tho' the Fancy of a Fool; for shou'd it be Real, I am lost.
What think you,?
Ladies, your Servant! -- I was just coming up to you. This honest Gentleman, Madam, is a Friend of your Husband's; and desires to be known to you and your Sister.
Recommended by you, and my Husband's Friend, are Merits will always make him welcome here.
O Lord! Madam, I am welcome where-ever I go. All People love honest: I am known every where by the same Name.
That proceeds from your being every where the same Thing, I dare say, Sir.
Yes, Madam; for I am the same I was the Hour I was Born; never have any Thing to do, but to go to Plays and Opera's, or where People ask me: 'Twould kill another Man to do as I do.
No, sure, for he would die first.
D'you think so; thank God I'm as healthy as a Horse; pardon the Comparison.
If the Horse does, I do. But pray, Sir, Was you never in Love? That wou'd try the Strength of your Heart, more than all you have mentioned.
She likes me, I see -- She talks of Love,
-- Never but with a Cousin of my own, who is as like me as ever she could Stare; just such a Face for all the World, and such a Humour; every-body said we shou'd have made a charming Couple; but she was my Second Cousin; had she been my First, I might lawfully have married her.
It is unlucky for the rest of Womankind -- You'll never love so truly again; our first Passion is ever the sincerest.
She's at it again.
Not so neither, Madam; your Ladyship methinks is as like her in Person as any Thing, only indeed you are not so facetious. Gemini, the Jokes we used to crack upon our Neighbours, and upon one another: I shall never forget one she made upon me at a Christning; said she, I believe your Father and Mother were both Maids when they were married; because when Two Maidenheads meet they always get a Fool. Ha! ha!
I believe by that your Cousin's Father and Mother were not Maids when they married, for she was no Fool.
How come you to know that? No more they were; and that broke off the Match, for they say she was a Bastard.
I thought, being your Relation made it impossible.
Not so neither: For by paying so much Yearly to the Poor, I was told the Spiritual Court would wink at it.
This must break her Heart sure?
No; that was too tough, as they say, but it did turn her Brains.
Then she was cured of her Passion, I suppose, Sir?
No, Madam; I told you Truth, I never tell any Thing else: Your Brother always said I was too honest to live in this World.
But happily you have another Quality, that always thrives, though Honesty don't.
If it is any Errand, Madam, I'll go. I've nothing to do.
I thank you, Sir, 'tis what I hope will employ us all. The Company and Dinner wait.
If I am not mightily mistaken,, your Inclinations are not different from mine; here is none but my Friend, honest; I may speak freely of a Design I long have wish'd to execute, by binding of our Friendships by the Name of Brother: Tell me; Do you like my Sister well enough to say that seriously which you have so often spoken to her in Gallantry?
I like her, as one that has her Sexes Beauties with her Brother's Mind; so well, that I conjure you by our Friendship, put not the least Constraint upon her Actions: Let her make me happy; or at least leave me the Pleasure of reflecting I have not made her miserable.
'Tis generously answer'd. You have my Consent; now gain her your own way. -- But shall we go in? The Women talk'd of Tea.
'Tis so; just as I expected, they are to be married I find.
To be Married! then his Suspicions and my Fears are true -- But stay, I'll hear more.
Her Sexes Beauty with her Brother's Mind; those were his Words.
Then Hell's blackest Falshood was in them.
He is in Love, I see -- But I may spoil his Sport. If I could make him banishhis House -- For she seems to like me -- I'll try.
Leave that to me,, for I've overheard all you've been saying, and will join my Interest to advance you in her Esteem; and for your Comfort, knowSister hates: Yet further for your Hopes, if you can keep a Secret, she is, I know, in Love with you. Her Brother will, she tells me, this Day force her to marry, if some Means are not found out to avert the Blow.
What d'you think of makingjealous ofwith his Wife? -- If you'll tell me what to say, -- I'll swear any Thing.
That won't do -- Her Passion lies so much another Way; -- besides, he is so indifferent in his Behaviour, the Malice will appear.
I know well enough who you mean, 'tis. -- I saw him Whisper, and put a Note into her Hand rising from Table, and went away immediately.
No; I have a better Prospect -- But let us be gone, -- they'll miss us else -- How quick to fear is Guilt! -- Go wait for me at my House.
Nay, 'tis endless to dispute, you are a Wit, and will always be in the Right.
That I am both, appears in nothing so much as admiring you.
Flattery, after one is married, is downright Abuse, because we know 'tis Flattery.
And yet 'tis then we want it most.
How so, pray?
Because we generally discover Faults that won't bear Truth, which we conceal'd before.
Ay, but the Disease is then grown desperate, and Sleeping Draughts are best to quiet what's incurable.
I'm of your Opinion; and it shou'd go near to quiet, if I prepar'd it.
Monster! but tell me, what wou'd you say if a Woman shou'd endeavour to make a Fool of you?
Why, that she was inclined to love me, and so endeavour'd to make me what was most agreeable to her.
Your Wit, Sir, makes you forget here are Women in the Room.
You and your Sister's always does, Madam -- Therefore--
Prithee hold your Tongue, and keep your Compliment, for I wou'd not be a Wit for the World.
Why, Madam -- 'tis the best Security against Envy.
Ay, but 'tis not the best Security against Hatred,.
I wonder it shou'dn't, -- 'tis the harmlessest Thing upon Earth, it never infects any Body.
You're intolerable; I'm surpriz'd you escape.
If you mean the Power of your Eyes, Madam, I have not escap'd?
Ridiculous Creature; I would rather hear you rail than praise, because I'm sure you're sincere then.
Nay, I'm Dumb, Madam; I say nothing.
You need not be Dumb to say that.
Nay, if you begin to be severe on one another, do it to some Purpose, e'en marry and be heartily reveng'd; so I leave you to decide the Quarrel --we must go into the City.
, thee and I will make a Visit -- Sister, you'll entertain.
Now I find myself in earnest, I'm as aukward as Sir-- how near are Sincerity and Dullness allied! full as near as strong Desire and Impotence. I'm so Silly and so Serious, that I'm downright Speechless --
I wonder, Madam, where your Brother is gone.
Wou'd you have me go and inquire, Sir -- He looks shamefully Guilty, and I'm glad to see it.
For God's sake, Madam; I only ask'd.
A most happy Expedient truly; but I interrupted some Jest, I fear -- You seem to be in a most pleasant Humour.
That's pardonable in you, Madam, who can make such good ones of your own.
I'm oblig'd to you, Sir, for that Power.
You are, but 'tis sorely against my Will.
I shou'd be sorry to oppose your Will, whilst you have that dying Look.
I'm glad you think me in so desperate a Condition, you'll the easier believe what I say, since the Words of even dying Criminals are seldom doubted.
I wou'd be glad to know what you have to discover, that makes you so sollicitous to be believ'd.
Truth of great Importance, that will, if I recover, concern my Life.
But if you shou'd not recover, what wou'd you leave me?
I have nothing I can call my own; you, like a bold Invader, have born away by force what else my Faith and Love had offer'd.
And what had my Brother's Visit to do with this Speech? Why did you not at once open your Snuff-box, and then the Case?
Truly, from not thinking well of myself, nor ill enough of you, to ask you to resign the World for me.
Tho' you pretend too much Modesty to ask it, I'll be sworn you have Vanity enough to expect it.
Rather say, I've Love enough to wish it, and too much, I fear, to be easy under a Disappointment.
Love from you sounds like Religion from Atheists, they never name it but in Ridicule or Complaisance to the Company.
I beg you not to think -- because I laugh at theProphets, I'm so insensible as to reject Truths enforc'd by Miracles.
Ay, but Women like a little of the Prophet, a Man to win us must see Visions and dream Dreams till he is quite out of his Senses, and then we'll believe him sent by Love.
You are to blame, your Interest is the same with true Religion, a Man loves you the more for being in his Senses.
How comes it then all your Lovers in Romances and Novels are raving?
Faith, unless their Authors were so, I can't tell; or if that was a Proof, as you pretend, it ought to be a kind of Mortification, for it looks as if you were not the proper Objects of Reason's Worship.
Yes, but we love to be serv'd implicitly; it shows our Power. Now your Reason is an inquisitive Free-thinker, that rather prescribes than obeys.
It only inquires that it may serve you as you deserve, a Doctrine Women of your Merit ought to propagate, and scorn the Offering of Ignorance, that daily sacrifices to Idols. -- Believe me, the want of Sense makes every Victory ridiculous.
Too much Sense has often the same effect as too little.
Then there are fewer ridiculous Things in the World than I imagin'd.
And so you wou'd have us increase the Number and marry.
And why not -- for People are generally fondest of their own Jests.
Nay, 'tis a secure Way of never being without one.
Which in a Month's time every Body will laugh at but ourselves.
Does not that Thought frighten you?
Not when I think how many happy Ages will rowl round me, and of the painful Hours I am to count without you.
And so you are really in Love.
As certainly as any one must be that saw you.
And how certain is that, pray?
Why just as certain as that you don't think I flatter when I tell you so.
Odious! I don't think of the Matter.
I'm glad to hear it, you'll the likelier consent.
Since you've help'd me to an Excuse I can't tell but I may.
Then let us lose no Time.
But for all that I'll venture -- tho' I'm in the wrong to consent thus easily, for Men generally measure the Value of Things by the Difficulty they have in obtaining 'em.
Quite contrary, Madam, nothing dignifies a Benefit so much as a readiness in conferring it; and Men never like any thing for the sake of the Difficulty, but despise all Difficulties for the sake of what they like; the Charm is in the Prize, not in the Hardship -- But in return to your Goodness, I beg you wou'd make your own Terms.
No, Love is free as Air, and, like it, grows distemper'd by Confinement: You shall be absolute, for I shou'd hate the Good you did me by Compulsion, and scorn whatever little Contracts without Love produc'd.
Generous Creature -- I'll instantly inform your Brother of my blest Success with you; he, I'm sure, will not delay my Happiness.
Madam, your Slave -- You're opportunely come to help me in the choice of a Snuff-box for the Woman I love best.
That will require, Sir, what you won't agree to, my knowing the Lady, for our Tasts may differ.
Impossible, you may as easily differ from yourself.
That mayn't be so hard a Task, perhaps. But are you awake, do you know what you say?
I vow to God, Madam, I mean nothing, but that my Mistress is an Angel, and you are another -- And Angels must always like the same Thing.
Yes, indeed, Madam, I'm sure that's what he meant -- If your Ladyship had but heard what he said of your Wit and Beauty!
Fie, Mrs., I wou'd have some Tea.
There is some just ready, Madam.
Ay, but I hate this publick Room, one's kill'd with idle People.
Ay, Madam, I have a charming Room above Stairs your Ladyship never saw; with thecharmingest rich Covering for a Bed that ever came into. Will you be pleas'd to walk up, Madam?
I'll follow you, Mrs.-- Your Servant, Sir.
Nay, you must not exclude me, Madam.
Oh! pray, Madam, have Mr.Fancy in the Covering; all the Ladies say he has a charming Fancy in a Covering.
Is Mrs.to be seen?
I'll let her know you are here, Madam.
I'll try how she's inclin'd, before I give a loose to my Revenge; but why shou'd I be angry with? I shew'd him first the way to change his Love, by being false myself -- Fool that I was, first to give him up my Person, Honour, and my Heart, and then to wrong him; he's a Wretch we shou'd despise, that cou'd forgive an Injury in Love; for such an Easiness bespeaks Indifferency for us, or else a Meanness in the Lover's Soul, that everlastingly condemns our Choice -- But here's-- Be calm my Griefs.
You'll forgive me, dear, and yet I don't know how to expect it, when I consider what kept me so long.
If this was it
I must approve your better Choice.
'Tis silly to own it; but I've been as angry with Mother, as ever Mother was with a Child.
What Part provok'd you so?
Don't you see -- her Obstinacy in wandring from her Husband, contrary to his Will and common Sense -- I can't help thinking it like some of our fine Ladies, who think their Husbands inhumanly cruel, if they won't believe they wou'd resist the Charms of all Mankind united for their sake, and yet won't sacrifice such a Trifle as a publick Place or Visit to his Quiet.
You'll make some Man envied, and all Womankind asham'd, when you marry, if you reason thus.
The latter will be against my Will then; for all I propose in Marriage, is to make two People as happy as I can, by never doing any thing to be asham'd of myself.
Then you do think of marrying?
And what will surprize you more, I'll marry from having thought on't.
By no means, since you judge too well to chuse amiss -- shou'd I not be too curious to ask the happy Man -- Now hold my Heart.
Not at all, since my own Inclinations are confirm'd by my Brother's Approbation -- though, perhaps, you'll laugh when I name him, 'tis.
I wish you may have reason to laugh.
What's the Danger?
He's a Man, that's all.
Or between you and I,, I wou'd not have him; wou'd you?
I! not for the-- What stoop to be the Refuge of a Fop, who brings me the Refuse of the whole Town; and, tir'd of Life, wou'd bury himself with me!
Yet you persuadedin my Brother's Favour, whom you knew a Man of Pleasure.
Because I knew him to be a Man of Honour.
Is nottoo a Man of Honour?
I can't tell, I never trusted him.
Then when he's mine I beg you never will -- for believe me,, if he offers to borrow then, it must be out of Extravagancy.
What d'ye mean, Madam.
Nothing, but that I'm glad to be marry'd well; we Women without a Husband are like Sheep without a Shepherd, expos'd to Wolves and Foxes.
And Marriage, like a Shepherd, saves you from Wolves and Foxes, only to sell you to the Butcher's Knife, a Husband.
And so you wou'd have me graze my Life out, be shorn once a Year to support the Woollen Manufactory, cloath Fools, and comfort decay'd Constitutions -- No, that will never do while my own is so good -- But don't you think I'm wild,?
You are in the way of being tam'd, remember I say so.
I'm glad of it, for to tell you the truth, I'm quite tir'd of this savage Life.
But had you not better live in a Tree than a Cage?
No, if I had a kind Master, 'twere better than being disturb'd by hunting Fools and Hawks.
Well, I shall wonder at nothing, after your declaring in favour of the perfidious Sex with the Frankness of a downright Libertine.
I'll venture to say one thing, Madam, without thinking myself a Libertine: To subdue our Inclination to our Duty, is all I know of Virtue; for 'twere ridiculous to pretend a Merit in the Conquest of what didn't oppose us.
To have a Nature pure, and refin'd from all Passion, is sure a higher degree of Excellence.
But since such a one is not upon Earth, I shall insist 'tis in Resistance we acquire our Fame.
Well, I cou'd never come up to you -- What, go to Church and declare to the whole Congregation that I've the Inclinations of a Brute! Oh! I am ready to faint at the Thought of it!
May be you think the Place too publick; that puts me in mind of a Lady, who wou'd never taste Wine at Table where ev'ry Body drank it, and got a red Face by drinking strong Waters in her Closet.
Red Face, Madam -- mine is no redder than yours.
Yes it is -- No -- Now 'tis pale again.
I've gone too far
I must dissemble, or my Looks will betray me -- I beg Pardon, dear, I've only rallied all this time.
I'm glad to hear it, I protest I was almost out of Temper, to hear you maintain an Argument so different from your former Conversation -- I hope I have said nothing I shou'd not, I mightily fear I have.
Nothing I assure you, but what I shou'd have said in your Case -- Here's your Brother, he seems pleas'd.
, you must be Witness this Night to the greatest Happiness of my Life, next to-- Sister,overjoy'd me with the News of your Consent, and begs I'll not delay. So I'm resolv'd I will not sleep till he's pleas'd -- You may sleep as much as you think fit.
I may, without blushing, own an Esteem that's authoriz'd by you -- tho' my Friendhas almost put me out of Humour with Mankind.
Lord, Child, I told you I was but in jest.
If she'll follow your Example, I'll answer for it she'll change her Mind. I must dance at your Wedding, remember,.
'Twere kinder to dance at one's Funeral, for that is the End of our Sorrows, the other the Beginning.
Did not I tell you how averse she was -- What is it, dear, has chang'd you so o'th' sudden?
Banter, meer Banter.
Nothing else, I assure you -- Lord, did you never say a Thing for the sake of saying it?
Never; and I thank God I have not Wit enough to teach my Tongue a Language different from my Heart.
May no Time nor Chance dissolve the happy Union then; and so I take my Leave of you.
You'll be here,-- I'll invite the Company that din'd here, if they're to be found.
If I am able you may command me.
Did you ever see any thing so alter'd? What can it mean?
I can't guess; a secret Sorrow seem'd to hang about her, that discover'd itself the more she labour'd to conceal it.
It's odd, this strange Dislike to Matrimony shou'd seize her at this time. I remember nothing Gayer at your Wedding than she was.
If I did not know Malice and Envy had Ten thousand Tongues, and they all false, her Conduct would almost tempt me to believe common Fame; and that her Aversion to your marryingwas like some memorable Patriot's Hatred to absolute Power, they could not endure it in any Hands except their own. -- But I had forgot my Friend; I am accountable to him for every Hour I lose. Come, Sister, let's go in and prepare ev'ry thing.
From-- But here's my Husband; he's now grown painful to me. Our Hate encreases with our Crimes; and the Sight of him we have injur'd is like the Ghost of one we have murder'd; it haunts away our Peace, awakes our Guilt, and fills our Soul with Horror.
Here she is
What! retir'd, and talking to yourself: Trust me, my Dear, it is unkind to rob my Eyes and Ears of all that can delight 'em. I've been this Hour in search of you to let you know I'm resolv'd this Evening to give my Sister to, if you approve of it.
Your Judgment, Sir, is too good to want a Woman's Skill.
Believe me, my, 'tis mightily your Interest to have my Judgment good; for it speaks wondrous Things in praise of you. But why so cold? Has any thing displeas'd my Love?
Sudden Vapours and Sickness at my Stomach.
Come, prithee cheer up, and glad my Heart that knows no Joy while thou art sad. Here's, she'll join to chase away your Cares.
Lord, I have no Cares -- but your importuning me to fly without Wings -- that is, to be merry when I have no Reason.your Servant.
Your Servant: What makes you out of Humour, Child?
Ridiculous Question! Why, what makes one old and ugly? Something we can't help, for one would be neither of the three by Choice.
But why are you not as ready to help Nature in the Improvement of your Humour, as you are artful in mending your Complexion, and concealing your Age?
Because, being better humour'd were to cultivate a Weakness that puts it in your Power to impose upon us, whilst looking young and handsome enables us to cheat you. And 'tis in Love as 'tis in Play, you must be the Knave or the Fool.
This is a way of Reasoning pardonable in none but those ruin'd by Play. I hope no ill Run has turn'd you Gamester, Madam.
No Matter: I shall never attempt repairing my Loss by one who understands all the Game. You are in no Danger, Sir.
In no Danger,! Is he not going to be married? I told you you'd change your Mind.
So will he, if he has not chang'd his Nature.
Don't you think this Behaviour ofmost prodigious?
Not at all; but your Friend and you are so censorious, 'tis not safe to speak or look before you.
I've done -- I leave you for a Minute to hasten the Bride.
Pray don't be in too great a Hurry; for I'm engag'd for an Hour., Shall I set you down any where?
With all my Heart, if you go near the.
Your Liberty is now upon the Brink of Fate, as a Man's Life is when the Enemy appears in the Field. Don't you, like many of 'em, wish to make up the Quarrel, and part Friends?
No; for I would no more preserve my Freedom at the Price of my Love, than I would my Life at the Expence of my Honour.
Courage,, the Enemy is as well determin'd as you: See you keep firm when she appears.
Pleasure will keep my Constancy in this, as Reputation wou'd do in the other.
I'll send and invite the Company that din'd here.
Do: In the mean time I'll go to the, and bespeak some of the Ensigns of. Such as Favours, &c.
Mrs., d'ye esteem this Essence essential?
I'll assure you, Sir, 'tis as fine as ever was put in Hair.
What's in that Paper?
Cravats, Sir.
May I crave at what Price you sell 'em?
Twelve Pound the Dozen is the lowest, if you'll take my Word, Sir.
If I should take your Word, wou'd you not take me up?
Good God! Why shou'd you think so?
Because 'twould be taking what was another's.
O, Sir, You are dispos'd to be merry; however, I'llventure to take your Word. Here's a charming Piece of Lace: To be sure I'll use you as well as any Body.
Madam, your Ladyship's most humble Servant. I hope, Madam, your Head and Ruffles pleas'd your Ladyship.
By no means, Mrs., nor any Body else.
I wonder at that, Madam; they were the same Pattern with my Lady.
And therefore I, nor no Body else lik'd them. I would assoon have my Stays made by her Measure, or let her sit for my Picture, as have any thing I wear made by her Pattern.
What d'ye mean that overgrown Blue-Coat Girl, who has always as much Muslin about her Face as she has Affectation, or Decay in it?
Indeed she's in Fashion now to be sure.
Silly; She has been as long out of Fashion as out of her Teens.
And out of Lovers.
Or Modesty, for she has yet the Assurance to snuff those dim Eyes of hers, and twinkle after Hearts.
Then when she would be obliging or civil, she's as nauseous as the oldHospitality, that brings you Ale and Cheese for Breakfast: Or as a certain Knight's Lady that gives you Wine of her own making: I wou'd as live drink Water of her own making.
Well, surely an old Jest, or an old Story, is not duller than Love in an old Man or Woman.
Or 'tis as dull as a Country Town in Sermon-time.
Ay, or a Country Town at any time: Or as foolish as neglecting it in the Young.
Madam, I thank you for the Hint.
Well, Mrs., I'll send you that monstrous Head and Ruffles; and if you can reduce them to a size fit for a Christian, you'll do Miracles. Sir, your Servant.
You won't take less than Twenty Shillings a Cravat?
If I would I'm sure, Sir, you would not have the Conscience to ask 'em cheaper.
Lay by a Dozen, with some Essence, sweet Mrs., and I'll send for 'em to Morrow.
Madam, Mr.is below.
Show him up. He is an old Admirer of mine. I could, if he would assist me in my Revenge, be tempted to do that out of Malice, which I shall never do out of Love; for, I fear, is too great a Fool to be of any use.
Love and the Hickup have seiz'd me so of the sudden, I can't tell the dear Creature how much I love the Tip of her little Finger.
Shall I get you any thing to bring up the mighty Nothing you are big with?
Three Go-downs of you would do me more good than warm Water.
You want warm Water to wash those Hands of thine, and that dear dirty Face. Why, Man, thou'rt as dirty as a Chymist.
And as hot as his Fire.
Foh! And as windy as the Bellows that blows it. But prithee where hast been?
That's not to the purpose; shall I tell you where I would be?
Where all drunken Men generally would be, in the Place they are oftner troublesome than pleasing.
Methinks you Women shou'd like Drunkenness, for it opens Mens Purses, and shuts their Eyes.
But not their Mouths, Beast: Women hate Drunkards, for they neither keep their Words nor a Secret.
And you Women all keep your Words, because no Body will take 'em. Then for your Secrets you never trust us with any, but the Subject of a Quarrel betwixt you and your She Friend, how inhumanly she made you wait at Home to go with her to the Opera;be deny'd to seventy or eighty Bosom Friends; and neglect paying a hundred Visits that the last Winter was too short to pay: but indeed you're not sorry, since you've heard her Character, of any Pretence to break off an Acquaintance that had neither Credit or Entertainment.
Hold, you Brute, wou'd you have me believe, if we repos'd greater Confidence, you wou'd not deceive us? I would as soon trustat Play.
It's better doing that than never play.
To those that have the Rage of Gaming.
Do you never divert yourself with those dear Fingers? Let me buss 'em. I warrant they are always full of Court-Cards that crowd about 'em as about Favourites, to guide 'em to the Port of Preferment.
Nonsense! What does the Fool mean by Fingers, Favourites, Port and Preferment?
If you do not know what I mean I'll explain myself.
No, trust that to any Understanding rather than your own; 'twill be to your Advantage
Nay then --
If you're thus rude, I vow I'll keep my Resolution, and --
Till it spoils in this warm Weather; but it shan't be my Fault.
Stand off, Impertinence; d'ye think this Impudence will prevail?
If that don't, I have neither Wealth, nor Beauty; and for Modesty that never did; so I have no Hopes.
Your Case is not so desperate as you imagine perhaps -- If you, in return to any Favour you wou'd obtain, will.
Name it.
Let the Proposal be what it will, you promise?
Provided it be not Murder, Treason, nor Marriage, I do promise.
None of them; and upon this Condition, an Hour hence I'll meet you at. Remember you perform.
Keep your Appointment, and you shall find I will perform, and Wonders too.
Where's your Master?
I don't know, Sir. My Lady is at Mrs.Shop. She sent the Coach and me away with Mrs., with Orders to return in an Hour, and wait for her here.
Your Servant, Mrs.; how goes new Fashions and old Promises?
Why truly, Sir, neither to my Advantage.
Have you had no Ladies this Afternoon?
None, except Madam.
Is it long since she went?
O, Sir, at least an Hour: Mr.and she just staid to laugh at my Lady, and went away.
What, together! It's pretty odd, send her Coach and her Servants away.
Your servant, Mrs.; I wish, for your sake, little Heads may go out of Fashion. Pray make hast with what I sent about.
Ha! is not thatandcoming out of a Hackney-Coach?
Don't this look strange,?
By no means, Madam, 'tis the commonest thing in Life.
and I had certainly been kill'd; for the Coach broke at; and if Mr.had not come by, I know not what we should have done without him. Pray, Heaven,has kept the Coach.
I live but to serve the Fair, Madam.
And your Friend, Sir.
After them.
Both at once sometimes.
I'm frighten'd to Death; he seems suspicious.
Sir, you are expected at our House to Night. I'm the unluckiest Creature.
I'll not fail.
I hope, Sir, you'll come and see the last of your humble Servant.
How soon, pray?
You can never come too soon. In an Hour at farthest.
I'll not fail waiting on you.