Bid the Coach set up, and let the things be brought in here My Daughter come! God bless you!
I am o'er joy'd to see your Ladiship, and to see you look so well.
Your Ladiships most humble Servant.
, How do you like these figur'd Velvets; this I design for the Bed and Hangings; this Violet colour suits agreeably with this Buff.
Most extreamly well, Madam; does your Ladiship design a Mixture?
I had thoughts of Paining and Bordering it with this Crimson and Green; but that sort of Furniture has been my aversion, ever since I saw my odious LadyAppartment set forth with Scotch Plad and Damask.
Confusion! How his Eyes are fix'd on her, as if his Soul received her Charms, and wanted pow'r to hide it!
I don't look well to day, Mr.
Your Ladiship can never look other.
, thou won't flatter me; I have not red enough have I?
But from the Eyes to the Chin, and looks like the Raddle upon a Sheep's Back.
Your Ladiship is mistaken, I never saw you look better; there's a Curl indeed out of order with the motion of the Coach; Hold, incline your Head: So, very well, that Pink-colour'd Riband suits agreeably with your Complexion.
But do you really think, Mr, I look so well to Day.
He has reason to hope, Madam, that your Ladiship may look better to morrow Night.
Have you catch'd hold of that report, who made you so wise?
Him that is to make your Ladiship so happy.
Indeed, indeed, Mr., it derogates from you to talk with Girls: When I had a Mother, I durst never think of approaching her without Fear and Trembling. Now a Young thing as soon as ever she has bid farewell to Bibs and Aprons, is ready for a Love, and thinks her self with Noise and Impudence, better to be liked, than her Mother with all her Experience.
Sirdesires to know if your Ladiship be at leisure.
Always to him; I shall be glad of his Company Daughter, I have taken that care of your Fortune, as deceives not the Trust my late Lord reposed in me, Sirand I, have agreed upon your Marriage; my Authority secures your Consent.
Marriage, Madam, is a thing I have not thought on, yet 'tis a Journey for Life, and that once consider'd, we ought to do every thing to make it as easie to us as possible.
Sir, your Servant; where have you been since dinner?
Be Dad, taking a Glass to this pretty Lady's health, Madam your Servant.
Your most humble Servant.
, a very pretty Lady.
I cou'd think so to, if 'twere not of the latest.
Give me thy Hand sweet heart, thou'rt welcome to Town, be Dad with all my heart.
What think you of a Walk in the Garden; the Lovers are engag'd, and we wou'd leave them together.
We wait upon you.
Which dost thou like best, my Dear, the Town, or Country.
The Town, Sir, beyond Comparison, all good Judges are of my Opinion, I hope you are one of them.
Before George not I, yet if it had not been for me you had been there still; I persuaded my Lady to send for you up, and have provided a Husband for thee, Girl, what say'st thou to a Husband, heigh.
'Tis a sort of Creature, has not yet fallen under my Consideration.
All in good time, Child; I like thee ne'er the worse for that. You don't look like the forward things of the Town, that Marries a Man only to Cuckold him, Ods bobs thou wilt not do that, I hope, Child.
I don't understand you, Sir.
Come, we will be better acquainted, and then thou shalt understand me, heigh: to say truth, the way of making Cuckolds is soon understood.
Pray, Sir, at once forgive, and satisfie my curiosity; have you spent your time mostly in the Town or Country.
Be Dad, Child, the Country; I never came tobut in times of Parliament, which thank Heaven were not very frequent in our late Reigns; do I look like your Sickly, the dregs of nothing but Pox and Wine, Hemh, -- Hemh, -- shew me any young Fellow of them all, that can match me in Health and Vigour; neither Stone, nor Gout, nor the relicts of any Distemper, but love of thee, Child.
Love of me, sure you mistake your self, one wou'd have imagin'd it, any other under the Sun at your Age.
Why there, be dad you'r out, there's none Lovers but us old Fellows, the Young ones don't think it worth their time; shew me such another as Old Sir; why Child he does nothing but look Babies in her Eyes all day, but bedad I believe he sees but in Imagination, unless he borrows the assistance of Spectacles: He sets her, before George, in a great Chair in the very middle of a Chamber, and himself for hours together at her Feet, upon a Foot-stool, in admiration of her; there's encouragement now.
My Ladyand her Counsel are in the Parlor, Sir, looking over the Writings, she desires your Company.
I come, I come; Sweet Mistriss your Servant, till I see thee again.
I cameto your deliverance, I imagin'd how you were teiz'd.
O hideous!, did I think in Nature, there had been such an ill bred, awkard thing; why he's so great a Monster already, Horns can't make him worse.
And yet my Ladysays you must Marry him.
What with twelve thousand Pound, a great deal of Youth, no contemptible stock of Beauty, besides an untainted Reputation, that out-weighs them all; believe me,, I'm not so far ignorant of my own worth, to bury it in him.
I wish you don't ruine your self by the Refusal.
That Marriage is the greatest, and you must use all your Interest with my Mother to prevent it; or resolve to make me the most unhappy Creature breathing.
All aids that are in my power you may command: But has not your Journey tir'd you, you will not be for the Park this Evening.
The Name has unweary'd me; I'll but change my Cloathsand be ready for you.
My Ladyhas tir'd poor; he has left her to her Bonds and Conveyances, and is gone to the Park before; wou'd not you wish to meet him there?
Why thy question? He is my Mothers, and never can be mine; but we trifle: will you favour me with your Company, whilst I am Dressing?
I'll follow you.
Yes,, my Interest pulls too strong against you, to leave you a Moment to your self till I have put it out of Fortunes power to injure me,.
Pray, Gentlewoman be pleased to wear your Mask, till we're got out of this Road of Foppery; I had better have gone Ten Miles about.
Lord, Mr., 'tis so hot, my Mask stifles me; but where are you going? I am sure Walking is not your Business, especially in this place.
Yes, Wife, to chuse, that you may have the pleasure of comparing your old damned Jealous Husband, to these Gay stuttering Fops, that sail along by us; Here's your Gallant, Mr., coming, put on your Mask, I say; Not for the World, I warrant you.
'Tis too late, he has seen me, Husband, 'twill be uncivil.
Mr., your Servant; The fairhere! Since when is it, Sir, you have been so far reconciled to our Lewd end of the World, to trust this Lady amongst us.
Hum, Sir, not too much of trusting neither, but yet, as you say, 'tis a dangerous place, for an old Fellow, that has an Handsom Wife; Have you not that Opinion of her, Mr.?
All the World must allow her that Character, but Faith, my Friendship to you, hinders me to think of her, as I would, if she were not thy Wife.
And you, forsooth, Have not you a just Esteem of Mr.Merit?
As I ought, I know my Duty to you, Husband, and never had a thought against it.
Why, very well, since you are both so indifferent, 'twere no great harm, if you never see one another again. As to you, Gentlewoman, 'tis Mortifying you too much, to suffer the Visits of a Man, who has not Sense to know your Worth; And, let me tell you, Mr., I Love my Wife, and don't like People that slight her Charms, and prefer my Friendship to her Beauty, therefore till you come better prepared to do her justice, your Visits will be but offensive, and if ever you make another, I shall conclude you have taken a Friends Advice. Come, Wife.
Go thy ways, for an old Jealous, I wish be-gad, I could say, Cuckold, but my honest Endeavours shall not be wanting to make thee, that thou believest thy self.
Thank God for my deliverance, I'm got into the open Air again, without the incumbrance of an old Woman, who is not satisfied, unless you confine your Eyes to the Curse of meeting none but hers.
If thou art weary already, what wilt thou be when the Noose is fixt, and no kind relieving Hand can do thee the curtesy of unslipping it.
I confess, I have given the Town reason to believe, I cou'd allowandthe two ends of time, to meet in our expected Wedlock.
The Opinion of thy Sense was not forfeited by that, we always believed, thou hadst enough to distinguish between the glittering Metal and the Allay; But are you not resolved to Marry my Lady.
So far from it, that I wou'd run my self into any other Noose in, to avoid hers;is the Goddess here; You have doubtless heard her Father left her a Fortune of 12000on Condition she Married with my LadyConsent, else Shame and Beggery to be her Portion.
That any Man shou'd be so far wedded to the Follies of his Wife to desire the entailing of them upon his Posterity.
I have held a long Age of Dissimulation with her Mother to permit her return to Town, and get her Fortune secured,engaged my Father with the hopes of Marrying her, and doubtless I shou'd prevail over the old Lady, if it were not for another; but this is the hardest part of my Confession, for I think, whatsoever Custom can persuade, that Man's a Villain, who boasts a Lady's Favour.
Begad if our Town Ladies come to know how well thou art principled, thou may'st e'en make thy own Markets amongst them, 'tis not to be matched in thy green years, which commonly reckons the pleasure of telling as the foremost delight in an Amour.
I am not Beaux enough for that yet. To be short then,who you know lives with, and governs my Lady, did me the honour to like me, and I had reason to believe my self Master of her first Favours, I cou'd not shake off her fondness, tho' all mine was secretly addrest to, for whose sake I was forced to dissemble with.
Begad that was slavery enough, for the trouble of getting handsomly rid of a Mistress, is ten times more than what it costs to make her such.
She catch'd the discovery from my Eyes, and unknown toperswaded her Mother to send her into the Country, then to confound me further, the old Lady grew fond of me,putting it into her Head, that I wou'd Marry her, by which means, she constantly secured her self of seeing me, being in the same House, and reasonably thought, the interest she had in my Heart, ran no hazard, by bestowing my Person upon an old Woman.
Then how comes it, she has sufferedto return, for I perceive she manages at pleasure.
'Twas conditionally, I Married my Ladyto morrow, and consented thatshould be bestowed upon my Father.
And how do you think to evade either.
'Tis for that reason I make this discovery to engage your assistance,will not suffer her to sign for her Daughters Portion, till the moment of Execution, but my present uneasiness is to entertain, I have ordered Musick and Dancing after Supper, if possible engagein your Affairs, that she may not concern her self with mine.
You have ordered your own without considering my applications tomay ruine me with.
Quite contrary, that Coquet never likes a Man so well as when he does not seem to be fond of her, trust my Opinion; besides 'twere no Obligation if you did not run a little hazard for your Friend.
You shall command me, and now I consider, I'le bring Sir, who is Fop enough, to think all Women that have fine Cloaths Beauties; him I design for the old Lady, if she shou'd happen to like him 'twere no ill way of getting rid of her.
That will be admirable, but be sure plyclose, she's handsom enough to reward your pains, and because of her interest with my Lady, the only Enemy I can apprehend, -- They are come into the Walk, we'll meet them at the next turn.
Your Lad'ships most joyful humble Servant, you'r welcome to Town; how long have you done it the honour to grace it with your presence.
But to day, Madam, I'm pleased at the good fortune of meeting you so soon.
your Servant, O Gud I've been at the Play-house, where there has been the odiousest Play, so dull, that o' my Conscience, I shan't abide to set my foot in it again this Twelve Month.
I believe there was very little Company there this Weather; how come you to prefer that Diversion to?
O Gud, you may very well ask, for 'twas no choice of mine, an Alderman's Wife and Daughter did me the displeasure to Dine with me, and press'd me beyond decency to go with them; O Jesu, what a vexation 'tis to be with those precise sort of People, that wou'd not go out of their Road, tho' to be less odious.
They were famously set out, I warrant you.
O most unsuitably, the very sight of their Trappings wou'd have made you died of heat, of all things I hate Winter Cloaths in Summer; what say you?
That there are a sort of People that think Finery never out of season.
Lard,, I finish't a Copy of Verses last night, which I have sent to half a score of my Friends for their approbation, I bestow'd the last upon admirable Sir, but I'le send you one of them.
You'l not fail.
Lard, Madam, what do you take me for?must come in too for a Judge.
Pray, what was the Subject?
I know none so Entertaining as her self.
O, Madam, your most grateful Servant, 'twas upon the different Addresses I have had made to me of late; O Jesu, such a glut of Foppery and Mankind; I long to breath a little of the Country Air, that I may get rid of this Town Lumber, and entertain my Muse alone with the reflections of what she has left behind.
But, who is that Sir, he's sprung up since my reign.
O Gud, a very pretty Gentleman,, so Airy, so well Drest, so Handsom.
See how Opinions differ, if you'l take mine,, he's the most out-cast Fop in Nature, he once made the Campagne, but all he remembers of it, is running to, which has given him fears enough to keep at home all his life after.
, Will you favour me with your Company to night, we have Musick and Dancing?
I'le wait upon you anon, 'tis my Lady Junket's Visiting day, and she'l never pardon me, if I omit my Devoir.
O, that old Gossipping thing, she'l never have lost the relish of youth, but wishes so well too't, she'l bring young loving things together in spight of their Hearts.
Fye, Gude I hate you, for being so censorious, because she allows the freedom of her Apartment to Quality of both Sexes; A Lady of her age can't be friendly or so, but presently she is thought procurish.
O, very friendly, and then so grateful, one Treat shall make her yours all her life after.
Ladies, your humble Servant, 'tis a delicate Evening.
Sir, your Servant, see,is stealing away, go after, and bring her back.
I have ill Nature enough to break an Appointment, and I fancy here is one.
I have that to say which it concerns you to know, favour me but with an opportunity after Supper, and letknow nothing of it.
In the Garden I'le expect you.
Ten thousand ages, till then, O, do not fail me, my Heart will suffer unspeakably if you shou'd.
No more, take my word I'le be there.
O Jesu, sureyou have lost your senses, who wou'd be seized thus.
Together, and so thoughtful, I see the growing evil.
Let me be nothing, Madam, if ever I saw any thing so killing as your Eyes, they have Charms, my Heart never understood before.
Yours is a general gallantry to the whole Sex, Sir.
Lard, Sir, what a loss shou'd we have had, if you had made the Campagne.
I must confess I staid in pure Charity to the fair Sex, to expose them, by my absence, was an inhumanity my Heart cou'd not agree to.
I fancy, Sir, you are very fortunate in Amours.
Let me expire, Madam, if I have any reason to complain, but those fair Eyes, makes me forget, every thing but themselves.
I swear Mrs., you talk pleasantly, come, shall we not be going?
When you please;we must not leave you behind.
You'l give me leave to wait on you to your Coach, Ladies.
Sir, not so fast, come back,
I've a word with you.
Pax on you, let me go, I must wait upon the Ladies, 'tis such an omission, that I shall never be pardon'd, nor deserve the Esteem of a Gentleman amongst them.
You may appologize for that anon, I call'd you back, to give you a little Advice.
Be sudden then, I cannot live, divided from.
The old fire, that flames upon sight of every new Face, but I design you for another, who exceeds her in advantages, as much as you do all the Play-house Beaus in Dress and Gallantry.
No ill Comparison; who is it? I dye to know.
First then, she's prodigious rich, wears extravagant fine Cloaths, and has the best way of putting them on.
O, of all things, I love a Lady well Drest, let me be nothing, if one that is other, does not look mean, and as if she were to be loved according.
Then she's Amorous, and will no doubt be presently taken with you.
'Pshaw, Pax, so they all tell me, I cou'd have bated her that part of the Character, 'tis surfeiting.
Her Fortune however is enviting, if you apply your self to her, she's rich enough to reward your labour.
Let me expire, if thou dost not talk scandalously, I hope 'tis not Matrimony thou hint'st at.
Why, you're too much a Man of Mode, to make the burthen uneasie to you; a Civil Husband, and so forth, is all that a Wife can rationally expect from you.
Gad, now I think on't, Cold Civility to a Wife, gives one a good air, let me dye, if I cou'd be fond of an Angel that I was once Married to, but to be seen abroad with her, were an extravagance, I shou'd never forgive my self for.
Or if it shou'd happen, once in an Age, I fancy, you you wou'd make just such meen, as my Lord, and his Lady, when they are together in one Coach at.
Just for all the World, or let me expire, let me never breath, if I have not been passionately in love with her uneasie Frowns, and even ravish't to find during the whole Park time shehad not bestow'd one word, nor look, upon her Lord, one wou'd have sworn, but by her Frowns, she had not known him to be so near her.
Gad, I think he matches her, his lolling back in his Coach, without glance or motion, speaks as much mortification as her sulleness, the best we can conclude is, that they'r heartily weary of one another.
Shew me that Married Couple who are not, but then there's good Management in those Affairs, as in all others; Is it reasonable to disgust one self with a Wives Company, only to oblige the Town with Matter for remark, let her take her Coach, and leave me the freedom of my Chariot, I'le give her the Ceremony of the Glass as we meet, pass on and make no uneasie reflections of the heavy load intail'd upon Mortal life.
Besides, my Widow will set all uneasiness aside, and repair the breach you have made in your Estate.
The Campaign, the Campaign, let me be nothing, if I did not loose Baggage to the value of 1500all my Dressing Plate, Wardrobe, and Military Accoutrements, and was glad to secure my self at, with only the days Provision upon my Back, thou art my Friend, to whom I may own such a Misfortune, let me expire, if ever I was in such a Consternation since I was born into the World.
'Tis now Eight a Clock; do you know my Ladyhere in the Square, any body will tell you the House, I'll meet you there at Nine.
Adieu; I'll walk over the Park to my Lodgings, write an Excuse to an Expecting Lady, who does my Company the Honour to sigh for it, and then I'll be certain to wait upon you.
Why trulywe have had but a sorry Day on't.
Indifferent, Master, besides those that came to inquire after Stolen Goods; the Party that wou'd know the Cause why she did not conceive, paid us notably.
Look out some body knocks,.
O Gemini, Master! 'Tis Mr., the Turky Merchant, and Madamhis Wife; I am very well acquainted with her Maid, Mrs..
Peace, we must not pretend to know them till the Stars have been consulted: I'll to my Study, mind your hits,and get what intelligence you can.
Where's your Master, Friend, I hope 'tis not too late to speak with him.
In his Study, Sir; I'll go and acquaint him with your being here; He does not use to appear after Sun.
Lord, Husband, you are the strangest Man in the World, what will People think of you?
What, Mistress, you'r afraid the Devil should speak Truth, and discover your Abominations.
The Devil's the Father of Lyars, how shou'd he speak Truth.
You are the Mother of Lyars, and that Cuckold maker, one of your vile Disciples.
Because you heard he courted me before I was Married, you think I must needs be naught with him.
No, no, very Good in your sense, I warrant; Naught, why thou art not a Citizen's Wife for nothing; thou hast more grace I trust in the Lord, than not to think Cuckolding thy Husband a good honest practicable Thing; those are naught who do it so awkardly that the World is acquainted with it; nay their very Husbands, who are always the last in knowing the Favours that are done them.
But sure, you don't believe, that an ignorant block-head of a Fortune-teller, should speak any thing like Truth.
I'll tell you what I believe though, Mistriss, in my case of Enquiry your Ladiship can exceed all the Cunning men in, and read our Fortunes to a Tittle; but the Devil's in't, you won't make me as wise as your self, but put me here upon unlawful means, the Sin will lye at your door, Wife, you'd as good confess, and save charges into the Bargain.
If I should, I'm sure you wou'd not believe me.
The Devil take me then; Come be quick, before Master Astrologer comes.
Lord, Husband, what do you take me for? Why, if it were so, do you think I'd be such a Fool to confess.
No; Thou'rt wiser o' my Conscience, but be sure you are as trusty to other Folks; you Women have she Friends that you discover your failings to, and that way the Secret comes about; 'tis for your Interest, as well as mine, to keep the matter private, if 'twere but for the sake of preserving your Lovers, they are squeamish amongst such a glut of Womens Flesh, and are disgusted by that which has been blown upon; but see the Devil appears to decide our Controversie.
Is your business with me, Friend.
Yes, Mr., I've a doubtful Question to be resolved, therefore there's something by way of Encouragement, only whether my Wife do me Justice, you understand me Friend; I'm plaguily afraid of being a Cuckold, an ignorant Cuckold, Sir, for that's all; Pray consult the Stars, that I may come to the knowledge of my good Fortune.
We'll erect a Scheme, or as the Vulgar term it, cast a Figure, and give you the Opinion of the Stars thereupon.
He's Conjuring; we shall immediately see the Devil in the Circle.
Are you so silly to believe it, he seems to be a sorry ignorant Knave, that has more Will than Power to do Evil.
They say a Woman can out-wit the Devil, and I believe out-Face him too -- Well, Mr., have you done? What do the Stars say, am I represented with Horns like Capricorn, with a certain Tall young Gentleman in my Figure, who does my Wife the Honour to Love her, better then she can her Husband.
Your Wife, Sir, looks like a good Virtuous Lady, and your Figure speaks you to be a mighty dissatisfy'd Person, a little troubled in your Brain with Jealousie; but either my Skill deceives me, or you have no occasion for it.
How say you Master, do you like my Wife too? does the Stars denote me for further Cuckoldom, what encouragement do they give you, to take her part for she's so bad, not one Devil in Hell dares do it without a Bribe.
Is that one question all you wou'd have resolved.
Ay Friend, and I see 'tis more than thou canst do, thou art going to convince me of the Vanity and Folly of all those who have helped thee to deceive themselves.
How, Sir, do you undervalue my Profession?
O no, Sir, Your Profession is a very Learned Profession; but I much doubt the Skill of the Professor.
Were it not for this Virtuous, Good Lady, I cou'd show you a Proof of my Art wou'd make you tremble; yet verily it may be a means to acquit her; how say you, Sir, if you dare stand it, I'll raise a Familiar to convince you, and protect your Wife near me.
Wou'd you frighten me into an Opinion of your Art, you that can't tell a Man whether, or no, he's a Cuckold; I have no Faith in you, and therefore dare stand the Worst.
From Hell's deep Center, hither am I come, To warn thee, Mortal of thy heavy doom; Thy Wife is Chaste, yet shalt thou not believe, Thy Visionary Doubts, thy Mind deceive;Therefore remain accurst, and may'st thou find, Thy constant plague, in thy suspicious Mind.
Mr., accept of this Gratuity; my Husband faints! Lord, I wish his fears have not taken away his use of Hearing, He'll never remember what the Devil said to him.
Sir, Sir; How fares it with you?
Lord! How do you do, dear Husband? I'm frighted out of my Wits; I'll never venture to the Devil again with you, you shall e'en go by our self, next time for me.
Ay poor Wife; as thou say'st thou wilt, I believe, forsake me in all Perils; but is he gone are you sure.
Gone; Yes, Sir, what do you think; by vertue of my Art I can lay as well as raise -- This 'twas to be incredulous, and undervalue the Mysteries of Knowledge; I was forced to use extraordinary means to convince you: O the Blindness and Stonyheartedness of the Ignorant.
Pray let a Coach be call'd -- I'm very ill -- but Master, your Skill in the, shan't make me believe my Wife the Fairer.
'Tis the Capricio of all Old Men, Jealous of every thing that's Younger than themselves.
Ay, poor Lady; Heaven endow you with Patience -- There's a Coach, Sir.
Is there, come Wife; good Night Friend.
Sir, your Servant; Madam your Servant:wait upon the Gentry to the Coach.
Verily this Evening has helped the Morning, and both together made a good Day, few better. --
Now,thou didst it admirably.
Ay, Master, did not I; He little thinks, that from my hiding place, I over-heard all he said; but how did the Habit set upon me.
As like as the Devil cou'd be, every one in there way,all Trades have their Cheats, and this is to be said for ours, we do it with their own consents.
Ay, Master, better this than worse, every thing wou'd fain live, and we do but our honest endeavours thereto.
Come, let's go in and pray, to morrow may but prove as good a Day.
To Morrow, Siris the happy day.
Be-gad, I long for the Sack-posset, and throwing the Stocking; that was the Fashion when I was Married, and a good Sociable one too; I mean to make use of it still. He, he, he! I have bin telling her, how eager all the young Fellows will be of hitting the Bride in the Face; but be-dad, I hope I shall hit her better somewhere else; before, I'll try to get a Nap in this Chair, and Dream of to Morrow, before to Morrow comes.
Siris falling asleep over his Wooing. When we force Nature beyond her self, she must return for a recruit.
Be-gad Madam! You don't know what an Insipid Fellow I am this way; I never Love taking fruitless pains: If I had not a real Inclination for you; the Devil take me, I if wou'd pretend it. For where's the satisfaction of dissembling; when that, which shou'd be a reward to our endeavours, disgusts our Inclinations.
You Men of the Town, never value a Woman for her self, 'tis only to increase the Wretched number, tho' your selves are never the better for it.
That's only seen amongst the Loose, Idle part of Mankind; who not setting a value upon their own Reputations, think it no fault to Expose a Lady.
Well, not disputing any further your Talent of Secrecy, what Security can you give of your Sincerity?
Your Charms, and the opinion the World has of my Sense: Be-gad, wou'd you have a more undoubted one? If a Woman be very handsome, and meets with a Man who has Wit enough to know and value it; the Consequence speaks it self, and needs no Corroborating Evidence.
Well, enough of this to Night; I receive you for my Lover, and as such, you must do me what Service I desire.and you, are mighty Friends. Has he told you nothing of his concern for?
He's to Marry her Mother -- Besides Child! I never care to hear those sort of secrets, for fear they shou'd expect mine in return.
However indifferent you are, I'll tell you one, tho' theReport runs of to Morrow., must Marry my Ladyprivately this Night, and if you please, you shall have the Honour of bestowing her upon him.
Your Commands wou'd make greater difficulties easie; but Pox, why this haste, to bring a young Fellow into slavery? Does he know the Design?
She carried him hence to tell him: I can't imagine how she'l bring it about; for I fancy, one must be a good deal out of Countenance, to let a young Fellow know, one has a mind to lye with him, one Night sooner than he design'd.
Ay, or desired; for if I were to be Mr., that wou'd be my Case always with an old Woman: But where is he now?
Shut up with her in her Closet; if you'l stay a Moment, I'll go see what's become of 'em.
If we don't take care, this Gipsey will be too cunning for us all; Pox take Sir; Where can he stay?
Is Madamhere? My Lady Enquires for her.
No Child, she's just gone; but here's a Friend of yours, wou'd be glad to see you at my Lodgings.
I assure you Mr., you are mistaken in me; I wou'd not be a Whore, if you wou'd keep me a Coach and Six Horses, to tend me all days of my Life.
Nay, now I'm sure you lye.
Pox take all oldWomen; I stinck of Petter as bad as her self: I fancy it to be like our Perriwiggs, that retain the scent of Tobacco, after being in a City Coffee-House.has told you.
Yes, yes -- Have you seen?
Where shou'd I see her, in her Mother's Closet? Be-gad, you wou'd have laught your self to Death, to hear her break the business to me. She was in so good a Humour, that had I not wanted Witnesses, she wou'd have sign'd, without consulting her Oracle,.
'Tis pity, the Poor Lady shou'd be disappointed of a Husband; Sirshall Marry her.
But how? I don't think it feasible.
We'll try to turn our Modern Comedy Plots into good, sober, earnest, and make her Marry one for another.
Impossible!is her shadow, and not to be deceived. They stay Supper for us; my appointment holds with; the Musick will amuse the rest of the Company; if possible, don't letfollow us.
If she follows you, I'll follow her, I assure you, for I've talked my self, into a kind of liking of her; but we must not leave the old Gentleman behind us. Sir, Sir! How sound he sleeps? He's taking up his Rents before-hand, and providing for to Morrow Night, which he Fancies will be no good one of rest to him: They stay Supper for you Sir.
Supper, why, what's a Clock?
Near ten, Sir: Shall we wait upon you down?
I had rather you shou'd wait upon me up, Sir, a good Bed in my Country is worth ten Suppers; but be-dad, I must not tell my Mistress so till I am her Master. Come along.
We wait upon you Sir.
Where's Sir, that he has not honoured us with his Company?
I left him taking a Grace-Cup with your Ladyships Chaplain. Mr.will be too hard for him, they are so used to their Sanctified Wine they can swallow a large share of our unhallowed Juice of the Grape. Be pleased to know my Friend, Sir.
As such I must ever value and esteem him.
Your Ladyship's most Obedient Servant; let me Expire, if ever I saw any thing so taking as your Ladyship's Civility.
Lard Sir! Do you consider whose in the Company? These young Ladies will have reason to Quarrel at your Judgment, or rather I shou'd be displeased at your insincerity.
Let me expire Madam, if ever I saw any thing so ingaging as your Air. O that Dress, that Dress Madam! The Devil take me if the Drawing Room in all its Birth-night finery, can shew us any thing equal to it.
I wish I had but as good a Title to the rest of your Commendations; but time was, when they might have passed upon me with less injustice.
Be-gad Madam, no time like the present: The Sun is not in his glory till he is mounted to the Meridian, let me dye; if I can imagine your self, cou'd ever exceed your self.
Lard, Sir, your'e extream Courtly! How unfortunate have I bin till now, in wanting your Acquaintance! I never had so sudden an esteem for any one. O! I Love a well bred Man, in my Soul -- Good Breeding -- There's no Charm exceeds it. Pray Sirhave you not bin abroad?
Yes Madam, I have fetch't the Tour of all the Courts in, made some small residence in, but their Gravity disgusted me, and therefore made haste to pass into, which had every thing that a well bred Gentleman cou'd desire, either to Instruct or Entertain.
Lard, 'tis strange! I durst have sworn that very thing by your Air, your janty, way of Dress, your Perriwig. Oh Jesu! How ravishing the Curls fall to cover your Face, and leave us almost nothing besides to Contemplate. Ah! how far you exceed all that ever I saw in the Art of Powdering., don't you think SirDresses extreamly well?
Undoubtedly, Sir, I beg your Pardon I did not see you sooner -- Heigh, this is Gallantry indeed! What a new Dress!
The Devil take thy Foppery; was it for this, thou madest us stay for thee?
I had a Misfortune, just as I was crossing to my Lodging, a filthy Carman dash't me most intolerably, a just reward for being on foot in the dirty Street; I was forc'd to change my Cloaths before I was fit for this shining Assembly.
Sir, your most devoted, Admirer -- Lard, my Lady, did you ever see anyhave that Air? Never cou'd Madam, the Princess, have hoped a Copy, so transcending the Original.
'Tis all of a Piece, all Sir, in a word; all that can be named, the fine Gentleman, the Courtier, the Something beyond all, the Modern expressive word of Beau.
Let me expire, if your Ladyship has not the best Judgment. is not my Sword-knot extreamly fine and just?
O, of a most ravishing length -- What is Fashion, for well bred People, If, as Mr.says, we don't top our parts?
Your Ladyship's unacquainted with one Sir ofExcellencies; he Dances to a Miracle, and carried it from all the Quality at the last Court Ball.
A Corant or Minuet, Madam, I am no higher Dancer: Will your Ladyship do me the Honour of a Minuet?
Sir, I must beg your Pardon, if I share the Dance, I shall lose the entire Prospect of your Person;, if she pleases shall oblige us.
Nay, be-gad Madam, you shan't go till Sirhas done with you.
Eternal Impertinence, they are both missing, and undoubtedlytogether. Sir, I'm not in Humour, and shall make but an ill Figure,will do much better.
Let my be nothing, Madam, if she has not ten times more Chagrin in her Looks than your Ladyship. I must not be refused.
SirDances in Perfection.
I told your Ladyship his Talent, I was sure you wou'd not find me in a mistake.
So slighting, she has Debauch'd him from me. O I can't hold my Muse! Muse go Lament the Misfortune.
O your Ladyship flatters me, or let me dye! But to say what has bin said before, Blows from hands so soft, who wou'd not bear!
Sir, you are a Judge of Decorum and Decency; what say you to walking in, and seeing the Bridall Bed?
I'll follow your Ladyship through the World; but I shall expire in seeing the place where my Happiness is to be Sacrificed.
O Jesu! 'Tis a thousand pities so pretty a young Gentleman shou'd have an uneasie Moment.
Grant, I dispense with that one Form of our Sex, disbelieving a Lover; when he first tells us he is such; how can you avoid my Mother, or delay her expectations?, whose reasons I could not comprehend before; will do all that's necessary to ruine our intelligence.
If nothing else can secure me, your Denial must.
Twelve Thousand Pounds is a Forfeiture too great to oblige an Enemy with. I hearvoice, she must not see us together.
But why do you follow me?
But why do you fly me?
shot that way. I seeat the bottom of the Walk, I have business with him; oblige me, and leave us together.
You Command me.
Here so late?
I come in search of you, the Bride expects you.
To Night! It must not be.
The same thing as to Morrow, the sooner 'tis over the better; for in these cases our fears are the worst part of our punishment. Was notwith you? she is wanted. Sirhas drank himself into a Matrimonial Temper, and Mr.Swears twelve at Night, is as Canonical as that of Noon.
, have you Loved me!
Has not my Ruin told you?
Then do you Love me?
Yes, to see you happy -- But the Mask is off, and thou canst Cheat no more, and I no more believe.
You never Loved, but now abhor me.
You reproach me with what I wou'd be; do not, do not rouze the Woman in me, I wou'd be Calm to Night and see you Married.
Rather see me Buried.
Perhaps so -- Cou'd the remembrance of my Wrongs but sleep with thee, I wou'd not Envy thee a quiet Grave.
Farewel, we part for ever, I'll leave the Town this Minute.
At least, Sir, if you will not Marry your self, but unkindly leave your Bride thus in the longing Moment; do your Father the honour to grace his Marriage.
What have I done, that you shou'd wish to make me Wretch'd?
What hast thou left undone to make me such?
Your Reputation yet stands fair, and unlessyour own Indiscretion betrays you the Secret shall be such, with me for ever.
But thy heart, Traytor, thy perjur'd Heart; tell me, how shall I get it back?
Never this way, I assure you.
'Tis given for gone then -- Go -- Live as Wretch'd as I can make you, I'll think no more upon you.
Where, Madam, are you going?
To a Wedding, Sir,Wedding; you say we must not Dance at yours.
Rather of the two, but why to Night?
All Bridgrooms are not as backward as your self; your Father has the start of you, in desire as well as years, he is impatient of his Happiness.
You are Peevish; does you Love make you Jealous?
I have none, thehas taught me better; no longer doubting, away at once with Love and Jealousie.
Then 'tis Spite disturbs you: In what have I deserved it?
Look in thy false perfidious Heart, and take my Answer thence.
That speaks of nothing you can quarrel with.
Then I will stay and argue with thee, how often hast thou told, thou coud'st for ever Love me?
I told you that I cou'd, not that I wou'd.
Poor Caviller, those who can jest with Oaths, can play with Words -- You'l come after and wish the Bride Joy.
We must not part thus, you were not used to fly my Arms.
By all that's good, he has got the sorry cunning of our Sex; just so does a Wife when her Husband has caught her false, the gilting Creature cries, Do you believe it Spouse? you do not use to be so unkind -- Ha, ha, ha, -- Let me Laugh, tho' 'tis maliciously; go on, I'm in the Vein of Audience; let me hear some disagreeable Truths, and how well thou canst turn Woman;is at stake before you, do it handsomely; I wou'd be fortified in my Aversion, and have my hate implacable.
'Tis Barbarous to insult, where you shou'd rather pity.
I do, let all the World be judge else; nay, do more than Pity, I wou'd prevent your Ruin, and stop the Passage up to your undoing, wou'd save you from the Ills, nay, Scorns of Poverty, keep your Friends such, and put it in your Power to be one by still Preserving you: The Worlds opinion, who judge of Merit but by Fortunes Favours.
We know the Extent of your Generosity: But serve me as I wou'd be serv'd,.
I thought this was your way: I mistook you for him that was to Marry my Lady-- But I'll go look for certainties within.
Come back, 'tis my last Call: I wou'd satisfie thy Womanish Revenge, and let thee see me Curst by any other way than Fatal Marriage -- Take my Sword -- Thy Malice can supply thy want of use, despight can furnish strength, and too often thou hast found the way to my unhappy Heart to miss it now.
Ha, ha, ha, in Love to dying! By all that's good, turn'd: Your Mistress, Sir, is much obliged -- Keep your Sword, it may be a Fortune better worth than all your Fathers Lands; there's Wars abroad, you may employ it in, 'twill keep your Wife from wanting here at Home.
Am I indeed your Scorn, Proud, Fantastick Woman; thy liking was foul Lust; not Love: That gentle Name brings Happiness, but thou -- Let me not think upon thee, for fear it force my Tongue to something worse, than shou'd be said of Ladies; I've served it seems, as long as you cou'd like, and now you chuse another.
Wou'd it were come to that, I wou'd exchange thee, forthe last of Men, and think the Bargain Cheap, wou'd part with all that goodly Form, for honest Ugliness, and think it fairer; thy Youth for Age, and Doat upon his Doatage -- So in return I found but Truth, mark well that word, that word has Charms thou never knewest, and which out-weighs thine.
, thou hast power to read my Soul; thy Magick Spells are irresistable. How hast thou found this Failing in my Vertue, which I not knowing of, my Wants cou'd never miss till now?
Thank my Wit, Natures best Gift -- I've seen your shuffling poor designing Arts, to wave this Marriage and promote another. Your care too, ofFortune falsly guilded with the weak pretence of Generosity; 'twas not doubled thick enough for me: But because Doubts never shou'd condemn the Man I Loved, I wou'd not seem to doubt till I was certain; therefore no more dissembling, 'tis vain,never shall be yours; and if you cou'd not think it an unhappiness, I fain wou'd keep you mine.
Give me this Night to think in, I'll promise nothing, but this: I'm Grateful where I am obliged.
To shew your Power, I will; my Ladythrough my persuasion designed this the Marriage Night; I'll excuse you to her, but not one word or thought of, for in that Moment she shall be bestowed upon another; I wou'd divide the World, rather than you shou'd meet; I hope to Morrow, we may give you joy; this Night I find but little.
Less thou hast left behind, O the Curse of Lewdness! What Woman's Fair after we find her Faulty? What Lady Innocent, when no longer Chaste? Or who so vain to hope for Honour, or for Pity from that Soul who wants it for her self?
What I hear 'tis deferrd, there's no hopes of Posset.has dissmiss'd me till to Morrow, she's gone to your Bride; by this time Sirhas supplanted you, he is shut up with her, and has impudence enough to bid fair for it.
They talk of Eating against ones Stomach, but no Surfeit is so nauseous, as what I'm in danger of,catch'd me in the Action; and Faith, a sinner must have more impudence than I, who can deny matter of Fact.
Be gad, I have Pimpt to a fair end: What to let a Woman out-wit thee? How cou'd you once think of being sincere to one, whose Interest runs counter to yours? I would have dissembled as much Love as I had Aversion; nay Counterfeited my first desires, and suffered her, to believe she had preserved the Conquest of me now, that I might have Triumphed over her all my life after.
Very well, I am railed at on all sides.
Thou hast this Moment in thy Face, all the Mortification of poor Lenten Penitents, and lookst more akin to the Spirit than the Flesh. I believe thou art not in the condition of Wedlock. Confess your Misfortune to my Lady, I know no reason, why a Man shou'd pretend false Courage, when by it he runs himself into an inconveniency, he might have otherways avoided.
Faith, if lying, dissembling and flattering, can deserve her, I have done it. After we parted, I underwent the Mortification of an Arrest, which has the better fitted me for that of Matrimony; 'twas necessary for me, to have just got out of the Baliffs hands, to be able to go through with her, or else let me expire, if I cou'd have done it.
But what's the Consequence, Sir?
No more, than deferring the Marriage. The Duce take me if I don't think it Exceeds allLabours, to be able to perswade a Widow to lye alone, when she is resolved to have a Bed-fellow.
The next Affair shall be resolv'd in your Chamber, where I'll wait Sirand you in a Minute.
Nay if you wou'd be private, I'm discreet.
Let me be nothing, if he has not some melting Billet, I know it by his very Air. Good Fortune to thee.
Hum! to Morrow Morning like a Phisician., where had you this Letter?
Mrs.brought it to your Lodgings. She says her Master has bin at the Fortune-tellers, to Enquire, whether your Honour had made him a Cuckold.
I am sorry, the Devil cou'd not answer him in the Affirmative: She writes me word thatsick with his fright, and that I may pass upon him for a Physician; however, I believe my skill lyes mostway., go and knock up my Apothecary; borrow his Velvet Coat with the great Gold Buttons. A few hard words, of Plebotomy, Purgative, Laxative, and I shall be set up in my Profession,and look like any Collegiate Doctor of them all -- Why then, the Devil take me if I don't go -- Now the matter's brought to Perfection, I'll not fall asleep over the Brazen Head, when it shou'd answer me. Yes.