You have extreamly delighted us this morning, by your House, Gardens, your Accomodation, and your way of Living; you put me in mind of the renownedAdmirable description of.
Sir you Complement me too much.
Methinks you represent to us the Golden 'days of Queen, such sure were our Gentry then; now they are grown Servile Apes to Forreign customes, they leave off Hospitality, for which we were famous all over, and turn Servants to Board-wages.
For my part, I love to have my Servants part of my Family, the other were to hire day Labourers to wait on me; I had rather my Friends, Kindred, Tennants and Servants should live well out of me, than Coach-makers, Taylors, Embroiderers, and Lacemen should: To be pointed at in the Streets, and have Fools stare at my Equipage, is a vanity I have always scorn'd.
You speak like one descended from those Noble Ancestors that madetremble, and all the rest ofHonour 'em.
I reverence the Memory of 'em: But our New-fashion'd Gentry love thetoo well to fight against 'em; they are bred abroad without knowing any thing of our Constitution, and come home tainted with Foppery, slavish Principles, and Popish Religion.
They bring home Arts of Building from hot Countries to serve for our cold one; and Frugality from those places where they have little Meat and small Stomacks, to suffice us who have great plenty and lusty Appetites.
They build Houses with Halls in 'em, not so big as former Porches; Beggers were better entertained by their Ancestors, than their Tennants by them.
For my part, I think 'twas never good days, but when great Tables were kept in large Halls; the Buttery-hatch always open, Black Jacks, and a good smell of Meat and March-beer, with Dogs-turds and Mary-bones as Ornaments in the Hall: These were signs of good House keeping, I hate to seefine Buildings with no Meat or Drink in 'em.
I like not their little Plates, methinks there's Vertue in an English Sur-loyn.
Our Sparks bring nothing but Forreign Vices and Follies home; 'tis rediculous to be bred in one Country to learn to live in another.
While we lived thus (to borrow a Coxcombly word) we made a better Figure in the World.
You have a mind that suits your Fortune, and can make your own happiness.
The greatest is the Enjoyment of my Friends, and such Worthy Gentlemenas your Selves, and when I cannot have enough of that; I have a Library, good Horses and good Musick.
Princes may envy such an English Gentleman.
You are too kind,.
Spoken like a Noble Patriot.
Pardon me, you talk like English-men, and you have warm'd me; I hope to see the Prince and People flourish yet; old as I am, in spite of Jesuits, I am sure our Constitution is the Noblest in the World.
Would there were enough such English Gentlemen.
'Twere to be wisht; but our Gentry are so much poysoned with Forreign Vanities, that methinks the Genius ofseems sunk into the Yeomanry.
We have indeed too many rotten Members. You speak like Gentlemen, Worthy of such Noble Fathers, as you both had; but Gentlemen I spoke of Musick, I see two of my Artists, come into the Garden, they shall entertain you with a Song this Morning.
Sir You oblige us every way.
Finely compos'd, and excellently perform'd.
I see Sir you are well serv'd in every thing.
My sweet Cousin good Morrow to thee, I hope to call thee shortly by another Name, my dear Child, Heaven's bless thee.
Ladies your most humble Servant; you are early up to take the pleasure of the Morning in these Gardens.
'Tis a Paradice you are in; every object within this place is ravishing.
This place affords variety of Pleasures; nothing here is wanting.
Where such fine Ladies are.
A Gentleman, To speak with you.
With me! Daughter pray shew those Gentlemen the Statues, Grottoes and the Water-works, I'lewait on you immediately.
This is an opportunity beyond our hopes.
Would you speak with me?
Arrah, and please ty Oorship, I am come here to dis plaash to maake a wisitt unto thee, dest dou not know me Joy?
Oh! You live at Mr.my Catholick Neighbours.
Ah by my Shoul, I.
How came you to venture hither? you are a Popish-Priest.
Ay, but 'tis no matter for all daat Joy: by my Shoul, but I vill taak deOades, and I think I vill be excus'd, but hark vid you a while, by my trott I shall be a Paapist too for all daat, indeed, yes.
Excellent Principles.
I do come for de nonest to see dee, and yet I do not come one purpose gra: But it is no matter, I will talk vid you aboot daat, I do come upon occaasion and Mr.did shend me unto dee.
For What?
What will I say unto dee now, but Mr.did shend me, and yet I did come off my self too for all daat upon occaasion, daat I did heare, concerning of dee, dat dy House and de Plaash is all over-run with Witches and Spirits, do you see now?
I had best let this Fool stay to laugh at him, he may be out of the damn'd Plot, if any Priest was? Sure they would never trust this Fool.
What shaall you shay unto me upon all dis, I will exorcize doze Vitches, and I will plague dose Devils now by my Shoul, vid Holy-water, and vid Reliques, and I will freet 'em out of this Plaash, God shaave the King.
I have forgot your Name.
They do put the Name ofupon me, Joy, but by my fait I am call'd by my own right Name,.
Yes, a very oold Naam inby my Shalvaation, well gra, I havebrought upon my Cloke-bagg shome Holy-water, and I will put it upon the Devils and de Vitches Faashes, and I will make you shome more Holy-water, and you will vaash all de Roomes vid it and bee --
Well, Father, You're welcom; but how dare you venture publickly in these times?
Why, I have great consideraation upon dy Prudence; for if dou wouldst betray me, now phare will be de soleedity of dat Joy.
I speak not for my self, but others.
The Devil taak me now, I do think, I will suffer for my Religion, I am affraid I will be slain at lasht at the plaash they call Saint, but I do not caare by my Shalvaation; for if I will be hang'd, I will be a Saint presently, and all my Country shall pray unto Saint, besides, shome great people will be naamless too, I tell you I shay noe more, but I will be prayed unto Joy.
Prayed too! Very well.
Yes by my Shoule will I, and I will have Reliques maade of me too.
Sirand my Lady have some business with you, and desire your company within.
Come Father, come along with me, do you hear, find the Gentlemen that are walking with my Daughter and her Couzen, and tell 'em I will wait on 'em presently.
I will. They are here, Gentlemen, my Master is called away upon businesshe begs your excuse, and will wait on you presently.
Heaven gives us yet a longer Opportunity, and certainly intends we should make use of it; I have my own Parson that comes to hunt with me at, Madam, an excellent School Divine, that will end all differences betwixt us.
He is like to begin 'em betwixt us, the Name of a Parson is a dreadful Name upon these occasions, he'lbring us into a Condition we can never get out of, but by Death.
If the absolute command of me and my Fortune can please you, you shall never desire to get out of it.
I should at more distance and with more reverence approach you, Madam, did not the shortness of the time, and the great danger of losing you, force me to be free; Throw not away this pretious time, a Minute now is Inestimable.
Yet I must consider on that Minute on which the happiness or Misery of all my Life may depend.
How can I imagine that you who have rambled up and down the Southern World, should at last fix on a Home-bred Mistress in the North? how can you be in earnest?
Consult your Understanding and your Looking-Glass, one will tell you how Witty, Wise, and Good you are, the other, how Beautiful, how Sweet, how Charming.
Men before they are Married turn the great end of their Perspective; but the little end after it.
They are Men of ill Eyes, and worse Understanding; but for your Perfections there needs no Perspective.
If I were inclin'd to Marriage, methinks we are not well enough acquainted yet to think of that.
To my Reputation I suppose you are no Stranger, nor to my Estate, which lies all in the next County; and for my Love, I will convince you of it, by setling what ever you please, or all that Estate upon you before I expect any Favour from you.
You are so Generous beyond my Deserts, that I know not how to Credit you.
Your Modesty is too great, and your Faith too little.
Death, Who are these whith my Mistress and my Sister? Oh! they are the silly Fellows that we saw at the Spaw, that came hither last night, do you know Sir, that this is my Mistress Sir.
I know Sir that no man is worthy of that Honour.
Yes Sir, I will make you know that I am Sir, and She has the Honour to be my Mistress.
Very well Sir.
Very well Sir, No 'tis very ill Sir, that you should have the boldness to take my Mistress by the Hand Sir, and if you do Sir, I must tell you Sir -- What do you Smile Sir?
A man may do what he will with his own Face. I may Smile Sir --
If you do Sir, I will fight Sir, I tell you that Sir. hah,
Sir, you are a Bloody-minded man.
'Tis for my Honour, my Honour, he is plaguely afraid; look you Sir, if you Smile Sir, at me Sir, I will Kick Sir, that'smore Sir.
If you do, you will be the fifteenth man I have run through the Body Sir.
Hah! What does he say, through the Body, oh.
Yonders my Brother, we must not be so perticular, let'sjoyn.
How, the Body Sir.
Yes Sir, and my custom is (if it be a great affront, I kill them, for) I rip out their Hearts, dry 'em to Powder, and make Snuff on 'em.
Oh Lord! Snuff!
I have a box full in my pocket Sir, will you please to take some.
No Sir, I thank you Sir: Snuff quoth a, I will have nothing to do with such a cruel man, I say no more Sir.
Your Servant Sir --
Your Servant Sir: does he take such Snuff too?
The same -- do you hear Sir, if you value your own life, which I will save for the Families sakes, not a word of this to any man.
No Sir, Not I Sir? Your humble servant.
I ask your pardon Gentlemen, I was stay'd by what, if you please to walk in, will divert you well enough.
Wee will wait on you Sir.
Daughter, Sirand myhave made complaints of you for abusing Sir; let me hear no more on't, we have resolv'd the Marriage shall be to Morrow, it will become you to be upon a little better Tearms to day.
Do you here that Gentlewoman --
Gentlemen, I have sent tofor all your Servants, and Horses, and Doggs, you Must do me the honour to Make some stay with me.
We cannot enough acknowledg your great Civility.
No Complements, I obliege my self, Sirand I have just now agreed, that to morrow shall be the Day of Marriage between our Sons and Daughters.
Very short warning.
Hee'lnot delay it longer.
I'le in and see what the reason of this sudden resolution.
Sir we wait on you.
Stay you there a while with Sir.
Dear Cousin, prethee be kinder to me, I protest and vow, as I am a Christian, I love the better then both my Eyes, for all this.
Why how now Dogs face, hast thou the Impudence to make love again,with that hideous Countenance? that very insipid sillyof thine? with that most piteous mein? why, thou lookst like anfor Teeth.
This is all sham, I wont beleive it; I can see my self in the great glass, and to my mind no man looks more like a Gentleman than my self.
A Gentleman! with that silly wadling shuffling gate? thou hast not mien good enough for a chief Constable, every change of thy Countenance, and every motion of thy Body proclaims thee an Ass.
Ay, Ay, come Madam, I shall please you better when I am Marry'd, with a trick that I have; I tell yee.
Out of my sight, thou makest me sick to see thee.
I shall be more Familiar with you to Morrow-night, oh my dear rogue -- well I say no more, faith I shall, well, no more to be said.
Be gone thou Basilisk, here, I vow if thou wert the only man on Earth, the Kinde should cease rather than I would Marry thee.
You'l be in a better humour to Morrow-night, though you are such a vixen now.
This place, where some Materials are to mend the Wall, will furnish me with some Ammunition: be gone I say.
I shant do't, I know when I am in good Company, come prethee Cousin, do not let us Fool any longer, to Morrow we shall be one flesh -- de ye see:
I had rather be inoculated into a Tree, than be made one Flesh with thee; can thathide of thine ever become one Flesh with me? when, I can become one Ass with thee it may, you shall never change my mind.
Well, well, I shall have your Body to Morrow-night, and I warrant you your mind shall soon follow it.
Be gone, thou infinite Coxcomb, I'leset thee farther.
What, what, what a pox! hold, what a Devil, are you mad? Flesh, heart, hold, what a plague, uds bud, I could find in my heart to turn again.
Do filthy Face, do if thou darst.
Oh help, murder, murder.
I have no patience with this Fool, no Racks, or Tortures shall force me to marry him.
I am very indifferent about this Matrimony, and for ought I see, you are so too.
I must confess you are as fine a Gentlewoman as ever I saw, and I am not worthy of you; but my Father says he will disinherit me, if I will not marry you to Morrow; therefore I desire you would please to think on't.
I will think on't.
You shall command all my Estate, and do what you will; for my part, I resolve all my Life, to give up my self wholly to my Sports, and my Horses, andmy Dogs, and to drink now and then a cup of Ale with my Neighbours, I hate Wine.
You will do very well.
He says we must be Married to Morrow at Ten, I can be going a Hawking by six and come home time enough, I would be loath to neglect my Hawking at Powts in the height of the Season.
By no means, you'd do very ill if you should.
Ay so I should, but shall I tell my Father that you will have me to Morrow? you know the Writings are Sealed, and Wedding-Cloaths bought of all sides.
Well, I shall do as becomes me.
Well, Cousin there's no more to be said betwixt you and I then,, a word to the Wise, I say, is enough, so I rest your humble Servant to command; I'le tell my Father what you say presently, your Servant to, tell you truly I had never so much mind to be Married as now; for I have been so woundedly frightned with Witches, that I am affraid to lye alone, dee see; well, I am glad this business is over: a pox upon all making of Love for me.
I thought I saw my Cousin in yon Walk, 'tis time for us to consult what to do, my Father and Mother are resolved upon to Morrow for the fatal day.
Susan,.
Demdike.
Rome.
Smithfield,.
T.
,.
, a Company of Tantivy Fools.
England, and abominate the Religion that contriv'd it.
dis is my dear Friend.
Mary,.
Your Servant Gentlemen.
Your most humble Servant.
Your most humble Servant.
Is not myman a pleasant fellow?
A great Father of the Church.
And perhaps may come to be hang'd for't.
Siris going to take some informations about Witches, perhaps that may divert you not ill, 'Tis against my opinion, but I give him way.
I hope you are pleas'd to pardon my incivillity, in rushing unawares into your Chamber last night; but I know you are so much a Gentleman, so well-bred, and so accomplisht, I know you do --
Madam.
And for that reason I will make you my Confident in a business, that perhaps, I do not know, but I think it may not be to your disadvantage, I will communicate it to you in private. Now, Sirand I are to take some Examinations. I assist him very much in his business, or he could never do it.
Call in these Fellows, let's hear what they'l say about these Witches; come on, Did you serve my Warrant on Mother?
Sir, I went to her House (and please your Worship) and lookt in at her Window, and she was feeding three great Toads, and they daunc'd and leapt about her, and she suckled a great black Cat well nigh as big as a Spaniel; I went into the House, and she vanisht, and there was nothing but the Cat in the middle, who spit and star'd at me, and I was frighted away.
An arch Witch I warrant her.
I went out at the back-dore, and by the Threshold sat a great Hare, I struck at it, and it run away, and ever since I have had a great pain in my back, and cannot make Water, saving your presence.
A fit of the Gravel.
No, by my shoule, she is a great Witch, and I vil cure you upon daat.
No: I tell you, Sir, I am sure she is a Witch, and between you and I, last night, when I would have been kind to my Wife, she bewitcht me, I found it so.
Those things will happen about five and fifty.
I will tell you now, Joy, I will cure you too. * Taak one of de Tooths of a dead man, and bee, and burn it, and taak dee smoke into both your Noses, as you taak Snush, and anoint your self vid dee Gaall of a Crow, taak Quicksilver, as dey do call it, and put upon a Quill, and plaash it under de shoft Pillow you do shit upon, den maake shome waater through de Ring of a Wedding, by St., and I will shay shomefor dee, and dou wilt be sound agen: gra.
Who is this pretends to skill in Witchcraft?
A very learned man in these matters, that comes hither on purpose.
I shall be glad of your better acquaintance.
I vil be very vel pleash'd to beafter being acquainted vid dee Joy.
Have you any more to say? Fellow speak to me.
Why, an't please your Worship forsooth, Mothersaid she would be reveng'don me for not giving her some Butturmilk; and the next night coming from, I saw a great Black Hog, and my Horse threw me, and I lost a Hog that night, he dy'd, that was as well when he went to bed, as ever he was since he was born.
'Tis enough, a plain, a manifest Witch, make a Warrant for her.
Ay, do.
Take some of the Thatch of her House, and burn it at your House, and you shall see she will come streight.
Or to morrow about dawn, piss in a Pot, and cover it with your right, neither Stocking, and the Witch will be tormented in her Bladder, and come to you roaring before night.
A most profound Science.
And poor old Ignorant wretches must be hang'd for this.
A Cow of mine is bewitcht too, and runs about the Close as if she were mad; and that, I believe, Motherbewitcht, because I deny'd her some.
Put her into the Warrent too: 'Tis enough, a little thing will serve for evidence against a Witch.
A very little one.
* Put a pair of Breeches orTrowsers upon your Cows head, Fellow, upon aMorning, and wid a great Stick maak beat upon her, till she do depart out of de Close, and she vill repair unto de Witches dore, and she vill knock upon it vid her Horns indeed.
Thank you good Sir.
Sir, I see you are a Learned man in this business, and I honour you.
Your Servant Sir, I will put shome holy waater into your Cows mout, and I vill maak Cure upon her for all daat indeed.
Come, has any one else any thing to inform?
Yes an't please your Worship, here is a Neighbour,.
Why, an't please your Worships, I was atHouse where shewons i'th' Lone, and whoo had a meeghty great Cat, a black one by'r Lady, and whoo kist and whoo clipt Cat, and ay set me dawn a bit (meet a bit) and believe Cat went under her Coats, Quo ay what don yeo doo with that fow Cat? why, says Whoo, who soukes me. Soukes tee! Marry that's whaint quo ay, by'r Lady what can Cat do besides? Why, says whoo, whoost carry me tobelieve. Whaw, quo ay, that's protty! Why, says whoo, yeost ha one an yeow win to carry yeow; by'r Lady, quo ay, with aw my heart, and thank ow too, marry 'twill save my Tit a pow'r of labour; so whoo cawd a Cat to me, a huge Cat, and we ridden both tostrieght along.
Well said, this was home; I love a Fellow that will go through stitch.
This is a Witch, indeed, put her name in.
This is naw thing by my Shoule, I will tell you now it is naw thing for all daat, a Vich, if she be a good Vitch, will ride upon a Graashopper, I tell you, very well,and yet a Graashopper is but a weak beast neither; you do maak wonder upon dis, but by my Shoule it is naw thing.
Where did you take Cat, say you, together?
Why, we took Cat ith' Lone meer a mile off.
So you rid eight mile upon Cats: are there any more informations?
No more an't please your Worship, but when I have once taken 'em, enough will come in.
Go then about taking 'em, and bring 'em before Sir, and my self, I'le warrant you wee'l order 'em.
I will tell you now Fellow, taak de shoe of a Horse, and nayle it upon your Threshold, de plaash dou dosht goe into dy dore upon.
And put a Clove of Garlick into the Roof of thy House.
is very good in your House against Spirits and Witches, and, and the Herb, and, andtoo is very good.
* Burne shome Brimstone, and maak a sweet fume of de Gall of a Black Dogg, Joy, and besmeare dy Pots, and dy Walls, and bee, and Cross dy Self, and I will touch dee vid Reliques, and dee to gra.
Thank you good Sir.
Thank a.
Is not this an excellent Art?
'Tis so extravagant, that a man would think they were all in Dreams that ever writ of it.
I see no manner of Evidences against these poor Creatures.
I could laugh at these Fools sufficiently, but that all the while our Mistresses are in danger.
Our time is very short, prethee let's consider what is to be done.
Well, my Dear, I must open my heart to thee; I am so much in Love with this, that I shall dye if I lose him.
Poor, dying is something an inconvenient business; and yet I should live very uncomfortable without my Spark.
Our time's very short, therefore preethee let's play the fool no longer, but come to the point when we meet 'em.
Agreed: But when shall we meet 'em?
I warrant thee before Midnight.
Come, let us take one turn in the Garden, and by that time my Dinner will be ready.
Madam, For Heaven's sake consider on what a short time my Happiness or Ruin depends.
Have a care, Sirand his Lady will be Jealous.
This is a good sign.
Not a word, we shall be suspected, at night we will design a conferrence.
Why so unkind? You frown and wonnot kiss me.
No marry, I'lebe none of thy Imp, I wott.
What dost thou mean my Love? prethee kiss me.
Stand off by'r Lady an I lift kibbo once, Ist raddle thy bones: thou art a fow Queen, I tell o that, thou art a fow Witch.
I a Witch! a poor Innocent young Lass, that's whaint, I am not awd enough for that Mon.
And I believe my Eyne, by the Mass I saw you in SirCellar last neeght with your Haggs, thou art a rank Witch, uds flesh I'le not come nere thee.
Did you see me? Why, if I be a Witch, I am the better Fortune for you, you may fare of the best and be rich.
Fare, marry I'le fare none with thee, I'le not be hang'd, nor go to the Deel for thee, not I by th' mass, but I will hang thee on I con by'r Lady.
Say you so Rogue, I'le plague you for that.
What is whoo gone? 'Tis for no good marry, I ha scap'd a fine waife, a fow Carrion by'r Lady, I'le hang the Whean and there be no more Witches in. Flesh whats 'tiss?
Within this Shattered Abby Walls, This Pit oregrown with Brakes and Briers, Is fit for our dark Works, and here Our Master dear, will soon appear, And make thee Mothera Witch, Make thee be Happy, long-liv'd, Rich, Thou wilt be Powerful and Wise, And be reveng'd of thy Enemies.
'Tis that I'd have, I thank you Dame.
Here take this Imp, and let him suck, He'l do what e're thou bidst him, call Him Puck-Hairy,
Come hither Puck-Hairy.
Where is thy Contract written in Blood?
'Tis here.
So t'is firm and good. Where's my Mamilion? come my Rogue,And take thy Dinner.
Where's my Puggy? Come to me and take thy Duggy.
Come my?
Come Sirrah, I have switcht you well I'le tye you up now to the Rack.
Well met Sisters, where's my Pucklin? Come away my pretty Sucklin.
Waunds and Flesh, what con Ay do naw, I am turn'd into a Horse, a Capo, a meer Titt; Flesh Ayst ne're be a Mon agen, I marle I con speak, I conno pray, I wot a pox o'th' Deel Mun, Ay live of Oates, and Beans, and Hay aw my life, instead of Beef and Pudding: uds Flesh I neigh too,
Oh who has switcht and spurd me plaguely, I am raw all over me, whoo has ridden a wounded way about too.
Peace, here's our Master him Salute, And kiss the Toe of his Cloven Foot.
Now our new Sister we present, The Contract too, sign it with Blood.
First, Heaven you must renounce.
I do.
Your Baptism, thus I wash out too. The new Nameyou must take, And all your Gossips must forsake, And I these new ones for you make.
A piece of your Garment now present
Here, take it Master, I'm content.
Within this Circle I make here, Truth to our Master you must swear.
I do.
You must each month some murdered Children pay, Besides your yearly tribute at your day.
I will.
Some Secret part I with my mark must sign, A lasting token, that you are wholly mine.
Oh!
Now do your Homage.
Who's here? who's here?
Waunds what'shere? The Witches By'r Lady, I'le shoot amongst 'em: have at ye.
Hey, Dive-dappers, Dive-dappers: What a Devils here!tied by a Bridle and a Neighing! What a Pox ail'st thou? Const a tell?
Uds flesh, I am a Mon agen naw! Why, I was a Horse, a meer Tit, I had lost aw My speech, and cou'd do naught but neigh; Flesh I am a Mon agen.
What a dickens is the fellee wood?
Ise ta the Bridle with me, fly from the Deel, and the Witches, and I'le tell you aw at the Ale-house.
What a murrain ails the Hobbell? I mun follow, and see what's the matter.
I Am sorry I am forced to complain of my Cosin.
Sorry, marry so am not I; I am sorry she is so pert and ill-bred, truly Sir'tis unsufferable for my Son, a man of his Quality and Title, Born of such a Family, and so Educated, to be so abused, to have Stones thrown at him like a Dog.
We must e'en break off the Match, Sir.
Sir, I am ashamed of it, I blush and grieve to hear it; Daughter, I never thought to see this day.
Sir, I am so amazed I know not what to say, I abuse my Cosin! Sure, he is bewitched.
I think I am, to Love you after it, I am sure my Arm's black and blew, that it is.
He jested with me, as I thought, and would have ruffled me, and kissed me, and I run from him, and in foolish play, I quoited a little Stone or two at him.
And why did you call me Filthy-face, and ugly Fellow, hah, Gentlewoman?
He ugly! Nay, then I have no Eyes, though I say't, that should not say't, I have not seen his Fellow --
Nor I neither: 'twas a jest, a jest, he told me he was handsomer for a Man, than I for a Woman.
Why, look you there, you Blockhead, you Clown, you Puppy, why do you trouble us with this impertinent lye?
Good words, Sir, 'twas not so much amiss; hah, I'le tell you that.
Sure this is some mistake, you told me you were willing to marry.
I did not think I should be put to acknowledg it before this Company: But Heaven knows, I am not more willing to live; the time is now so short, I may confess it.
You would not use him, you intend to marry, ill.
I Love him I am to marry more than Light or Liberty. I have thus long dissembled it through Modesty; but, now I am provoked, I beseech you Sir, think not that I'd dishonour you so.
Look you, you have made her weep; I never found her false or disobedient.
Nay, good dear Cousin, don't cry, you'l make me cry too; I can't forbear, I ask your pardon with all my heart, I vow I do, I was to blame, I must confess.
Go too, Sir, I never could believe one of your parts would play the Fool so.
And you will marry to morrow.
I never wisht for any thing so much, you make me blush to say this.
Sweet Cousin forgive me, and Sir, and Sir.
Can I be angry at any thing. when I am to be married to morrow? And I am sure I will be, to him I love more than I hate this Fool.
I could find in my heart to break your head, Sir, you are a Puppy.
Come let'sleave 'em together, to understand one another better.
Cousin, Daughter I should say, I beg your pardon, your Servant.
Servant, Sweet Daughter.
Dear Cosin be in good humour, I could wish my self well beaten for mistaking one that loves me so, I would I might ne're stir, if I did not think you had been in earnest: well, but I vow and swear I am mightily beholden to you, that you think me so fine a person, and love me so dearly; Oh how happy am I that I shall have thee to morrow in these Arms! by these ten bones, I love you more than all the Ladies input them together. Prethee Speak to me, O that Smile Kills me, oh I will so Hug thee and Kiss thee, and Love thee to morrow night -- I'd give forty pound to morrow night were to night, I hope we shall have twins before the year comes about.
Do you so Puppy?
Help, Help, Murder, Murder.
Help, Help, Murder, Murder.
What a Devils to do now? hah, she Counterfeits a Sound.
How now, my Dear, what's the matter?
What's the Matter?
I feel the matter, She gave me a Cuff, and lug'd me by the Ears, and I think she is in a Sound.
Oh the Witch! the Witch came just now into the Room, and struck Sir, and Lug'd him, and beat me down.
Oh Lord, a Witch! Ay, 'twas a two legg'd Witch.
And, assoon as she had done, she run out of that Door.
'Tis very true, I met her and was frighted, and left her muttering in the next Room.
Oh Impudence!
You Puppy, you Coxcomb, will you never leave these lyes, is the fellow bewitched?
Go Fool, I am ashamed of you.
Let's see if we can take this Witch.
Quickly, before she flies away.
Well, I have done, I'le ne're tell tale more.
Begone, Fool, go.
Well, I will endure this, but I am resolved to marry her to morrow and be revenged on her; if she serves me so then, I will tickle her Toby for her, faith I will.
Well, I'le be gone, and get out of the way of 'em.
Come on.
Madam! Cozen hold a little, I desire a word with you.
I must stay.
Adieu then.
I am drunken well neegh, and now I am not so hala, (since we must marry to morrow) I pray you now let us be a little better acquainted to neeght, I'lemake bold to Salute you in a Civil way.
The Fool's drunk.
By the Mass she kisses rarely, uds lud she has a Breath as sweet as a Cow, I have been a Hawking, and have brought you home a power of Powts in my bag here; we have had the rarest sport, we had been at it still, but that 'tis neeght.
You have been at some other sport I see.
What, because I am merry? nay, and I list, I can be as merry as the best on 'em all.
I see you can be merry indeed.
Ay that I can, Fa, la, la, fa, la.
I was at it helter Skelter in excellent Ale, with Londoners that went a Hawking, brave Roysters, honest fellows that did not beleive the Plot.
Why don't you beleive the Plot?
No, the Chaplain has told me all; there's noPlot, but there's aone, he says, none but Phanaticks believe it.
An Excellent Chaplain to make love to his Patrons Daughter, and Corrupt the Son.
Why all the Eminent men of our Church beleive it; this fellow is none of the Church, but crept into it for a livelyhood, and as soon as they find him they'l turn him out of it.
Nay, Cousin I should not have told it, he Charged me to say nothing of it; but you and I are all one, you are to be bone of my bone to morrow: And I will Salute you once more upon that d'e see.
Hold, Hold, not so fast, 'tis not come to that yet.
'Twill come to that and more to morrow, fa, la, la, but I'le out at four a Hawking, though for all that, d'e understand me?
Here's, I must get rid of this fool.
Cousin, I hear your Father coming; if he sees you in this Condition hee'l be very Angry.
Thank you Kindly, no more to be said, I'le go and Sleep a little: I see she loves me, fa, la, la, la.
Dear Madam, this is a happy minuite thrown upon me unexpectedly, and I must use it: To morrow is the fatal day to ruin me.
It shall not ruin me; the Inquisition should not force me to a Marriage with this fool.
This is a step to my Comfort; but when your Father shall to morrow hear your refusal, you know not what his passion may produce; restraint of Liberty is the least.
He shall not restrain my Liberty of Choice.
Put your self into those hands that may defend you from his Power: the hands of him, who loves you more than the most Pious value Heaven, than Misers Gold, than Clergy men love Power, than Lawyers strife, than Jesuits Blood and Treachery.
If I could find such a man.
Then look no farther Madam, I am he; speak but one word, and make me the happiest man on Earth.
It comes a little to quick upon me; are you sure you are the man you speak of?
By Heaven; and by your Self I am, or may I be the scorn of all Mankind; and the most Miserable too, without you.
Then you shall be the man.
Heaven; on my Knees I must receive this Blessing; there's not another I would ask, my Joy's too big for me.
No Raptures for Heavens sake, here comes my Mother, adieu.
I must Compose my self.
Sir your most humble Servant.
Your Ladiships most humble Servant.
It is not fit I should lose this opportunity, to tell you that (which perhaps may not be unacceptable to a person of our Complexion) who is so much a Gentleman, that I'le swear I have not seen your equal.
Dear Madam, you confound me with your Praises.
I vow 'tis true; indeed I have strugled with my self before I thought fit to reveal this: but the consideration of your great accomplishments, do indeed, as it were, ravish, or extort it from me, as I may so say.
I beseech you Madam.
There is Friend of mine, a Lady (whom the world has acknowledged to be well bread, and of Parts too, that I must say, and almost confess) not in the Bud indeed, but in the Flower of her Age, whom time has not yet invaded with his injuries; in fine, envy cannot say that she is less than a full ripe Beauty.
That this Creature should bring forth such a Daughter.
Fair of Complexion, Tall, Streight, and shaped much above the ordinary; in short, this Lady (whom many have Languished, and Sigh'd in vain for) does of her self, so much admire your Person, and your Parts, that she extreamly desires to contract a Friendship with you, intire to all intents and purposes.
'Tis impossible she should be in earnest, Madam, but were she, I cannot Marry ever.
Why she is Married already, Lord how dull he is! she is the best Friend I have, Married to an old man, far above her sprightly years.
What a Mother-in-Law am I like to have!
Can you not Guess who this is all this while?
Too well.
Not I truly Madam.
Ha, ha, ha: No! that's strange, ha, ha, ha.
I cannot possibly.
Ha, ha, ha, I'le swear! ha, ha, ha.
No, I'leswear.
'Tis very much, you are an ill guesser, I'le vow, ha, ha, ha! Oh Lord! not yet?
Not yet, nor ever can.
Here's Company, retire.
I am all on fire, what is it that Inspires me! I thought her ugly once, but this morning thought her ugly: And thus to burn in love already! Sure I was blind, she is a beauty greater than my fancy e're could form; a minutes absence is death to me.
Phaat Joy, dou art in Meditaation and Consideraation upon something? if it be a Scruple upon thy Conscience, I believe I vill make it out unto dee.
No Sir, I am only ruminating a while; I am inflamed with her affection, O! Ah me! Ah me!
Phaat dost dou not mind me? nor put dy thought upon me? I do desire to know of dy Faathers Child, what he does differ from de Caatholick Church in, by my fait it is a braave Church, and a gaallant Church (de Devil taake mee) I vill tell you now, phare is dere such a one? vill you speak unto me now Joy, hoh?
'Tis a fine Church, a Church of Splender, and riches, and power, but there are some things in it --
Shome things! Phaat dosht dou taalk of shome things? By my shoule I vill not see a better Church in a Shommers day, indeed, dan de Caatholick Church. I tell you there is braave dignities, and promotions too; what vill I shay unto you? by St., but I do beleeve I vill be a Cardinal before I vill have death. Dey have had not oneCardinal a great while indeed.
What power is this that urges me so fast, oh Love! Love!
Phaat dosht dou shay, dosht dou love promotions and dignities? den I predee now be a Caatholick. What vill I say unto you more? but I vill tell you, You do shay dat de Caatholicks may be shaved, and de Caatholicks do shay, dat you vill be after being damn'd, and phare is de solidity now of daat, daat dou vill not turn a good Caatholick?
I cannot beleive there is a Purgatory.
No! Phy I vill tell you what I vill shay unto you, I have sheen many Shoules of Purgatory dat did appear unto me; And by my trot, I do know a Shoule when I do shee it, and de Shoules did speak unto me, and did deshire of me dat I vould pray dem out of that plaashe: And dere Paarents, and Friends did give me shome money, and I did pray 'em out. Without money indeed, we cannot pray dem out, no fait.
That may not be so hard; but for Transubstantiation, I can never beleive it.
Phaat dosht not beleive de Cooncel of Trent Joy? dou vilt be damn'd indeed, and de Devil take me, if dou dosht not beleive it. I vill tell you phaat vill I say to you a Cooncel is infalible; and I tell you, de Cardinals are infalible too, upon occaasion, and dey are damn'd Heretick Dogs, by my shoulvaation, dat do not beleive every oord dey vill speak indeed.
I feel a flame within me, oh Love, Love, wether wilt thou carry me?
Art thou in love Joy? by my shoule dou dosht Comitt fornicaation, I vill tell you it is a veniall Sinn, and I vill after be absolveing you for it: but if dou dosh Comitt Marrage, it is mortall, and dou vilt be damn'd and bee fait and trot. I predee now vill dou fornicate and not Marry: for my shaake now vilt dou fornicate.
Sure I am bewitch'd.
Bewitch'd in love, Aboo! boo! I'le tell you now, you must taake de Womans * Shoe dat dou dosht Love sho, and dou must maak a Jaakes of it, dat is to shay, dou must lay a Sirreverence, and be in it, and it will maake cure upon dee.
Oh the Witch! the Witch!, I am struck in my Bowels, takeher away, there, oh! I have a Thousand Needles in me, take her away,.
Phaare is shee,.
Oh, I have a Million of Needles Pricking my Bowels.
I vill, set up a hubub for dee, help! help! who is dere? help, Aboo, boo, boo.
Oh Needles! Needles! Take away, take her away.
He is bewitch'd, some Witch has gotten his Image, and is tormenting it.
Hold him, and I vill taak some course vid him, he is possess'd, or obsess'd, I vill touch him vid some Relicks.
Oh, good Sir, help him, what shall I do for him?
Get some Lead melted (and holding over his body) power it into a Poringer full of Water, and if there appear any image upon the Lead, then he is bewitch'd.
Peash, I shay, here is shome of St.own Whisker, and some of the Snuff he did use to taak, dat did hang upon his Beard; here is a Tooth of St., indeed, here is a Corn from de Toe of St., and here is de paring of his Nails too.
Oh worse, worse, take her away.
By my shoule it is a very strong Devil, I vill try some more, here is St.de Virgins Wedding-Ring, here is one of St.Nipples of her Tuggs, by my shoule, here is some of de sweat of St., and here is a piece of St.Gridiron, dese vill make Cure upon any shickness, if it be not ones lasht shickness.
What will become of me, I have poyson'd him, I shall lose my Lover, and be hang'd into the bargain.
Oh! I dye, I dye, oh, oh.
By my shoule it is a very strong Devil, a very aable Devil, I vill run and fetch shome Holy-vater.
Look up, dear Sir, speak to me, ah woes me, Mr., Mr..
Thisis a Gallant man about Witches, he out-does me.
But I do not know what to think of his Popish way, his Words, his Charms, and Holy Water, and Relicks, methinks he is guilty of Witchcraft too, and you should send him to Goal for it.
Oh! oh!