I never thought,Madam
that Ihave been so unhappy as not to subscribe to ev'ryOpinion of your Ladyship's, till this unlucky Moment: But, Madam
I am yet more unfortunately mistaken, if you don't think this Air more agreeable to the Sweetness of your Complexions, than the Smoaky Climat of, tho', Sanctify'd Place. And I fear, Madam
that your apprehensions of such a retreat from the Gay World, threw you into a Melancholly, which might have been no less fatal to me, and all the admiring World, than to your Ladyship; had not Heaven preserv'd, to be ador'd by all Mankind -- My Lord
I did really Arm my self against all, e're I came abroad,, indeed, to receive such Volleys of your Wit and Gallantry.
My most Honour'd Lady!
and my Divine Mistress! How happy I am to see your Ladyship so well recover'd in your Health and Beauty, as to adorn this Walk with what it so long has wanted in your absence? -- Madam
Mr.wrongs the Court-Ladies; some of which are really Great Beauties, who frequently do bless this Park. But, pardon me, Madam I beseech you, if I thinkhave done 'em the greater injury; in appearing here so much to their disadvantage. -- 'Sdeath! -- what Spark's this?
Sir, the Lady is out o'danger of being Flatter'd; and you may go on at the same rate, if you please. But
you may assure your self (my Lord) it will not altogether please: And I cou'd wish, the Gentleman would spare himself the trouble of a second thought.
but, in the name of Wonder, (Mr.) how came you to find us here? Madam
hearing that my Divine Mistress was taken Sick upon her return to Town, I thought it my indispensible Duty to pay my Respects to her, in enquiring of her Health, if I might not have been permitted the Honour and Happiness of seeing her; and this Afternoon I had the good Fortune to learn from Sir, then at home, that your Ladyships were gone towards the Park; whereupon, as I was going to call a Coach, this worthy Gentleman, my Honour'd Friend prevented me, by taking me into his own Coach; he designing for a Walk in this place.
Indeed (Madam,
he makes a very Graceful Figure, and speaks well; -- Pray Heav'n and you, Madam, it prove not to my disadvantage: No; no (my Lord,
your Lordship does not conquer by halves. -- I fear I have said too much
but make the best and kindest use on't you can for both our Interests. Ah Madam
you have almost taken away from me the power to thank you for this mighty Blessing,and to assure you, that I can have no Interest but what I must Centre in yours. -- But I don't like this same Dancing-Master; I fancy he helps to play the Game against me. No matter my Lord
since I deal, you are safe. -- But, come let us joyn Company; for the Lady your Sister is at loss for us. Alas, my Memory!
I had forgot till now to tell you, (Madam) that she came with me hither particularly to Kiss your hands, e're she goes to a Relation of ours who is a Lady Abbess in; with whom she designs to stay near a Twelvemonth; beginning her journey about three days hence:
Madam
I have had so great a desire of seeing some part ofthese manyYears; that I cou'd no longer defer giving my self that satisfaction: Especially, since my Ladyis now so pressing in her Invitation: And, unless your Ladyship will lay your absolute Commands on me to the contrary; I must leavewithin these few days: Ah Madam!
I can pretend to no such influence in your Ladyships Actions: Besides, if I might, with, you may assure your self, that, I wou'd rather wholly disquiet my self, than give the leastto your Ladyships pleasure. That were too great a Condenscension in you, Madam, to me;
since you may be confident, that you have an Arbitrary and Dispensing power in every thing relating to my Brother.
-- Well, Sir
what have you observ'd about me to my Advantage? I fear, nothing at all,
but what makes wholly for yours. So much on the contrary;
that I assure your Lordship, I wou'd not have you for a Rival of all Mankind: And I cou'd wish, with your Lordships Pardon, that you were not onlythat Beautiful Lady
in outward Figure alone, but ev'n in her very Sex. I must avow to you, myLord, 'twou'd give me a great deal of ease. Methinks, Sir
you look on meas one that is a Disturber of your joys. If I do, my Lord,
you are too secure in your own Merits to fear any attempt from me.
Art not well, my Dear?
yes, Madam
pretty well now; I humbly thank your Ladiship. 'Twas only a stitch that took me on the suddain; and as quickly has left me. Ha!
I can tell your Distemper better than Mr.himself: For I have the occasion of it here in my Pocket, which I will so improve, that you shall either marry me, or dye of the Pip, and so lead Apes in Hell. I'm now going to your Father, and consequently every step I make is towards her Bad.
,
greatestSlouch.
!,
,
Humanity,Heaven,
.
.
.
.
--,
.
Stepwell
Philandra.
Beetleheads,.,
.,
,
.
know,I maymaywill?
.
desire him to walk in;
Sirrah, desire him to walk into the outward Parlour, I will but dispatch a bit or two, and then I'll come to him.
Well, Mr.
what is his Name? His Name I beseech you, and where lies the rest of his Estate?
his Name, Sir, is, of the Ancient Family of the, Originally of; tho' the Family has spread it self into most of the Counties of, and;
Besides, Sir,
I beseech your Worship to take notice, that he is no Swearer, Whore Master, Drunkard, nor Gamester. Pish, pish,
'tis not a pin matter to you, or me, whether he be or no; yet (perhaps) I cou'd wish he were all these: But since you say he is so fine a Gentleman, I pray you good Mr.how comes he to have such an urgent occasion for this Sum, or be obliged toa Mortgage? Why, Sir,
he is unwilling to expose his necessity to any of his Acquaintance, because (possibly) he designs to marry one of their Daughters, wherefore he entreated me to assist him in this matter, since I have no knowledge of any of his Relations, or Country Acquaintance, more than your Worship has. Ay, but Mr.
you must give me leave Mr., you must give me leave to be better acquainted with him, and his Concerns, before I part with such a Sum of mony to him; for it is my custom so to do, it is indeed, Mr.Tho' I suppose
this mony is to carry on his Design on the Lady. It is so, Sir,
and he desires by all means, that you wou'd give your self the satisfaction of enquiring into the Circumstances of his Estate, but at a distance, and with all possible caution, lest his Reputation shou'd any way suffer. You may have a sufficient Character of him, and certain Information of the posture of hisAffairs in, and, from any of the Worthy Gentlemen of those Counties. No, Mr.
I shall not need I believe to give my self any great trouble in this matter, if this be the Richof. The very same, Sir,
That's enough
but tell me, Mr., is he already engag'd to this Lady? Is she a? Is she a? Or, what is chiefly to be consider'd, is she a Fortune? Sir, she's worth some 15 or 16000
That's but a small Portion for so great an Estate as this
and, if he be not already, I believe I can recommend him to a young handsome Lass, worth at least Thirty Thousand Pounds. On my word, Sir,
that wou'd be an extraordinary favour indeed, and I fancy he has not made his approach so close to her, but he can make an honourable retreat when he pleases. When may I see him then?
To morrow morning, if you please
in the mean time, I will prepare him to receive your kindness with the greater readiness, for (possibly) he will do something this Night, in order to his disengagement from the Lady he is now in pursuit of. Do so
and let me see you both here to morrow at Eleven precisely. I shall, Sir,
Sir,
your Present is of muchgreater value than the Gold or Stone cou'd make it, forc'd from embracing your finger to adorn mine; which shall be no longer part of my hand, than it is able to serve you.
You shall be as good as your word to my Lord,
for I will present it to her my self, tho' never so much to my disadvantage. I mean, if I have the happiness to see her to morrow. You will not, I hope
be so far far accessary to your own ruine there, as toattempt it. Pardon me, my Friend,
but I will. I beseech you then
read it first, Sir. Not for the purchase of my happiness in
I cou'd then never hope it, because I'm sure I shou'd notit. No,
inviolate as it is, and teeming with all the most Beautiful and Charming Ideas, and Expressions of his passion that it may be; she shall receive it from my hand the very first opportunity have to offer it to her.
Forgive me, Sir, I beseech you, if I think this the oddest method of making Love for a Mans own self, that I ever yet have heard of. Call itif thou wilt
but I have my satisfaction in it. -- Enough of this -- To morrow by Ten in the morning, I expect you here. I shall then pay my duty to you, Sir,
For
I have enquir'd of him of several Worthy Gentlemen, and Eminent Citizens, who all give me a most extraordinary Character of his Person, and Humour; and which is, of his Estate, being worth near Six Thousand pounds. And now (my dear Girl) I prithee do not stand in thine own light: No force, (
and I will stretch my Inclinations as far as may be, to embrace one of your choice, that I may recommend my duty to you.
Nor can I have reason, Sir,
to think otherwise, since I am yet absolutely a stranger to you. I confess, Sir,
you was ato me 'till now; but your Circumstances, I am, and have been before so well satisfied with, that I shall think both my self, and Daughter most happy, if you will accept her for your Wife. But it is not fair to oblige you to a promise of that, before you have seen her; wherefore you shall each of you havethe satisfaction at the same time. We'll wait on you presently
Now, Sir,
will you take my word another time? Did not I say 'twas his Daughter, my Divine Mistress, whom he wou'd propose to you? Ay,the Charm;
his Daughter, and Thirty Thousand Pounds were otherwise but dull musick, but indifferent sounds to me:! Thatwhom I first saw at the Boarding-School, whom I love! -- No matter whose Daughter, or what Fortune she is, so she may be my Wife. 'Tis the very same, Sir, I dare assure you
Then for my Lord's Letter
O! I have it with me, I find.
Here, Sir,
Look you, this is my Daughter, as my Lady-Wife tells me,
tell me how you like her, (pray?) Hah! you stand as if you were frighted at thesight of her. I am amaz'd, Sir,
at so much Beauty; and I beg the Lady will pardon the astonishment, of which she is the Cause. I protest that was spoken like your self, Mr.
like a fine Gentleman, and a Courtier: Nay, nay, I love to hear these Complements in an honest way -- Perhaps 'tis not the Court fashion to kiss, or (it may be) you are asham'd to do it before my face, therefore I'll be gone, and leave my Lady-Wife, and Daughter. No (Sir,
I dare do it in the face of, of Heaven it self, since my thoughts are Just and Honourable. And I am sorry, Sir, I gave you the occasion of instructing my duty.
'Uds precious
this puts me in mind of my wooing my Lady-Wife there; which I cannot remember without tears of joy:
But
I'll leave you together, and shall expect to find you and Mr.at dinner with me here to day. I have a little business -- a little business, your Servant, Sir -- Daughter
this is the man for my money.
I hope, Sir
you'll pardon the infirmities of Old Age. And the defects of an Old Citizen's Education
It looks hearty and kind, Madam
and I cou'd wish, Madam, you wou'd receive me with as true a wellcome. Assure your self, Sir,
a Person of your merits can't want a due reception. We plead no merits from Heaven
but (Madam) if self-denyal, and other the greatest mortifications be any way grateful, I am in hopes that this Present from me may give you a testimony of some of my weak Endeavours that way.
At last,
I perswade my self I shall not fail of a welcome for his sake that sent it.
this I guess is some new piece of Gallantry from the Lord; which, howsoever, shall not rob me of the honour and satisfaction of your Conversation, Gentlemen. Nay, Madam
we are but two to two, and, for my part, I decline any sort of dispute with your Ladyship. I beseech you, Madam
rob not your self of the pleasure that Paper may afford you, for my sake. For assure your self, I had rather suffer all the anguish of despair and jealousie, that you shou'd want the least satisfaction. Pardon me, Sir
this will serve to entertain me, when I want the advantage of better Company. Then, Madam
you must arm your self to receive a discourse of much the same nature, I fancy, with what that happy papercontains; which will (undoubtedly) be more troublesome to you, coming from me -- I love you, Madam
with such a passionate sincerity, that I fear I cou'dpart with you to my Rival; if it might advance your happiness -- say, Madam, have youthat I shall eternally be miserable in your indifference; and have youthat I must quit my pretensions to my happy Rival? Blast, Madam, blast all my hopes with one cruel and irrevocable word, and let me dye by your Thunder. If, Sir, on me depends your happiness, or misery, be confident I wish you the: And in a greater measure, than I can possibly create it to you. This indeed, Madam
is an obliging manner ofme to the, since you exclude me Paradise, and leave me all theWorld to range in -- But be assur'd, Madam,if all the Beauties of the Universe were divinely put together into, by their Great Creator;cou'd not bless me, were it not, as it is,; whowill not receive me into those joys you have entirely reserv'd to the Lord. Certainly, Sir,
this Tempest cannot be of long continuance. This is such aLove as Ibefore received. Ah! Madam,
youandwith my earnest passion -- Forgive me, if I say this is a little inhumane -- But 'tis the effect of your Divinity that sports it self with my misfortunes. Doubtless
such another storm o' t'other side from my Lord, wou'd give me such another surfeit, that I shou'd swoon at the veryofever after.
-- Well, my new, but worthy acquaintance
what progress have you made in your Amours with my Daughter? Why, Sir,
D'you think the Gentleman is us'd to boast of a Lady's favours? Ah! Madam
you have taken care that I shall have no such occasion from you -- But I can suffer. 'Uds precious, Noble Mr.,
suffer me no suffers, I'll ha' no suffering here, unless it be, that I suffer you to make much of my Daughter, and that she do the same by you -- Come
Dinner wait's us in t'other room, and there we'll make much of our selves.
No
good Sir, you are better acquainted here than I am, therefore pray take upon you for once the trouble of my Guide, and Leader.
'Uds precious
Sir, we have wanted you all this while to compleat our mirth, but you are now very wellcome -- Ha, what fine Gentleman have you brought to my poor habitation?
An humble Servant of yours, and those fair Ladies
Mr.
we are happy to meet here. Ay, my Lord
we are so, in the sight of these fair Ladies. 'Uds precious, my Lord,
your Lordship is wellcome, if you don't bring a Pope in your Belly. No, Sir
but I brought an Angel in my heart, I mean your Daughter, Sir, who fills it with all the Ideas of Beauty that Humanity is capable of conceiving, and much more than it can express. 'Uds precious,
you are a fine Gentleman, my Lord, a fine Gentleman indeed; thereforepray sit down, or you'll tire me with standing. I do so, Sir
To make you easie, and to make my self happy, I'll place me just opposite, and most remote to what I most love in this World, and to what you hate I shou'd make any nearer approaches to. Come, Sir
tho' you have been blest in the enjoyment of the pretty; yet you are almost in the Circumstances with me, as to the Beauteous.
My Lord
I fear your Lordship forgets that his Worship has been already so happy in his first Love, that he need not doubt his success against another, especially, when Aided, Abetted, Comforted and Assisted by a Father's Good, Pious, and kind Instructions and Intentions; which yet he could not have wanted, but for your Lordship's and this Honourable Gentleman's Address,and more plentiful Estates. But he may thank his Stars that there is one obstacle remov'd, for it seems your Lordship is a Roman Catholick. And for my part, Sir
I am so far from having receiv'd any particular favour from this our ador'd Lady, that I must utterly despair, unless her unparallel'd and matchless Duty prevail against her inclinations, and his Lordship's Merits. Sir,
you have always the goodand(it seems) to make me Debtor to your kind Opinion of me -- wou'd to Heavens yourwere as much to my advantage. But, Sir
How does the poor Titt? Has she yet taken her Degree in, or? It must be in the first; for certainly none but a mad thing wou'd ha' laid a miscarriage upon an Alderman's Fellow: It looks as if you had not been wicked, or able enough to get a Bastard; when (no doubt) yourmight ha' done you that piece of service, had you been Marry'd. Butsince your Worship is a Batchelor, I suppose she has been(as they call it) for putting the Saddle on the wrong Horse's back -- Ay, my Lord
the Wench did afterwards confess it was my Apprentice; for which (as your Lordship says) she wasin good faith.
And
this is as happy and full discovery as any Criminal cou'd make of himself. You're in the right, my Lady-Wife,
'twas a silly Wench, a silly Wench -- But no more of that, if you please. No,
I must remind my self of my Friend's business, about which I now come to sollicit you. There is a Friend of mine
that wants five thousand Guineas, now I can't spare him above two thousand; wherefore, if you will oblige him, Sir, with that Sum, I will, orsome port of my Estate for his payment of it. Why, look you my Lord
thismust be, and I don't likeany of your Church-Lands. Hark you Sir
I fancy that among all your Mortgages, you have one or more of our Church-Lands; that is, of Papists Church-Lands, as you stile 'em; and yet I find there is no great danger of their infecting you with Popery. But I mean some of those Lands that my Lawful Father and Mother left to me (for perhaps she was an Heiress) those will I dip unto thee. This requires farther thought, my Lord
and you shall have your answer to morrow this time. Nay,
if my my business, or my Friend's be not done by Six in the Morning, we shall have no further occassion of yours, or any other assistance. Six a Clock is early
but I'll see what may be done, my Lord, after I have discours'd this Honourable Gentleman: So, my Lord, I beg your Pardon
Ah, Madam,
'tis now high time for me to despair, since here I found my happy Rival; seated next to you, and feasting on your Eyes; happy he is in every Circumstance, in his Person, in his Sence, in his Estate, and, no doubt, happy in your Love. By your Father's approbation encourag'd, receiv'd by you with a just opinion of his extraordinary Qualifications; how long,knows, I'm sure I know not --
Nay, my Lord,
I find you are hot, we must walk. I thank you, Madam,
that you seem at least to take as much care of me, as my Grooms do of my Beasts; tho' they never ran such hot Courses, as I do in pursuit of you. You flye me, Madam, now,
you have shunn'd methese fourteen or fifteen unaccountable days; for so they have been to me; since in all that time I have not once been blest with the sight of you, 'till this hour. O Heavens! Madam,
where are all your vows? where are all your tender expressions of Love to me? Some indeed I wear about me, under your Hand and Seal; and all of 'em where you have fix'd 'em in my heart. Whence not you your self can remove 'em, unless you bid me despair, and dye -- This is all wondrous fine, indeed my Lord,
and since I find you love me, even to Jealousie, I'm resolv'd to give your Lordship farther occasions of that passion -- And look you, my Lord,
I suppose I wear about me some of your Lordships tender expressions of Love in this Paper; which I receiv'd from your happy Rival, as you think him: This he deliver'd to me, un-open'd I dare believe -- Unopen'd as it is!
now, by all my hopes on Earth, which terminate in you, Madam; my Love is not more sacredlyinviolate, than is this Paper; I know the Seal, and find 'tis not abus'd -- Oh! this is more dreadful to me, than his pretensions to you, Madam. And did he give it thus, without a scoff? Just as you see it, my Lord, and with respect
Ah, wou'd h'had soften'd the hard faithful wax, and ravish'd wide the innocent Contents! I then might justly have return'd the wrong, and from his breast have torn aheart, teeming with Sacriledge against you -- But now, now it appears so Gloriously adorn'd, with your Bright Form in ev'ry corner of it, that I must fear to touch it. Oh, that Love shou'd rob me of so generous a Friend -- I mean, whom I cou'd wish mine -- Make him so,
I shall not hinder such a happy union. Nothing but you on Earth cou'd do it, Madam,
Assure your self I will not,
-- Here, my Lord, take your Letter, I beseech you, and own the obligation he design'd you -- 'twill be a good beginning of your Friendship --
-- No, Madam
I will not rob you of whatpresented to you: Besides, if ever you had any regard of my Passion; I cou'd wish, you wou'd keep it: For, I fear, it is the last you will ever be troubled with from me., Madam, when you read it; to think how faithful and how Passionate a Lover you have thrown away. It seems my Lord
you are at length grownof feigning a Passion; and wou'd now perswade me, that I am displeas'd with your pretended services: But, assure your self, my Lord, Be it real or counterfeit; it has already given me a very pretty entertainment. You will e're long I doubt not, Madam, be judge of its truth or falshood. -- In the mean time, Madam; enjoy your self, with theof your new Lover! perhaps they will prove your only satisfaction.
Madam
if this worthy Gentleman's Fate be so Rigorous; what severity has your Ladyship reserv'd for me! How often, I mean, how seldom may I be permitted to pay my Devotion to you in an Age? The seldomer the better
once more will satisfie for your whole Life. So,
this comes ofinquiring into a Man's own destiny.
Your Lordship
shall Command me in any thing. But one;
Mr.your Servant
you had best make use of my Coach to your own House. Adieu, Mr.
-- How strangely does Fortune now at last begin to treat me! I mean, how severely! since, 'tis the first most sensibleAffliction that ever touch'd me, to havefor my Rival. You,
whom, above all Men my Soul wou'd chuse for its dearest Companion in all things; but in a Mistress. I know the greatness of your mind; have seen a little of the sweetness of your Temper; have receiv'd an obligation from you this day, in delivering my Letter to, seal'd as I sent it, by that, from whom you had it. And, after all this, is it not hard, that I must own to you, I cannot be happy if you live? At least in your pretensions to! This, my Lord
is certainly the greatest of my Misfortunes, since, (give me leave to own this sacred truth to you!) your Lordship is the only Person among all Mankind, with whom I cou'd have contracted a most Religious Friendship: As, on the other side, That Charming Creature, created to our Misery, is she alone in whom Ibe happy, as in a Wife. O! Pardon me!
you must not; while I live:You must therefore force your happiness through me; as I will attempt mine from you. Tho' Heaven knows with what regret! To morrow, Sir,
I shall expect you on the backside ofHouse. The Field is near your Lodging, and not far from mine. Bring with you, two of your best Friends, as I will of mine; whom I beseech you to engage to be no farther Active, than to endeavour the escape of the survivor. For, (haply) we may not both fall. Nor either of us, I cou'd wish
but (ah, my Lord!) these are but wishes. No more
but thus I have contriv'd it, if you please: -- our Chairs shall wait us at convenient distance; and our Friends shall prevent the unseasonable kindness of our Servants. And now, in the mean time we'll pray for one another. And, if it be my Fate to fall by you; Heaven forgive you, in its sweetest Mercy! And, if from you () I meet my Death; Heav'n grant you happy life, here and hereafter;
What hour, my Lord? 'Tis light enough at four
be that the hour: If 'tis befitting your convenience, Sir. I shall most punctually observe your Lordships Commands, said, Till then, let us embrace, and, andas Friends,
ah! wou'd to Heav'n, my Lord, I might for ever thus clasp you, as my Soul's Heart!
Good morrow to your Lordship,
A happy one to my Dear and Honour'd Friend,
E're we begin this unfriendly dispute
let me endeavour to make an acknowledgement and return of theObligation you laid on me yesterday. -- I here declare, before these Gentlemen, our worthy Friends, that I am the Aggressour: That I provok'd you to seek my Life, to defend your own. I know your Circumstances with his Majesty are not so advantageous for you, as I cou'd wish: I am sensible, you refus'd to serve him with your interest, for taking off the Penal Laws and Test. Mine are quite otherwise: This Letter therefore,
is superscrib'd, whom Heav'n bless!
this of my Death will give a just account; as well as of the manner how I sought it. -- O! this, my Lord,
isGenerous: since 'tis Rival'd Love that makes us both contend for the most glorious prize. No more thy Friend but Rival think me then!
as I will look on thee; our Swords will else want points. Noas Friend my Lord?
No more,
is the word:
I was going, Mr.,
to ask you concerning his health. His Health, Madam!
pray Heaven, he has his life! What means this?
I'll say Amen to that Prayer always. But satisfie me, I beseech you, why is there a more particular necessity of it?
Avert it Heaven!
However,
'tis some comfort yet, that he first dispatch'd that Papist Bully; who else wou'd ha' Cut his Throat, with Pistols, Fuzees, Musquet, Blunderbusses, and all sorts of Fire-Arms.
No, no, Madam,
all the World knew my Lord too Generous to do any thing below the Character of the bravest. But, why, Mr.,
since you had but too just a suspicion of their intention; why did you not endeavour to prevent 'em in it? Alas, Madam,
nothing but Heaven or the King's Commands cou'd have hinder'd it. Nor cou'd the last haveobstructedtheir fatal Resolutions. O, most unfortunate of Womankind!
Who will endure to hear my hated name? Since, forsake two such brave Men are lost. My dear Daughter, and only Child
do not grieve so
immoderately! Siris yet alive, who
will make a better Husband forthan either of 'em; and him, I resolve
thou shalt marry to morrow; or I
profess, thou sha't not inherit one
hundred pence of my Estate.