Holla, ho, ho, ho,,
But oho, oho,, Wife,, Wife, where are you?
for
my Friends and Neighbours will so Jeer and Scoff at me, telling me I am but justly serv'd for my Jealousie, that I had rather be a Slave, and tug at an Oar, than endure the Reproaches I am sure to meet with.
'tis a Place where no one has lain in since a Parson of, who us'd to Study there;
'Twas in this Place,
that he made his Prognostication of the Three Blazing Stars, and foretold their Effect some Years after they were past.
Oh! Sir, just so would my treacherous false Wife flatter me, so would she Speak, and Act, as tho' she were all Obedience; but dear Friend (for so I am resolv'd hereafter to call you) have a care and be warn'd by me, they are Saints in their Looks, but Devils in their Hearts. Who would not think but this Lady of yours was all Goodness and Honesty? When at the same time, perhaps, her Heart is employ'd in thinking of her Lover.
Sir,
I have taken a Course to prevent my Wifes loving, for (although I doubt not her Virtue) I have always so strict an Eye over her, that since she was mine, she has never been in the Company of any, but I have been by. O happy Conduct!
Would I had taken that Course, I had never been brought to the Misery you see me in. But Sir,
Heaven forbid that I should harbour the least ill Thought of your Lady, or raise in you a jealous Fear of your Honour, for I believe if any Woman can be Virtuous she is, all I alledge, is that you cannot be too circumspect; and that when once they have their Liberty of going abroad, they know not how to stay at home; therefore as a Friend I advise you, beware how you take her out with you, lest sometime or other, tho' she speak not by Words, she may make shrewd Signs with her Eyes, and they are such Bablers they'll soon discover the Heart.
No Wonder indeed
that your Head is so full of Chimera's and Jealousies, when you bring Men into your House on purpose to teach you: A fine Lesson indeed you have heard, and no doubt but you'll put it in Practice, that is to say, go you abroad where you will and junket and take your Pleasure, but let your poor Wife be still kept at home: But I have been ever Obedient unto you, I will not begin now to withstand your Commands, be they what they will, you are my kind and loving Husband, and so I'll Esteem you; but let that Rake-hell, that Fire-brand of the Devil, that Wind-mill pated jealous Fool, who as he says, has lost his Wife by his Folly, and I am apt to believe it a Truth, let him I say,be turn'd out of my Doors, and made a laughing-stock to the World; or at least so confin'd to his Lodge, that I may never see him abroad, for I have Vow'd him Revenge for what I have heard.
Oh! That I had but a Heart, 'tis all I would wish, you shall never know how I'de use it.
No Husband
he has some further Design than what he pretends, and Heaven grant it be not to make us both Miserable: I wish it be not my Honour he seeks to ensnare, and under the Cloak of becoming your Friend, would be your greatest Enemy: I pray God he do not do something to raise your Suspicion, and make you grow jealous of me: I fear you have harbour'd a Viper in your warm Bosom, who as soon as he shall recover Strength will sting you to the Heart.
there is no such hazzard,
you need only pretend you are troubled with your old Distemper the Gout, and cause a Bed to be made for you in another Chamber, seeming so kind to your Wife, as that you would not disturb her Quiet. My better Angel
Alas!,
what Comfort can accrue unto me of all this? How shall I accomplish my Designs, when the old Man is lying in the very Room through which I must pass, and who every Night locks you up in your Chamber, and takes the Key with him? No matter
we will do well enough for that; do you pretend to be Ill, and go to your Bed, and when he has taken his good Night of you, slip on my Night-gown and come down to the Garden, and stand behind the great Barbary-bush, where I will appoint him to meet me, so shall he carry you in in my stead: Now that he may have no Suspicion I will be just behind the Door, so that as you come in, slip out of his Hands, and I will be ready to supply your Place: I need not tell you then how easy 'twill be for you to get to your Lover.
for,
there is a Friend of mine who lies above Stairs, that I would not for all I am worth should knowof our meeting;
the Devil, the Devil,
For nothing now,
but I was dreaming that your Friend, as you call him, knowing that I lay this Night alone, had cunningly Stole into the House, and was offering me Violence. No, no, poor Man
he is in a most lamentable Condition, for he has made such an Out-cry of a Devil, that I am raising my Servants to see what is the matter.
ah dear Devil, forgive me this Fault, and I will never commit the like again.
No,
nor did you see nothing about a quarter of an Hour ago? Not any thing,
for I was so wearied and harrass'd with watching all the last Night, and my Troubles had made me so heavy, that had a Cannon been fir'd in my Chamber,I believe it would hardly have wak'd me.
Nay Husband
I have as much cause to be thankful as you, for it has quite taken away the Pain in my Head.
now Sir, see that my Words the other Day are come to pass, and this(as you call him) has rais'd such Whimsies in your Head, that I must never expect one quiet Nights Rest so long as he stays in the Lodge. Heaven knows
I have not been out of the Chamber since I came last to Bed;
Why truly
not knowing you lay your self below here, I heard a whispering, and something else I need not Name, which gave me the Curiosity to come downand see who it was, little suspecting it was my Friend, for I both thought you and your Wife lay in the upper House. 'Tis very true
tho' to Night it seems, we lay both in this Lodge; therefore Sir take it as you please, I must search your Chamber;
are you not asham'd
to make my Disgrace and your own so Publick? For certainly this Man will bruit it over all the Country, your Wife is safe enough, fear not, and 'tis only your Jealousy which creates these false Imaginations.
she would not let me rest till I had got out of Bed; for says she, the Man who so much you Esteem, and think so Honest and Virtuous, has only made his Excuse to get to this Lodge, where no doubt he has his Concubine; forgive dear Friend
for I Name but her Words, and Women you know when once they harbour an ill Thought of a Man, are as hard to be broke of it, as when they love a Man, to be debarr'd of Enjoyment.
but
they will have their Fagaries and Fancies let usMen do or say what we will: You are in the right indeed, dear Friend,
therefore I hope you'll the sooner pardon this Fault: What you have said and done, I forgive with all my Heart,
but she I can never pardon, till she ask it her self, or that she shews a through Reconcilementby accepting my Bed, which is easier and fitter for her than that where she is.
come my dear Wife, since my Friend will be no otherwise satisfied for the Affront we have done him, let us for an Hour or Two exchange Beds.
I wonder not now
that you pretended so much Kindness to, 'twas that he might be the Pander to your loose Desires.
No
shall still keep the Place she has with me, who, I know, had she not been overperswaded with your alluring Tongue, and more powerful Gold, wouldnever have wrong'd so good a Mistress. No, I'll be Sworn would I not
and Heaven knows this is the first, and shall be the last time, therefore dear Madam, if I may find Favour in your Eyes, forgive us this Fault, and my diligent Service and Fidelity hereafter shall demonstrate, how sensible I am of my Offence, and how careful I will be for the future, of giving you the least Umbrage of Suspicion. It is not but that I look upon you
equally Guilty with that ungrateful Man; but I will keep you in my Service, that you may be a perpetual Memento to him of his Transgression: So rise both, I do forgive you;