Honest Man. Is this the Way to London?
No, Sir. You are out of your way.
How much?
Half a Mile.
Must I then go back again?
'Tis your best way. And, when you come to such a Place, turn on your Right Hand. Go on that way, and you can't go amiss.
Must I turn neither to the right Hand, nor the left?
Not at all. Go strait forwards.
I thank you heartily. I am much obliged to you. But, pray, how many miles do you reckon it thither?
Five Miles.
No more?
Half a Mile hence you will be in sight of the Town.
So much the better. It joys me already to think on't.
Boy. Take my Horse. Put him in the Stable. Take care of him. Rub him well. Give him some Oats. A whole Peck.
Sir, I shall take a special care of your Horse. Do not trouble your self about it.
Where is the Landlady?
What d' ye want, Sir?
Have you any thing to eat?
Yes, Sir.
What have ye?
Are you for Fowls, or for Butchers Meat?
What Fowls have ye? Let me see.
Look ye, Sir. Here's a good Pheasant. Those are very fat Partridges. If you want a Dish of Larks, here is Larks. If you had rather young Pigeons, there be choice ones.
No. I had rather have one of those Partridges. How much must I pay for't?
You must pay half a Crown for it, when 'tis dressed.
'Tis too much. You must take two shillings.
It cost me near upon what you bid me for it. Partridges are scarce at this time of the Year. 'Tis hard to get any at all.
Then let it be presently laid on the Spit. Make a good Sauce to it. And, pray, let it be done with all speed, for I am ready to starve.
Sir, you shall have it presently.
Are you alone, or have youCompany with ye?
I am alone.
Have you got a Room?
Not yet. I am but just come in. Pray, give orders that I may have a good Chamber.
Sir, you shall have a very neat Room, a good Bed, and clean Sheets.
Very well. But when the Maid has made the Bed, she must warm it well with a Pan full of Coals.
Sir, the Sheets are very dry, and it is now sweltry Weather.
'Tis no matter. I do it for my Health. Your Beds are Hackney Beds, and apt to be infected. Now the Heat draws out all the Malignancy of them.
Well, Sir, you shall have every thing done to your satisfaction.
Is my Supper ready?
'Twill be ready presently.
Then let the Cloth be laid. Bring me a Penny-roll. A Quart of Ale, and a Pint of Wine.
What Wine will ye please to have? White, or Claret?
Which is best?
They are both very good.
Draw me then a Pint of Claret, the best you have.
So I will.
This Wine is not natural. This is sophisticated Wine. I cannot drink it. It makes me sick already. Have you none better?
Sir, that Wine go's for the best in Town. You are the first that ever found fault with it. There's no mixture in the least, I assure you.
You are a pretty Man, to make me believe I have no skill in Wine. Bring me a bit of Cheese. And some Fruit, if you have any.
Sir, you shall have it presently.
Take away. Take care of my Things. Awake me to morrow by five a clock. Now I think on't, where is the Landlord?
He is at home.
Do's he understand French?
Very well, Sir.
Pray, tell him, I desire his company.
I shall be sure to tell him, Sir.
Stay a little.See if there be a Chamber-pot under the Bed. There is one. That's well. Remember to awake me to morrow by break of day.
Sir.
Who's there?
Tis I, Sir. Tis five a clock. It struck five just now. I am going to rise. Bid the Hostler to saddle my Horse. Bid him get it ready. Bring me some Water in a Bason, and a Towel withal.
Will ye be pleased to eat any thing before you go?
Yes, I could eat a couple of boiled Eggs. When you bring them, bring the Reckoning too. What's to pay?
There is so much. For the Partridge, half a Crown. A peny Roll. Two pence for Ale. A Pint of Wine, six Pence. The Fruit, three Pence. The Bed six Pence. In all, four Shillings.
And for my Horse?
That's a thing by it self. The Hostler will tell you.
Here, there's your Reckoning. And six Pence for you.
Sir, I humbly thank ye. I wish you a happy Journey.
Tell the Hostler, that I am ready, and bid him get my Horse out of the Stable. Well, honest Man, what must I pay for my Horse?
Sixteen pence, Sir.
Here's eighteen Pence, keep the Two-pence for your self.
I thank ye, Sir.
Have you, Madam, any Rooms to let?
Sir, I have one, two pair of Stairs.
Forwards, or backwards?
Backwards.
Will you be pleased to let me see it?
Yes, Sir, if you please to give your self the trouble to come up. This is a good Stair-case.
It is pretty lightsom.
Will you be pleased to step in, Sir. This is the Room. Tis a very fine Chamber, well furnished, and very convenient,There is a little Closet to put Things out of the way. Here is another larger, with a good light, and very fit for a Schollar. The Feather-bed is very good, and the Furniture very neat. Here you have a Table, a couple of Stands, and a Looking-glass. The Maid shall make clean your Shoos. Every Morning she shall bring you a Bason of Water, and give you from time to time such attendance, as you can reasonably expect.
So far, Madam, all is very well. But the Room is two Stories high. That's an Inconveniency.
'Tis according as People fancy. In my Judgment, the Air ought to be better and clearer, than in the first Story. I am sure of one thing, that here is a far better Prospect. Do but take a View, Sir, of that large extent of Country which is seen from hence.
I cannot say, Madam, but that the Room is convenient enough. The Rate is the thing we must now go upon. Therefore, pray, tell me the lowest.
How would you take it, Sir, By the Quarter, by the Month, or by the Week?
By the Week.
Then you must pay five Shillings a Week.
Indeed 'tis too much. But I won't be much out of the way, I offer you fairly four Shillings.
Tis too little. I have had six Shillings a Week for this Room. And I cannot part with it under five.
I'le tell you, Madam, what we shall do, if you please. We shall part the odd shilling.
Truly, Sir, you are too hard. D' ye intend to lie here to night?
If you please to get the Room ready.
That I will.
Then I'le go fetch my Things, and I shall be back again within an hour at farthest. But first I must know the Name of the Street.
The Street is called...
And what Sign is this that hangs here?
The Paradise.
A good Omen, I hope. I please my self with this lucky hit.
Sir, I come to fetch my Things away. I took a Chamber in. Let's see what I ow here.
Tis but a small matter. There's but ten Pence to pay.
Here, give me the rest. Do so much as call a Coach.
There's one over the way.
Coachman.
Sir.
Turn your Coach. Take in this Portmantle. Open the Door. Carry me to Paradise.
To Paradise, Sir. There is no Coach-way thither. And, to tell you the truth on't, I am not at all acquainted with that Road.
I believe ye.
But I know the way to Hell very well.
I don't question it.
If you please to go thither, 'tis at. I shall carry you thither with a full gallop. As we go along you may take a view of the Devil in, near.
God forbid, thou wretched Charon.Carry me to.
Tell me then the Name of the Street.
Go strait to the Garden. There I'le shew you what Place we must go to.
'Tis well enough. Sir, we are at the Garden. Which way must I go now?
Go into the Street which is just over against us. And, when I bid you stop, be sure to stop. Hold, hold, this is the Place. How much must thou have?
One Shilling.
Shillings run faster than Coaches in this Town.
Sir, you are very welcome.
Madam, I am your most humble Servant. Well! is all ready now?
The Maid is above imployed about your Room. I'le go and bid her make haste.
By no means, Madam. Don't give your self that trouble. I am in no haste. I can stay a little. Provided you will be troubled with my Company.
Pray, Sir, step then into this Parlour. Will you be pleased to sit down? Let us sit down, if you please. How long, Sir, have you been come to London?
I came last night about twelve a clock.
'Tis likely then that you came by Water.
From Dover I came Post as far as Gravesend, and from Gravesend by Water.
The Thames is very pleasant at this time of the Year.
So it is. The truth on't is, 'tis a very fine River. And I admired, as I came along, that infinite Number of Ships that rid upon the River as far as London-Bridge. You would take it, at a distance, for a great Forest.
'Tis an undoubted Argument of the great Trading of this Place.
'Tis a Gulf of Commerce. Every where you see scarce any thing but Store-houses, Shops, and Commodities.
, is the Gentleman's Chamber ready?
Yes, Madam, all is ready.
Carry up that Portmantle.
Madam, I wish you good night.
Sir, I wish you good rest.
What's your Name?
My Name is.
Then,, you must give your self the trouble to warm my Bed very well. Reach me those Slippers. Take my Shoos, and make 'em clean to night. For I intend to go out to morrow morning early. Be sure to bring me a Bason of Water, and a Towel.
The Towel hangs in that Corner.
That's very well. What time do you rise?
By break of day.
And your Mistress, what time do's she commonly rise?
At seven a clock.
Is she married, or no?
She is a Widow.
How long has she been so?
These two years.
What was her Husband?
A Sword-man.
Has he left any Estate?
He has left his Wife this House ready furnished, and a competent Estate in the Countrey, which she lives handsomly upon.
Has she any Children?
She had some.But they are all dead.
She seems to be a well-born Gentlewoman. And I look upon her as an ingenious Woman.
She is so, I assure ye; but her good Nature and Breeding go's beyond all.
I do not doubt it in the least, and I think my self happy to be under her Roof. But, hark ye,, is the House full of Lodgers?
There is now but one Room empty.
What Lodgers are they?
Very civil People.
How long have you been a Servant here?
Near upon five years.
'Tis a great while. But I forget my self. Pray, go fetch the Warming-pan. I'le go to bed e're it be long. For I did not sleep a wink all last night.
Sir, your Bed is warm enough. Have you any thing else to command me?
No, Sweet-heart. Do but tell me whereabouts is your convenient House.
You will find it in a back Yard.
That's enough. Good night t' ye.Remember, as soon as you are up to morrow morning, to bring me what I want.
I won't fail.
.
Sir.
Do you know an honest and good Washer-woman?
Sir, I know one that washes very well, and at a reasonable rate.
Pray, send for her. For my Linnen is almost all foul.
I'le step to her my self. She lives here hard by.
Bring her then along with you, if you can.
Sir, here is the Washer-woman.
Bid her come in. Good Woman, I have here a stock of foul Linnen. What shall I give you to wash it? You must be very reasonable. Otherwise I shall pitch upon another.
Sir, we must see the Pieces.And I shall tell you my Rates. A night-Shirt, is Two pence. A fine Shirt, six Pence. A Lace-Cravat, with Ruffles, four Pence. A plain Cravat, with Ruffles, Two-pence. The Socks, a Penny a Pair. And a Handkerchief, Half-peny. That is my lowest Rate.
Well, I am willing to give you what you ask. But I expect to have my Linnen very well washed. Pray, do it with great care, for I am a little nice in that particular.
Sir, you will have no cause to complain.
Tell the Pieces, and I shall set them down. See now whether I have the right Number. Whilst I read, do you tell.
'Tis all right.
Pray, see you tear nothing. But above all, take care you don't change my Linnen. You see how 'tis all marked.
Sir, trouble not your self in the least about it. All will be well on my side.
Very good, we shall quickly see what you mean by it.But, pray, when shall I expect my Linnen?
You shall have it Saturday-night at furthest.
Don't fail me then. I shall stay for it.
, has the Washer-woman brought my Linnen home?
Oh! dear Sir, I am loth to tell you of the Misfortune which is befaln you.
What d' ye mean?
That base Jade, your Washer-woman, has given us all the slip. She has carried away with her all the Linnen she could take and scrape. Yours is amongst all the rest.
Very well, now I am finely brought to bed. I am curiously put to it. Now I may go to bed without a Shift, and blow my Nose with my Fingers. I am undone, if I must buy a new stock of Linnen.
Sir, you sport your self ingeniously with your Loss. And I am much mistaken, if I don't take it more to heart than your own self.
Oh! the unlucky Jade, she knew what she meant, whenshe told me all would be well on her side. That Expression bred presently some Suspicion within me. But I deceived my self, when I went about to undeceive my self. However, I must take patience. Provided my Linnen be neither changed, nor torn, I am contented. Those two Things I strictly charged her with. When all comes to all, I save the Washing however. A Peny saved, is a Peny got.
Sir, I admire how cunningly you turn off the Point of your Misfortune. And you put me in mind of a great Artist; who, to save Candle, would never work in the Night.
When all is done,, I must think of providing my self with Linnen. Therefore you must direct me to some place or other.
Sir, you will find Seamstresse's Shops enough. Your business is only to cheapen as well as you can.
What d' ye want, Sir?
Lace-Cravats.
Here, Sir, take your choice, there you have several fashions.
But where be the Ruffles?
Here they are.
If you will be but reasonable, I shall take a couple of Cravats, with the Ruffles to 'em.
Sir, you shall find me as reasonable as any Seamstress in Town.
Shew me then a Cravat of another fashion, and yet fashionable too.
Here is a delicate one, and I think very fit for your turn.
Tell me your last word for these two Cravats, with the Ruffles.
Sir, you must give me three Pounds. The Lace is extraordinary fine. I cannot sell them under.
You exact upon me, Madam. What? thirty Shillings a Cravat and Ruffles. 'Tis an unreasonable Rate.
Sir, you don't know what they stand me in.
I dare say you would be lothI should know. Have you any good Night-shirts?
Sir, I have Shirts of several Prices.
Shew me some of the best, and the finest you have.
What d' ye think, Sir, of these? They are special ones, and of a fine length and breadth.
Are they long enough for me?
Long enough, I warrant you. And almost too wide.
Methinks the Cloth is not very fine.
Fine enough, Sir, for Night-shirts.
Tell me then your Price.
They are eight Shillings a Piece.
Indeed you are too dear. You exact. You ask too much for your Commodities.
Sir, you are under a Mistake. I ask you within compass. Sure you will allow one some Profit to live by.
'Tis but reasonable.
I want besides, Sleeves, Socks, Handkerchiefs, Night-Caps. Shew me some, if you please
Here, Sir, delicate Sleevesof pure Cloth.
But of a mad Price without doubt.
Eight Shillings a pair, and no more.
Really I was afraid you would have said twelve. Let me see those Socks. I fear they are too little for me. Have you none bigger?
These, Sir, will fit you to a hair's breadth.
What's the Price?
Six pence a Pair.
And these Handkerchiefs?
Two Shillings a Piece.
Lay 'em aside. These Caps, Madam, how much do you sell 'em?
Half a Crown is the Price.
Very good. Now let us see what the whole will amount to, by my Reckoning. For the two Lace-Cravats and Ruffles I'le give you fifty Shillings. Not a Sous more, Mistress. For four Night-shirts, at six Shillings a piece at the most, four and twenty Shillings. Fifty and twenty four, is three-score and fourteen Shillings, which is (I think) three Pounds fourteen Shillings.
Right. But all this while, Sir, you reckon without your Host.
'Tis no matter. Let us proceed. So the two Cravats, Ruffles, and Night-shirts come to three Pounds fourteen Shillings. Let us put by the three Pounds, and take up the Shillings.
Now I must reckon for the Socks, Handkerchiefs, and Night-caps.
Six pair of Socks, at Six-pence a pair, come to three Shillings. Six Handkerchiefs, at Twenty-pence a piece, make up ten Shillings. And three Night-caps, at two Shillings a piece, amount to six Shillings. Fourteen and three is seventeen, seventeen and ten is seven and twenty, seven and twenty and six is three and thirty. Three and thirty Shillings is one Pound thirteen Shillings. To which add the three Pounds, and the whole amounts just to four Pounds thirteen Shillings. Is not it right, Madam?
Sir, 'tis right at your own Rates, but that won't do my business. You must give me, in a word, five Pounds. It is a compleat Sum.
No, Madam.But, to let you see how reasonable I am, I am willing to give you four Pounds fifteen Shillings.
Upon my word, 'tis too little. And yet I must yield to it against the grain, that I may get your Custom. Take 'em, Sir, and remember that you have 'em Dog-cheap.
Tell that Mony, Madam, and remember that you have almost ruined me.
God forbid. I should be very sorry for't. Sir, shall I send these Things to your Lodgings?
I am going strait home. If you please to send any body with them, we shall go together.
Here's my Apprentice, that shall wait upon ye.
Very well. Follow me, Sweet-heart.
Honest Man, I have occasion for a new Sute of Clothes. But I must have it very neat, and fashionable.
Will you have it of Cloth, or Stuff?
I am willing to have it of Cloth. The Winter draws near, and English Cloth is much in the vogue.
Sir, shall I shew you some Patterns?
Have you any about you?
Yes, Sir. Pray, see which you like best. If you be for a fine Cloth, and a good Colour, this will do your Business.
What's the Price of this Cloth?
Eighteen Shillings a Yard.
What d' ye call a Yard?
A Measure three foot long, which is the common Measure in England. 'Tis less than the French Ell by one part in five. That is, there must be a Yard and a quarter, to make up a French Ell.
At this rate, how many Yards must I have for a Sute?
Sir, for a person of your Pitch, there must be no less than three Yards.
Eighteen and eighteen is thirty six, and eighteen to that, is just four and fifty. So the Cloth alone will stand me in four and fifty Shillings.'Tis a great deal of Money. But why must I have three Yards? In France I never took above two Ells of Cloth for a Sute.
Sir, they wear now their Coats very wide at the Pockets, and that takes up a great deal of Cloth.
Then we must take up three Yards. Where lives your Draper?
Here hard by, in.
Stay a little, and I shall go along with you.
Very well, Sir.
Master ... shew us some Cloth.
Will you have it fine?
The Gentleman likes this Pattern. Let's see the Piece.
This Cloth is very fine indeed, and lasting. Here's the Piece.
The Cloth is well enough. Do but tell us the Price.
Sir, 'tis very well worth twenty Shillings a Yard. But, to be short with ye, I will have but eighteen. That's the Price on't, I will not bate a Farthing.
You must give it for sixteen.
Sir, I should lose by it at that Rate.That is not the way to live. I assure you, at the rate I offer it for, I get but one Shilling a Yard. That's little enough.
I wonder how Tradesmen get Estates. By their Discourse, they are most an end Losers. If they get, 'tis so small a matter, that it is scarce worth their while to keep Shop.
Alas! Sir, Trading is come to nothing. It is not now as it has been formerly.
Well, well. We understand pretty well your meaning. Measure me three Yards of this Cloth. And be sure to give good Measure, though it were but for the Taylor's Profit. Tell that Money. I take it to be right.
It is so. Sir, I thank ye. I hope you will come hither another time.
Sure enough I shall come, either with Thanks, or Reproaches. Tis according as the Cloth shall prove.
Sir, I am so well satisfied with the goodness of the Cloth, that I have no cause in the least to fear your Complaints.
I wish it be so.
Honest Man you must come back along with me, to take my Measure.
What Lining, Sir, will you have?
I must have the Coat lined with a good Silk.
Must I find it for ye.
You shall find the Lining, and all the rest. I leave all to your Discretion. Do as you shall think fit. When you bring home my Sute, you shall have your Money. But you must be reasonable.
Sir, I shall make it my business to please you upon all accounts. But, to be the more sure of it, I should be glad to know first what sort of Button you would have.
Plain Silk-buttons.
You are not for a Vest.
No. I never wear any.
When must you have your Sute, Sir?
As soon as possible. You see what case I am in. I have but this travelling-Sute.
Sir, you shall have it two days hence.
Take three days rather than fail.
Sir, I dare undertake to finish it in two days.
Do then, and be as good as your word.
This is not all to have a Coat and Breeches. I must, besides, have a Hat, a Perwig, Gloves, Shoos, and Stockings. Thus I shall quickly see my Money at an end.
Sir, I want a Hat. Be so kind as to shew me the best you have in your Shop.
What sort, Sir? Will you have a French, or an English Hat?
Let me see a good English Beaver.
Sir, I have as good as any is in Town.
Let's see. This is too big for me. That is not fine enough.
Here is one, Sir, that I dare say will fit ye. Pray, try it.
Do's it become me well? Methinks the Brims are a little too narrow. The Crown is handsom enough. But I don't find it well wrought.
Believe me, Sir, 'tis a very good Hat, it fits you very well, and will do you a deal of service.
What d' ye ask for't?
Sir, that Hat is worth three Pounds. But you shall have it for five and fifty Shillings.
I will not make many words with ye. I offer you fifty Shillings. See, if you can afford it at that rate For my part, I'le give no more.
Truly, Sir, 'tis too little. Take it for four and fifty.
What I said is said. I neither go backwards nor forwards.
Then you must ow me four Shillings.
To pay, when I shall think fit.
Have you any Perwigs to sell?
Yes, Sir, here is a pretty Stock of Perwigs.
Shew me a light one, well made, and of a good strong Hair.
Will you have it, Sir, very long?
Of a middle Size.
Sir, I think this Perwig will go near to please ye.
Tis something too long, methinks. The Curl is not good. Neither do I find it thick enough of Hair. And, pray, would you make me believe this to be a good Hair?
Tis as good Hair as any is in England. Upon my word, I pay dear for it. Do but handle 'em a little, 'tis a strong Hair. As for the Curl, there is no better Curl. If you find the Perwig too thin of Hair, that may be easily helped.
But don't you find it your self somewhat too long?
Far from that, Sir, for a person of your presence, I should rather think it too short.
Well. What's the Price of it?
Sir, you shall have it for three Pounds.
I hope, my Friend, to have it cheaper than so.
Sir, I can bate no great matter of it. The Perwig is a good and genteel Perwig, and the Price very reasonable.
If I should give ye fifty Shillings for it, I should think it very well paid. Perwigs are not now so dear as they have been.
Sir, here is one of fifty Shillings. Do but see the difference.
This is a Perwig worth about five and thirty. I should be loth to give any more for it. To make no more words, shall I tell you fifty Shillings for the other?
If you please, Sir, to tell me eight and fifty Shillings, you shall have it.
I find you and I are not like to clap up a Bargain. We keep too great a distance.
Take it then for five and fifty. I can bate nothing on't.
If it be so, I take my leave of you. I shall try somewhere else.
Sir, Sir. Consider well the goodness of this Perwig. Assure your self, that you will find none better of that Price any where else. Take it for half a Crown more.
Not a Farthing more. I am fully resolved upon it.
Upon my word, you have it too cheap.
Sir, have you very good Gloves?
What Gloves, Sir, will you please to have?
Shew me some Doe-skin Gloves trimmed, if you have any.
Sir, here be choice ones. Try these on. I think they will fit ye.
No, they are too little. Shew me that pair. They are somewhat too big.
What d' ye think of these?
I fancy these will fit me. But are they well sowed?
Very well, Sir.
What must you have for 'em?
Six Shillings.
I'le give ye five.
Six-pence more, if you please.
No, 'tis enough.
Take 'em.
I Lack a pair of Silk-Stockings. Shew me a good pair.
Will you have 'em knit, or woven?
I would have a good pair of knit Stockings.
What Colour, Sir?
Take this Pattern, and match it as well as you can.
Sir, I found what you look for. There's your Cloth mighty well matched. And you never saw better Stockings than these are. They are of very good Silk, and well knit.
How much must you have for 'em?
The lowest Price is eighteen Shillings.
Pray, shew me a good pair of Thread Stirrup-stockins.
Sir, here are several pair, take your choice.
How much a pair?
Three Shillings.I must then give you twenty Shillings for both pair. Tis a Shilling too cheap.
Have you any Shoos fit for me?
Sir, we shall see, if you please to sit down but a minute.
I want a pair of good strong Shoos. For 'tis extream dirty.
Sir, here is a pair, that I think will fit ye.
Let's try it. Fy upon't, they are a great deal too little, they pinch me horribly.
Then I must look for another pair. What d' ye think of these, Sir?
Fy, fy, this is a clownish Shoo. See what a Heel that is. I must have a Heel well made, and a Shoo with a double Sole well beaten.
Sir, if you please to stay but till to morrow about this time, I shall get you a good pair of Shoos, that you will be pleased with.
How much must I pay for 'em?
If you will have a good, strong, and lasting pair of Shoos, 'twill cost you five Shillings.
Well. Take my measure. If I like 'em, we shan't disagree.
Where is your Dwelling, Sir?
Give me some Paper, with a Pen, and Ink, and I shall leave you my Direction. To morrow I shall expect you in the Evening. Do not fail me.
Sir, I shall wait on you without fail.
Madam, I come to beg your Advice. I can't imagine how I shall live in this Town. I don't love to eat alone. And how can I possibly avoid it, unless I board somewhere? Will you be so kind, Madam, as to admit me at your Table? I shall content you very well.
Sir, I have two Boarders already that lodge here, a Gentleman and his Wife. If you please to come in for one, you will be very welcome.
'Twill be a great Satisfaction to me.Make, if you please, your Proposals.
Sir, I'le ask you but ten Shillings a Week.
Then, Madam, I must have my Linnen washed into the Bargain.
Washing is a thing by it self. We do not wash at home.
Then I hope you will furnish me with Candles.
That I will. I shall allow you every Week a Pound of Candles. But you must know, that in this Town we commonly make but one good Meal a Day. I don't know how you will like that way of living.
If that be the way, I must use my self to it.
If you be for a Breakfast, you may have new Butter, and sometimes a Porrenger of Broth, if you like it. At Dinner we commonly have a Dish or two of good Meat. As for Supper, here we make but very light Suppers. And it agrees best with us in point of Health.
I am, Madam, no great Eater, nor a Man very hard to please. Tis true, that Supper in France is a regular Meal. But, 'tis possible, I shall make shift without it in this Country.I must try, I must run the Hazard of it. And, if you please, to morrow we shall begin.
What Dish is that, Madam?
This is an English Pudding. Will you be pleased to tast on't?
By all means, Madam. Truly, 'tis not unpleasant. But I fear it is heavy to the Stomach.
Sir, I confess this is a Dish that do's not so presently agree with French Palates. But the generality of them do in time grow in love with it.
For my part, I am a great Admirer of this Beef. Tis so good, so very juicy.
Come, Sir, you don't eat.
Madam, I eat with a very good Stomach. See what a Breach I made to this piece of Beef.
Much good may it d' ye. I love to see people eat, when they are at Table. That provokes my Appetite, and makes me have a good opinion of the Meat.
, give me some Drink.My service t' ye, Madam.
Your Servant, Sir. How d' ye like our small Beer?
Tis small indeed, but palatable enough.
, bring the Capon.
This Capon looks very well. It seems to me to be fat.
I take it too to be very tender. Shall I help you, Sir, to a Wing, or a Leg?
Give me leave, Madam, to help my self, rather than put you to that trouble.
What d' ye think now of the Capon, Sir? Do you like it?
Indeed, 'tis admirable good.
Pray, Sir, do not spare it. Remember our light Suppers. You must eat, not only to satisfy, but also to prevent Hunger.
Madam, I am already become an Englishman. I declare my self against Suppers from this very time. And I have eaten so plentifully, that I don't think Hunger will come upon me in 24 hours
, bring the Fruit.
Here it is, Madam.
Take away this Dish, and change Plates. Lay the Fruit upon the Table. Sir, I don't know whether you love Cheese, or no.
Nothing, Madam, comes amiss to me.
Here's such Fruits as the Season affords. Tast some of these Pippins. They are pretty good in this Countrey. If you like Walnuts better, there is some.
Truly, I am weary of eating. However I will tast a little of this Fruit.
Is Master ... at home?
Yes, Sir, he is at home. No, Sir, he is not within.
How long has he been gone out?
He is but just gone out. He went out this Morning. He has been gone out this hour.
Did he leave word when he should come home?
He said nothing when he went out.He left word, that he should be back again within an hour. If you will give your self the Trouble to come again, 'tis likely you will find him at home.
Pray, tell him, that I was here to wait upon him. Tell him, that I shall call upon him another time. Desire him, from me, to be so kind, as to call at my Lodging. I have something of consequence to tell him. If I can possibly, I shall call here again an hour hence. If he come before me, desire him to stay within doors.
Shall I crave your Name, Sir?
My Name is ...
Sir, I won't fail to tell him.
Well, Sweet-heart, is the Gentleman come home?
Yes, Sir, he is in his Chamber.
The first, or second pair of Stairs?
The second.
Forwards, or backwards?
Backwards.
Is he alone? Has he Company with him?
He is alone.
So much the better. I am glad of it.
Oh! my dear Friend, Iam very much obliged to you for this Favour. I am overjoy'd to see you.
And I am no less joyful, that I met you. Do you know that I was here about an hour since?
The Maid of the House told me on't. Therefore I waited for your Return with great Impatiency. Well! our dear Friend, what shall we do? Will you be pleased to sit down, and I shall call for something?
Nay, let us rather go and take a Walk. It is fine Weather now. And, if you please, after our Walk, we shall go somewhere, and drink a Glass of Wine.
It shall be as you please.
is a strange Country. See what a Fog there is abroad. It puts me in mind of the Egyptian Darkness. One is like to be lost in it. Let's have a Saw, and we will saw it.
The Truth on't is, 'tis a dismal Fog.And it is so very thick, that I don't remember I ever saw the like in England.
Ay. But you cannot deny me, that ever since the beginning of Winter few Days went over our Heads without some Mist or other, Morning or Evening.
Tis true. And I confess, the Sun is pretty rare here in Winter-time.
'Tis at least ten Days since the last time I saw it. Do's it appear? 'tis but a transient Appearance for a moment.
He imitates those Monarchs of the East, who, to make themselves to be the more respected by their People, appear but seldom abroad. Don't you know the Story that go's about, of a Spanish Embassadour, who was sent to KingI. at his first coming to the Crown of England? Tis said, he was here a whole Month, and went away, not having had so much as once a sight of the Sun all that while. At his departure he desired such Courtiers as waited on him to Ship-board, to remember his most humble Service to the King their Master, and to the Sun when they should chance to see it.
That was a pretty Joke indeed.
Nay, in the very Summer 'tis no common Thing here to see a clear and serene Sky.
What should be the reason of that?
The Sea is the Cause of it, from whence the Sun draws thick Vapours, which condensing themselves into Clouds, keep us so often from the sight of that glorious Body.
Thus from the Premises we may draw this general Conclusion, that the Air of England is gross and thick; that the Weather here is commonly over-cast, gloomy, and melancholy; subject to Rain, and Fogs, in Winter especially. So that, when it is cold Weather in England, it is not (as in Continents) a hard Frost, but for the most part a raw kind of Cold, not wholesom to be sure.
This is not all. There is another Inconveniency in the Weather here, I mean its Changeableness.
I'le tell you thereupon an Observation, which I lately made. In the space of 24 hours, there hapned to be four sorts of Weather, which had very well suted the four Seasons of the Year. The Morning-weather had been proper for a Spring-day. Towards Noon it was hot enough for an England Summer. About Evening the Sky was over-cast, as it uses to be in Autumn. And in the Night there fell a very cold Rain.
I confess, I made sometimes that Observation my self, but this is such a Thing as happens but seldom.
But don't you find however, that one is very apt to catch Cold here, especially in Winter. This doubtless does proceed from the Changeableness of the Weather.
'Tis true, Colds are very rife in this Country. Nay, the Consequences of it prove sometimes fatal to tender Constitutions.
Don't you believe the Consumption do's often proceed from thence?
The Thing is likely enough. And to prevent that mortal Disease, 'tis good to keep his Breast chiefly, the Head, and the Feet warm.
Methinks Feavers are not altogether so common here, as in France.
No more they are not. And therefore hard Drinking is the less dangerous here.
Ay. But 'tis said on the other side, that there is more danger in the secret Commerce with Woman-kind.
Therefore look to your hits.
Hitherto I must confess we have made the worst of England.It behoves us to speak within bounds, and for me to tell you that, though this Country be something troubled with Rain, and cloudy Weather, yet those Disadvantages are highly countervailed by the Sweetness and Comforts of it. Whilst the Sun scorches the Plants, and the Inhabitants of the Southern Country's, by the reflexion of its Beams, it do's but warm England by a moderate Heat, which makes it the more plentiful in Corn and Pasturage. The Noise of Thunder is but seldom heard here, and the Heavens darting of Thunder-bolts is a Thing unfrequent in this Country. Hail is not fatal here to Plants, as elsewhere. And, instead of those impetuous Showrs of Rain, which often drown the fairest Hopes of the Husbandman in hot Climes, here is commonly nothing but small Rain to be seen. Admirable is besides the Sweetness of this Country, in that it is not subject to Hurricanes, nor Earthquakes; that it do's not breed many venomous Beasts; and that the Cattel feed Day and Night in the open Field, free from any fear of the Wolf.
Is it really true, that there are no Wolves in England?
Tis true, Historians tell us there is none. Nay, there are those who attribute it to a peculiar Vertue of the English Air, as if it were mortal to that Creature. Others tell us more probably, that England was unpeopled of Wolves by the Care of one of its Kings; who by a happy Contrivance exchanged the Tribute paid him in Gold and Silver by the Welsh for a yearly Tribute of 300 Wolves Skins. Which made that People (as History tells us) so extream industrious and active in Wolf-hunting, that they cleared the Country from those noxious Beasts, and thereby eased themselves of their burdensom Tribute. For my part, I am apt to think, that the Race of English Wolves might be in a manner extinct by this means. However they were not so totally routed, but that there are some now and then to be seen. The Sight is rare, I confess, and England being an open Country, is the more unfit to shelter such a Creature. And so let us resume the thread of our Discourse.
What think ye, Friend, of the last Winter?
It was pretty mild. The Frost do's not last long here.
And yet England lies North of France, London being nearer the Pole than Paris, by four Degrees. However 'tis certain, that Winters are milder here.
How comes that to pass?
It happens so by reason of the warm Vapours that arise from the Sea, whereby the Rigour of the Season is allay'd.
The truth is, England is a very temperate Country.
It is so very temperate, that whilst the Winter mortifies the vegetable and sensitive Creatures in the Northern Regions, here we see frequently the Fields cloathed with green Grass, as in the Spring. You cannot but remember so many fine Days we have had in the Winter, amidst the gloomy Days, the Fogs, and Rain of that Season.
I confess, 'tis an happy Result of the Uncertainty of English Weather.
And yet there happens too sometimes Extremities both of Heat and Cold. But they are look'd upon here as Irregularities.
Pray, tell me, whether or no the Winter was very severe here two Years ago?
It was so very sharp and bitter, that the Thames, notwithstanding the Tide coming in and going out, was for a long time buried under its Flakes of Ice. So that both Carts and Coaches went over it. Nay, there was kept for some time a Fair, where one could hardly go through for the Crowd. And, which is more wonderful, a little before the Thaw, there was a whole Ox rosted towards.
I fancy, the Cold went then (if ever) through the thin Walls of London Houses.
You speak of a Winter that was a Prodigy all over Europe, both as to the Sharpness and Length thereof. But you may assure your self, that the English came off as well at least as any Nation. He that is rich is warm enough, you know.
I Admire at their Buildings in England. Here they raise Houses three Stories high, and two Rooms of a Floor, besides the Cellarage, upon Walls of the thickness only of a Brick and a half.
That's enough for Houses which are to stand but forty or fifty years at the most; and for a Country which does not require thick Walls, to keep off either Heat or Cold.
Ay. But, in case of an excessive Heat or Cold, how can those Walls withstand it?
I must confess, that when those Extremities are of long continuance, and either the Cold or the Heat has pierced the Walls, it proves very troublesom and uneasy. But we talk here of an extraordinary Case. You know, that in every Country they build according to the Temperature of the Air of that Country.
I grant it.
For my part, I admire the Genius of the English in their modern Buildings. And it is really a Thing worthy your Admiration at London, to see Houses built upon a little spot of Ground, so neat, and so convenient.
The Truth is, they found out here the right way of Building. But nothing humours me so much as the Convenience of Closets, which they have in their Rooms.
However I cannot be reconciled with their common Fewel, the Sea-coals. So noisom it is by the gross Vapours it casts forth, which stick not only to Houshold-goods and Clothes, but to the very Hands and Face.
Great are the Conveniencies of this very Fewel which you blame. First, it makes a Fire much hotter than Wood do's. Secondly, a Sea-coal Fire is much more lasting, because those Coals are a great deal more compact than Wood is. Thirdly, there is moreover this Advantage in Sea-coals, especially in a great City, that it is to be had at a cheap rate. Insomuch that for a small matter one may keep at London a constant Fire. And I make notthe least doubt, but that when it is nipping cold, the common sort of People atwould be glad, could they compass it, to change Fewel with the Londoners.
Is not there, besides those Sea-coals, another sort of Coals, which is used amongst the Nobility and Gentry of the Land?
You mean Scotch-Coals, which is altogether massive, and makes as clear a Fire as Wood it self. You cannot but know, that they burn here likewise a good deal of Wood. Nay, there are some Countries in England, where they scarce burn any Thing else.
You have hinted to me before, that England was a plentiful Country of Corn and Grass.
So it is.
I confess there is good Bread, and good Meat, and both of them even at London, at very reasonable Rates.
This is the Wonder of it, that Provisions should be commonly so cheap in so vast, so populous, and so rich a place as this City is.I leave you to think how cheap they live in the Country, but especially in Places remote from this Gulf. But, to insist upon Particulars, where is there better Beef to be had, than is in England?
It is admirable indeed. Tis the Partridge of England. And I could wish that Mutton were as good in its kind.
You must know, Friend, how to distinguish in this case. The great Mutton is commonly course, and is not for a sweet Tooth. But the small Mutton (or rather the middle size) such as feeds in dry Pastures, is very palatable. Veal and Lamb are likewise very good. And, as for Venison, England has an infinite Number of Parks and Warrens; those peopled with Deer, these swarming with Rabbets. There is also abundance of Fowls, which are not generally so delicious to the Taste, as those in France. But some sort there is very good.
Are not Fruits waterish here?
When the Season proves rainy.
What Fish do they eat here?
Here they have all sorts of Fish that the Sea, Ponds, and Rivers can afford. But perhaps you will say 'tis waterish.
You are a Wag.
As for Drink, shew me a Country in Europe, that has more Variety.
You make me mad, when you talk of English Drink. 'Tis nothing but boiled Water. Tell me of Wine, that admirable Liquor which cheers up the Heart of Man.
I see I must first shake off from your Mind those Prejudices you have against Beer. And so you will so much the more easily be weaned from that conceited opinion you have of Wine. In order to which, you must know, that in England they make all sorts of Beer, both small and strong.
Is there any that hath the quick taste and strength of Wine?
Pray, let me go on. The small Beer is commonly drunk at Meals, because it is cooling, and apt to quench ones Thirst. Nay, it is very proper Drink for French People. 'Tis good sometimes to mix Water with Wine.
I understand ye.
The strong is either Beer, or Ale. Beer is made with Hops. It has a strong and pungent Taste, and will keep several Years. Whereas Ale, being made without Hops, is sweet, and do's not keep. Therefore 'tis usually mingled with the other. And that is the common sort of Drink in England.
I would fain know, whether this Drink can be so strong as to make one drunk.
You may see Instances of it daily amongst the common sort of People.
What? Wou'd you make me believe that they make themselves drunk with Beer? It must be with Wine, or Brandy.
Tis an easy thing to convince ye of what I say to you. But let us lay aside those common sorts of Drink, and let me tell you that in England they make Beer even stronger than Wine. There is in your Country a Person of good quality, who knows it by Experience. Nay, there is Beer to be had, which burns like Brandy, and flies up as quick into the Head.
You tell me here many Things that I was ignorant of. Meanwhile you put me in mind of an Account I had not long since in France. That here is a sort of bottled Beer, which makes sometimes a sportfult Splutter. I was told, that it blows up now and then the Cork into the Air with a great noise, and then gets out of its Prison with so much Impetuousness, that the Spectatours are at the same time amazed at, and diverted with it.
Nay, sometimes it do's more than so. For, when it is in the height of Fermentation, if it wants Air, 'twill break the Bottle, and make way through the same. And you know what strong Bottles they have in this Country.
Then sure the Beer must needs be very strong.
Ordinary Ale will do that in Summer-time, when it is bottled, before it has done working.
Well, I conceive, that Beer and Ale, good or bad, is the common Drink in England. Pray, tell me, what other Liquours they have here.
Here they make great plenty of Cider, but chiefly in the Country.The best comes from, which is very much esteemed, and bears at London the same Price as French Wines, to wit, twelve Pence a Bottle. But I forgot to tell you, that as you have in France a hundred ways to dress your Victuals, so we are, near upon the matter, as full of Variety in our Drinks. It were a hard matter for me to name you but half on't. Only I shall tell you, that, as they have not the same degree of Strength, so they differ likewise in their Taste, according to the several Ingredients they consist of. Nay, there is some made Physical, and good for several Diseases. But, besides Beer and Cider, you must know this Country affords a great deal of Mead; and that in private Families they make Currans and Gooseberry-wine, two sorts of Fruit this Country is very plentiful of.
As for Wines, 'tis true the Sun is not hot enough in England, to supply it with that sort of Liquor. Not, but that there grow sometimes very good Grapes. But, this Country being so conveniently surrounded with the Sea, here is brought not only anincredible Quantity of your French Wines, but also the most delicious Wines of Italy, Spain, Portugal, and Madera Islands. More than that, the English go as far as the Canary Islands, to make Provision of Canary-Wines, whereof there is more drunk in England than in all Europe besides. Wines they have, even from Greece and Smyrna, for Varieties-sake. And, as for German Wines, what more common than Rhenish, or Mosella? So you may see, that England do's not fare the worse for bearing no Wine of its own. On the contrary, 'tis more to be feared, that an excessive drinking of that Liquor will do it a Prejudice.
You must grant me however, that Wine is best at the Spring. There it is natural, and cheaper to be sure.
Tis true, in France you drink it at the first hand. But, set aside French Wines, England and France are upon the same terms. Outlandish Wines are as great Strangers to France as to England.
In France they drink but little of outlandish Wine.They have Wine enough of their own.
Say what you will, Men are pleased with Variety; but here lies the matter, it is chargeable. Whereas the English Nation, being rich, spare for nothing, when they mean to enjoy themselves. You think it a great Advantage to drink Wine upon the Place where it grows. But you must undeceive your self, as to strong-bodied Wine. For 'tis a certain Truth, that such Wines drink far better in England than where they grow. The Sea refines 'em, and makes 'em more palatable.
I hear the English Vintners refines 'em too most ingeniously, and that they have a great Gift that way.
There is doubtless too much
of that true, and it is a grievous
thing.
 However, this Abuse is not so
universal, but that one may have
plenty of good natural Wine.
 I could tell you moreover of an
infinite Number of Cordial Drinks
which are made in England, but
that it is time to put a Period to
this present Discourse.
 Another time we shall speak of
the Use of Brandy, Coffee, Tee,
Chocolate, and Tobacco, which
are so commonly used in England.