Your Worship is wellcome into the Country, you have been kind to us this time, and made more hast down then we expected, we never wanted the Gentlemen to live amongst us more than now, for all our Comodities lie upon our hands, we can vent nothing, we must be forc'd to Eat what God hath sent us, in our own Families, if we can sell as much as will pay Taxes, it is all we can expect or hope for, God help the poor Farmers.
God help us poor Farmers indeed, I am glad to see your Worship well, I must depend on your Forbearance this year, or else my poor Family must be ruined, I thank God I can pay you in stock, if you'll take Cattle and Sheep, but I can get no Money for them, unless I will sell to great Loss.
How do you good Neighbors, I am glad to see you both well, how does your good Families, I thank you for your kindness in coming to see me, and bidding me so heartily wellcome into the Country, but I am sorry to hear such dismal Complaints of the Market, how shall the Landlord live at this rate, if he can have no Rents? especially we that spend so much Money in, in the Service of our Country.
If Money be so scarce in the Country, I doubt we shall have but a bad Harvest next Term in.
Come Gentelmen take Courage, providence is sufficient for all, God send us good Success in, and, and we shall recover from these misfortunes again, we are happy that we can enjoy that little we have in Peace and Quietness. It is a great Blessing to us, thatis not made the Seat of War, that we have not a standing Army in the Nation, and the Souldiers quartered in our houses, and that we can preserve our goods from Plunder, and our Wifes and Daughters from Rape and Violence.
In troth Sir, you say right, for I shall never forget the late troublesome times, when we could call nothing our own, and could neither keep our Wifes, our Daughters, our Money, or our goods to our selves: God be praised that little we have at present, we quietly enjoy; but pray Master how long shall we do so? What is the meaning of these disputes between the L--ds and C--ns, we begin to think our selves fine Folks in the Country, when those that should Govern begin to appeal to us; but for our parts you might as well have kept your Proceedings and Resolutions to your selves, as sent them down to us, for we learn nothing by them, but that our Neighbours are going together by the Ears
How so, I am sorry for that, Neighbor, they were sent down with another intent, that you might be Judges of the reasonableness of our Proceedings.
That's well contriv'd indeed, we send you up to Judge for us, because it is impossible for us all to meet and Judge for our selves, and you send your Proceedings down to us, that we may Judge of our Judges, we appeal to you as the wise Men of our Nation, and you appeal to us, as if you had no Wisdom at all; pray Master pardon me, if I am too bold, but if this be the way of it, we had as good Judge for our selves at first, and never give you the trouble to go to.
I am so far from being offended with you for this Freedom that I am well enough pleased with it, for I assure you I am one that was always against perplexing the People's heads with Politicks and News, or Printing so much as the Votes of the House.
I wish all the Parliament Men were of your mind, for I can hardly get a Labourer or Plowman but they will beRunning to the next Town to hear the news, and then they come home with some dismall Story or other, which puts them so out of humour, that they cannot speak nor whistle to the Oxen for two or three days, and perhaps a month after they begin to understand the meaning of the news better, and what they at first apprehended to our prejudice, appears to be for the publick advantage: So we are like to be rich, whilst you are Laying heavy Taxes on us above, and at the same time sending down printed papers to confound the brains of our workmen, and draw them away from helping us to get money to pay them;
Really Sir, this honest Freeholder Speaks a great deal of truth, for I am sure I have lost more in my way of Trading by my Prentices running to the Coffee-houses to read the News, than by all the Taxes of the Late Reign, and yet there was no reason to Complain of the smallness of them neither;
No, in my Conscience; but Sir, these printed papers have made us all mad, I can never go to the Market, but I meet with some Rascallions or other, that assaults me with hard words about my Landlord; Your master is a brave man (say they) to take bribes from, and to sacrifice his Country to Popery and Slavery; and when I ask them what they mean; who puts those strange Notions into their heads? They presently pull out a paper and shew me your name in Print, and a great many more, who they say have conspir'd together to Ruin their Country; and if I happen to speak one word in your defence, if I tell them you have always been a Patriot of your Country, and all your Ancestors before you, If I tell them you have a great Estate, a fine Lady, many hopeful Children and the like, and can any Man think that you can be Bribed to sell them all to Popery, and French Dragoons? they will not hearken at all, but are ready to knock out my Brains, and Swear that I am one of your listed Troopers, to serve against your Country, and so bring in the pretended Prince of, and sometimes I am forc'd to leave my Goods unsold, for fear of them; I am sure I shall never be able to pay my Rent at this rate.
The Liberty of the Press will be the ruin of the Nation, and I must Confess any thing that doth but Look like an appeal to the Collective Body of the People, is of very dangerous consequence to the Constitution, you had better a great deal to keep your disputes to your selves, than Communicate them to the Publick, for if you cannot agree togeather, who are the great Council of the Nation,who come from all Corners of the Kingdom, who are well instructed and able to Debate and Reason the Case with one another, how can you imagine that the People will ever agree, who can never meet together to argue the Point? You have really the best Constitution of Government in the World, and at this rate you'll make it the Worst.
You say very well Sir, for as a late Author hath observed,(and that is by their Representatives).
It is very true, and the Last Sessions we got the House of C--ns to be made Sensible of it, for it plainly appearing at the free conferrence with the L--ds, that the misunderstanding about the proceedings relating to the A--r of the R--pt of thewere chiefly owing to the printing of our Votes, wherein they say a Member of their House was publickly Censured in print, in the Sight of the whole Nation; before he was convicted on a Tryal at Law; tho' the Commons did hardly think that to be a Sufficient reason for their Proceeding. Yet to avoid giving any handle for such another dispute, the House came to a Resolution not to print their Votes any more; so very desireous were the C--ns to preserve a right understanding with the L--ds for the Common good of this Nation.
Why then did they print their proceedings concerning the Bill for preventing Occasional Confirmity?
Because they understood that the L--ds made an order for printing their Arguments upon it, and therefore they thought it requisite to print theirs too; or else I hope you'll not be much Troubled with printing from our House any more;
But what is the meaning of it, that the L--ds proceedings upon the said Bill are not only printed at Large as they used to be, but they are reprinted in a less Character, and many Thousands of them printed by Subscription of private Persons, industriously dispersed all over the Kingdom, and sold at a Low rate under the usual price.
These are very extraordinary proceedings indeed, and I cannot imagine what the meaning can be, unless they are also making Subscriptions for a Dissolution of the Parliament; but that will never do with the Ministers in this Reign, they have not such Tools to work upon as they had formerly.
I hope not, or else we should be in a miserable condition; but I have taken notice that there is a Gentleman in our Country, who imploys so many Mercury's to disperse those Papers with Comments upon them; that there is never a Messenger to be had for Money in all our Neighbourhood.
We have a great many busy People in this Nation: But why did you censure the A--r of the R--pt in Print?
Because we thought he had highly neglected his duty, and that it was time (when the Nation was engag'd in a War, and Twenty Millions in Debt) to Prosecute some, in order to deterr others; for we can never hold out long at this rate; we have Mortgag'd all the other Funds, and there is nothing else left, but the Land must now bear the burthen.
No doubt of it, God help us poor Freeholders, it is time to punish Offenders indeed, it is plain her Majesty was of that Opinion, when she was pleas'd to use these very words in her Speech to the Parliament;. This was encouragement enough, but why did not you Prosecute him first, and Censure him afterwards?
The Commons have but two ways of Prosecuting great Men for any Offence, and that it is either by Impeachment, or by Addressing the Queen to order her Attorney-General to Prosecute at Law, and which way soever they take, their Resolutions will be Printed if they Print their Votes; and they must first come to a Resolution that a great Man is Guilty, before they can either Impeach, or desire the Queen to Prosecute him, for the Commons are in the nature of the grand Inquest of the Nation, and must first find, before they can regularly proceed any farther.
It is plain, if you publish your Votes, your private Censures and Resolutions will be publish'd too, not only to the People of, but to all the World, and therefore I have often wondred that the great Council of the Nation should take so much pains to expose their proceedings to their Enemies abroad, as well as at home, when certainly it is for the interestof any Kingdom that they should keep their Proceedings as private as they can; The States of other Wise Nations think it so; for tho' they do indeed publish on a particular occasion, what they think convenient for the Information and service of the Nation, yet all other matters are kept as private as may be.
If all Lawyers had been as Honest, and as little Avaricious as you, Printing of Votes had never been brought in fashion, for if I am not mistaken, it was a Gentleman of your Profession that first brought in that practice for his own Advantage, when he was Speaker of the House of Commons.
I remember that Gentleman very well, he was one that lov'd Money as well as another, and had more of mine than I desir'd, or he deserv'd: But pray what was it worth to a Speaker?
It was formerly worth no more than Five Pounds a Day, but now they say it is worth Ten, because they Pay double Price for the Votes.
Ten Pounds a Day, that is Sixty Pound a Week, a very pritty business; then I'll warrant you, the present Speaker has too much Wit to part with such a Perquisite in his Office; he might be contended to loose the Benefit of it for two Days the last Sessions, but he'll make Friends enough to renew the Order for Printing the Votes next Sessions.
That is your mistake, our present Speaker is a Man of Honour, and scorns to Sacrifice the Interest of his Country for any private Advantage; he was always against Printing the Votes, and ever will be.
That will be very honourable in him indeed; but if this practice was so lately introduc'd, and by no better a Man than the person you mean, I am contented it should be let alone for the future. The Representatives of every County and Burrough, will (I presume) take care to give notice of every thing that relates to them in particular, and the whole House will publish as much as is requisite to be known in general, and for the rest you may keep it among your selves.
This method of proceeding will make us more careful what Members we Chuse for our Bourroughs; for as long as the Votes were Printed, we knew what they were a doing in Parliament, as well as our Members, and therefore it was no great matter who were our Representatives, whether they liv'd in, or in the Country, nor whether they attended the publick Business or not; but now on my word, we must take care to Chuse such as live amongst us, are concern'd for the true Interest of our Burrough, and will be sure to atendthe publick service, or else we may suffer in our Priviledges, or our Trade, before we are aware of it.
That is an advantage to the Publick, that I did not think of, and for ought I know, may be one good way to prevent the Electors from taking Bribes in Elections, I am sure the more you consider of Printing the Votes, the better you will be pleased that we shall keep to the Ancient Constitution of the Government, which never allowed of this practice, but pray what did you mean by saying that you learn nothing by publishing our Proceedings, but that your Neighbours were going together by the Ears.
Mean Sir, I mean to tell you the truth, that the People begin already to take sides, some are for one, and some for the other, and they are ready to Quarrel at every meeting, which of them have the best of the Argument.
That is very fine indeed, I was afraid of such Evil consequences, and what do they generally say? on which side are the Majority in your Neighborhood?
Nay I must confess we have not many, that appear against the C--ns, for we naturally incline to favour our own Representatives, but the Dissenters (who are but few amongst us) do generally incline to the other side.
That must be expected, tho' if the Dissenters had heard all the Debates in our House, they would be better Satisfied with this Bill ofthen they are, for if I can understand the matter, all the honest Dissenters will have an advantage by it.
I wish they may, and that some worthy Member of your House would state the matter a little more at large to us, for tho' the Arguments of the C--ns are very strong, yet they are very short, and ordinary People do not immediatly comprehend the Force of an Argument in so few words; besides the Arguments on the other side are more Copious, which makes them more easily apprehended by vulgar Capacities.
The C--ns may be easily out done in matters of this Nature, for they are a great body, full of business and perpetually in a hurry, and others are more at leasure, and take more pains in drawing up their proceedings; but I think the Arguments on the other side are not rightly grounded in this Case, tho' it must be confessed there is as much said on that side as the nature of the Case would admit, but they do not confine their Arguments to the Subject matter of the Bill, which only relates to publick Officers, and not to private Dissenters, which is indeed a plainand short answer to all the Objections made against it, but what do the People say to the other Proceedings concerning the publick accounts?
Nay, there you have the advantage very clearly on your side, for tho' some Persons seem to aim at a discovery of mistakes by the Commissioners of accounts, of which I am informed some are only Errors of the Clerk, and are rectified in the other Papers given in before, yet they confess the substance with you, and prove more plainly then you did;, and tho' there may have been several Deficiencies in the Funds, yet it does not follow, but that with good management, the many Millions given by the Commons would have answer'd all thePublick occasions.
I don't like the way of Arguing so much in favour of offenders, which looks to me as if the first draft had been made by some of the Parties concerned; and I observe that they compute the deficiencies from the Estimates given it, but perhaps the Estimates were as unreasonable as the management, for both were under the care of the same Persons; but suppose there have been some Deficiencies in the supplies or in the produce of the Funds, does it therefore follow that there hath been no Mismanagement? methinks they Labour a little too much, to excuse the Parties Accused by the C--ns.
And a little too soon in my opinion, for if they are Innocent it will appear on a fair Tryal, without any previous Arguments in their favour; but I must confess, I think there are some things mentioned in the C--ns Address to the Queen, upon the observations and Representations of the Commissioners of Accounts, which prove themselves, and (amongst the rest), for by what other means could they get them? a great many of them to my knowledge, had no other way to get a Penny, and some that were hardly able to shew their heads, have now got great Estates, and have no more Wit then to keep their Coaches, that the world may know it.
There was a very good method formerly prescribed in this Case, if it had been put in practice, and that was.
That would for ever prevent any publick Frauds, but I am sure there is one thing mentioned in the C--ns Address, that we Conveyancers were very sensible of, and that was the Stock-jobbing Trade between the, and the, for the Money'd men got so much that way, that my poor Clyents could not borrow a penny of Money tho' they were willing to give Procuration, Continuation,Besides the Lawful Interest of Six.
That was not only an inconvenience to private persons, but to the whole Kingdom, for there was so much Money misemployed that way, that it Lessened the true Trading Stock of the Nation, and thereby hindred the exportation of our Woollen-Manufacture,and the importation of other Comodities to be Manufactured in, and yet we are told on the otherside, that there were no Tallies with interest Struck unnecessarily, all was well manag'd, and no Body in fault.
I am sure there was something or other done unnecessarily, for they got so much in thisTrade, that Land was become a meer Drug; we could neither Sell nor Mortgage.
You were not like to do either, when the greatest Money'd men in the Kingdom sold their Estates in order to lend the Money into the, and what did they lend it for? only out of their great zeal for the publick Service? no doubt of it, they had no unnecessary Interest nor large Premiums: Fie, fie, this daubing work will never do the business of the Nation.
It is no wonder such men were willing to grant heavy Taxes on the People, for they not only got by it, in the, where they doubled their Estates in a few years, but slipt their Necks out of the Collar in the Country, and avoided the Taxes, by selling their Estates to so great an Advantage; but as to the publick Accounts and striking of Tallies, let the Commissioners of Accounts answer for themselves next Sessions: pray Sir, don't you plead their Cause without a Fee; for my part I think they need no Council, they have done very well, and are able to Defend themselves, and if it had not been for them, we should have had no account at all.
That is certain, but I don't speak now as a Council when I am retained for my Client, I must make the best of his Cause, but now I may speak freely and impartially without favouring either side, and I must confess I think the Commissioners of Accounts deserve the thanks of the Nation, they have acted like men of Honour, Quality andIntegrity, and have demonstrated the same, to the whole Nation; what can they get by Quarelling with great Men? if they consulted their own private Interest, and not the good of their Country, they would accept the Complements, the Caresses, and the Bribes that are usually offered on such occasions; but it is plain they have stood Buff against all Temptations, and been faithful to the true Interest of their Queen and Country.
It is very true, but what thanks have they had for their Pains? here is a Hue and Cry, after their mistakes but not one word in their Commendation; Is this the way to Encourage honesty and Fidelity in publick Officers?
We will not be put out of conceit with them, for all that, if these Observations had been printed before the Parliament was Prorogued, we should have had an Answer, Il'e warrant you.
No doubt of it, but what do you say to the good management in the last Reign, when the late Ministers prevailed on the King to give near three Millions out of his own Revenue for the Service of the Nation? What do you say to that?
Say to it, I am ashamed to hear it mentioned, what sad Shifts are we forced to make, to save one another; the Revenue of the Crown, is a publick Revenue; Three or four hundred thousand pounds a year did formerly maintain the Civil List, or expence of the Kings Household, and the residue was to be employed in keeping the Fleet in good order, and in other publick uses, and it has been formerly sufficient to maintain a standing Army, but the Late King of Glorious Memory, being at more expences in travelling abroad, and treating the Foreign Ministers and Generalls for the good of; The Estimates given in to the Parliament by the Ministers for the, was generally five or six, and for some years Seaven hundred thousand pound a year, and the over plus above that was employed for the publick Service, and carrying on the War against France, and thus you have this great management of those Ministers explained to you;
Is this all? does not the Queen now do the very same thing? She pays to the publick a rent Charge out of the Revenueof the Crown, of three thousand seaven hundred pounds a week, which is near Two Hundred Thousand pounds a year, and in fourteen or fifteen years Reign will amount to three Millions or thereabouts, and yet the Customs and Excise do now yeild a far Less Revenuethen formerly. Is this then the mighty Service done by the Late Ministry for the Publick? if they had saved for the Nation one hundred thousand pounds out of the allowance for the Civil List, as the Queen hath done, they might have boasted of it;
They were so far from saving any thing, that whatever was allowed for the Expences of the Kings Household, they generally expended a great deal more: Nay when Seaven hundred thousand pounds was allowed for the Civil List, they had some times Eight, and sometimes Nine hundred thousand pounds for those uses, besides all the other misapplications mentioned by the Commons;
Now I understand their Frugality and good Management very well, the publick Aids and the standing Revenue of the Crown, were it seems by the Kings directions and consent to be applyed promiscuously for the Service of the publick, but Liberal estimates being made by the Ministers for the Occasions of the Civil List, and agreed to in Parliament they still took more than was allowed; And the overplus that was not misapplyed, must now be attributed to the good Management of the said Ministers;
Is this the way of it? hold, let me see, I have the Address of the C--ns in my pocket give me leave to read one Paragraph;EnglandSunderland,Albermarle,; This it seems, is the Clause that is now to be evaded by a Calculation how much Issu'd out of the Excise, Custom, and other Branches of the Civil List, to the use of the War during the Late Reign.
That's fine indeed, what matter which way it issued, since it was agreed that the late King should have a rent Charge out of the whole for his own occasions? and that the overpluss should go to the Service of the War?
None at all, for when the Money for the Civil List was first paid and satisfied, the Publick must take the overpluss for the Service of the War, where they could get it, is this then any answer to the Representation of the Commons?
No surely, but you may guess by these sort of Answers, who takes most care to make right Representations to the People, but do you observe what frequent occasions are taken to applaud the Actions of the A--r of the R--pt?
Yes, Yes, it is plain enough, we poor Freeholders are not so silly as the great Men think us, we can see thorough these Cobweb Politicks well enough.
Nay but pray Neighbour do him Justice, he has done more then any of his Predecessors, ever did before him, he takes care of the Cash every day and Locks it up in a Chest with three Locks and Keys (which was never done before.)
I wish he has not lock'd it up so fast, that it will never come all out again.
Pray observe the true state of this Case. He solicited a Bill when he sat in the House of Commons, to regulate others, and boasted then of his great service therein, and now he wont be regulated by it himself, but if he performs any one direction of that Act, and breaks all the rest, he draws an Encomium of himself beyond all comparison; this Act was madeExchequer. The King, Lords, and Commons take upon them to say what was the Ancient Course, and this Noble L--d was the promoter of that Interpretation; and amongst other things this Act directs,; and it farther directs; these are the Directions of the Statute, and the said Officer has Lock'd up the Cash, but has done nothing else as the Act directs.
This is very fine indeed, the A--r has done his Duty in one point, therefore he has done it in all the rest, is this the Logick used amonst all the publick Officers?
Nay but observe how this is expressed by some persons; the.
That is remarkable indeed; as if it was not thebut the A-r had made this new Regulation;.
It was not convenient to give too much credit to that Statute, for except this Clause about the Money, it is aver'd that the rest of the Act is mistaken.
Ay, that's fine indeed, to aver against a Record, against an Act of Parliament, against King, Lords, and Commons, and tell them they are all mistaken; the Act declares what is the duty of the A--r, and also the Clerk of the Pells, and in setting forth the same, affirms that the A--r shall transmit the Imprest Rolls to the Remembrancer, and not one word of any such thing to be done by the Clerk of the Pells, and yet others say, that the Act is mistaken; the Clerk of the Pells must do it, and not the A--r.
The Act is mistaken, that's a jest, then there is an end of all Laws at once; that's an Answer will serve to cover all evil actions whatsoever.
Why may not the same persons that Stock-Job the Publick Money into their own Pockets, expound away the Statutes into wast Paper.
Of what use then are these general words in the Act,Exchequer.
The meaning of these words were to keep up the Course of thein all other matters, not Enumerated in the Act, as that the Imprest Rolls shall be Sign'd and Indorsed by the A--r as usual, that the Clerk of the Pells shall have the usual time of 30 days to examine the same, and that he shall also Sign and Endorse the same,according to the Ancient course of the; but these general words were not to contradict the Special words before; for that is contraryto express Maxims in the Law, for the Interpretation of all Statutes whatsoever that where there is a General and Special Clause in one Act, the Spicial Clause shall Govern the General one; but the contrary would be a contradiction, and destroy the Act,.
But you are told it is not practacible to account by these Rolls.
The act says otherwise, but if the Rolls are not made up as they ought, whose fault is that, shall we be allowed to excuse fault by another?
Thats too Common a thing in this Age; but as to the processes against accountants, its said, that it would be Vexatious to issue them out in Course;
Process ought to issue of Course, and on an application, the Treasury may respite the same and give a reasonable time, and such proceedings would make Officers follow their accounts and get them passed, for want whereof, the accounts are so very far behind;
There is a World of Excuses made beforehand, but what are they to the purpose? Let the Law judge of these matters, if the party is innocent, Let it appear on his Tryal, and that is the best way to clear his reputation, and not to banter the Nation at this rate;
But as to the examining the Tellars Vouchers, they say the Act was mistaken again, for who can tell whether a Voucher be Legal or not; and to what purpose then is that Law made?
To what purpose indeed? For tho' no man can be certain whether a voucher be forged or not, yet he may guess even at that, and he can tell when he sees an acquittance Signed with the name of the proper Party who was to receive the Money, and Witnessed by an Officer, which would be very much for the Publick Safety; for what Officer would venture to be guilty of Forgery and forfeit his Office? And I am sure for want of this examination a great Sum of Money has been lost in the.
Is this the way of it, When a man has made a breach of the Law, instead of Arraigning the Offender, he Arraigns the Law.
Nay, and Arraigns a Law obtained by his own Solicitation, but thus it is, the Law and the Commissioners must bear all the blame, for the A--r is above all Law and Com--ns whatsoever.
And above Parliament too, for the poor Commons shall neither have Remedy in Parliament nor out ofParliament, if some can hinder it, Ee'n let them take all at this rate;
The only way to preserve any Government, especially in time of War and publick dangers, is a strickt observation of, but if honest men must suffer and there be no way to punish great Offenders, then farewell all indeed;
But of all the contrivances to run the Nation in debt, there was none like the project ofbills; which (as I am Credibly informed) served a great many evil purposes at one and the same time, for they had thereby an opportunity of obliging several Members of Parliament with good offices, by evading the Law,; Then they had an opportunity to oblige their friends by letting them have a considerable interest for subscribing to the Circulation of them, without paying in all their principal Money, and they had an opportunity to gain great Sums for interest Mony to themselves (tho subscribed in other Persons names) without paying in any principal at all; and after all this they let the said Bills run at a great discount of 15, 20, 25, and 30loss to the publick, that they might buy them up at a low rate, and pay their Debts with them at parr to the Crown; and thus the Nation has been used, and the publick Money Stock-job'd away into private mens Pockets;
We were a long time before we could find out the mystery of this project. But I hope that Debt will be discharg'd next Sessions, for it is a great Clog upon all the publick Revenue.
It is so, and you would do well to make a more effectual Law next Sessions, for the better regulating the method of passing the publick Accounts of the Navy, Army,and for compelling the Accountants to prosecute and pass their Accounts, for we shall never get out of Debt whilst the publick accounts are so far behind and unpass'd.
I see but little hopes of having many good Laws, till there is a better understanding between the two Houses.
Pray Sir, how did those misunderstandings first begin, who made the first false step, the L--ds or C--ns?
Those unhappy misunderstandings first began upon the Impeachments of the L--ds; but who made the first false Step I will not determine: I presume you have read the Vindication of the Commons. I think that worthy Author hath writ very plainly and very honestly upan that Subject, and I do not remember that I have met with any book that has fairly answered him;
I agree with that worthy Member, in most things, but not in all, however I wish he would apply his thoughts how to reconcile these Differences; That would be a noble undertaking, and becoming his Character, for it is much easier to find out a fault, then to find out a remedy for it, and we are not now so much concerned to know who was in fault, as how both Houses may be reconciled for the publick good;
You say well Sir, That is the main concern, what is past cannot be helped, we must not now look backwards, but forwards, I believe the L--ds themselves do think they were a little too hasty in that matter to go to Trial and Judgment of acquittal in so many Impeachments, the very same Sessions, without the petition or assent of the C--ns, and to let men sit as Judges for one another in their own Cases; No History, no Record from the foundation of the English Government can give one other instance of such a proceeding; but we must remember that the Commons have been as faulty formerly in another particular, when they Voted the Lords useless; and therefore I think it will do well if they set one failing against the other, and so shake hands again for the publick good;
When the Divines and the Lawyers agree together in the same opinion, we may have some hopes; but the matter of the impeachments is past, and in a manner forgot, therefore there must be something else that occasions these misunderstandings at this time a day;
The matter of the impeachments will never be forgot whilstremains, but there is some thing else indeed that causes fresh misunderstandings, for it is easie to start new points, however I beleive an Act of Indemnity would reconcile us all;
An Act of Indemnity! I do not know what you mean, I cannot understand how that would tend to a reconciliation.
A Guilty Conscience is always full of Fears and Jealousies, and some men will never think themselves safe, unless they are sheltred by an Act of Oblivion, or by keeping up a misunderstanding between the two Houses;
Now I understand you, truly I am afraid you have hit upon the true Cause of all our differences.
But how is it possible that two or three persons can be able to influence a Majority of so great a body of men of Honor and Principles, and who can have no other thing so much at their heart, as the Common good of their Native Country;
The L--ds are naturally Jealous of their Rights and Priviledges, as well as the C--ns, and any Members that will stand up as Champions for the Rights and Prerogatives (as some now call them) of that Noble House, will be sure to get into esteem amongst them: and if they be men of parts and speaking Members, they become at last, to be great Men in the House, and to gain the Ascendant; and such men will never want Numbers to support them; it is the Common failing of both Houses, to be a little too much Influenced by particular Persons, who are therefore commonly known by the name of, because by their Oratory, by their plausible Arguments, and by their Established influence, they, and some times, very Honorable Members into their Opinion.
I hope Master you are none of those: I know of nobut what are in the Crown, and if you can both keep the Priviledges that belong to you, it is well enough; I had rather be Governed by one Tyrant if I were to chuse, then by a Multitude of them; but God be praised, we have now as good a Government, as our hearts can wish, and I hope you'll neither Lead, nor be Mislead to change it for any other, for in Troth, if I thought you would, you must excuse me as poor as I am, i'll never Complement away my Free-hold to a Leading-Member.
Thou art an honest Fellow, and a true, no honest, I am entirely of thy opinion,, and I am one of those in the House of Commons, they call the, sometimes on this side, sometimes on the other, as the Justice of the Cause leads me.
Then I'll Fly to your Election as long as I Live; I am but a poor man and of a mean Capacity, and therefore I'll be glad to be advised, and to hear every mans opinion, but I am resolved to follow my own poor Judgment at last, and not to be led by the Nose blindfold.
Thou art an Honest heart I'll warrant,, I wish all our Senators of both Houses were of thy mind; but what will you say, if men resolve to stand by one another right or wrong, and in a manner Subscribe their names to it?
I think they that do so, ought to have but one Vote amongst them all, for if Twenty Souls be as it were glew'd together by Combination, they are in effect but one Soul, and therefore ought to have but one Vote in Parliament.
Thou hast certainly pass'd a very good Sentence, if it were possible to be put in Execution.
But pray Sir, what is it that can possibly give any men an opportunity at this time to create any differences amongst us, we have certainly.
She does so, and if you did but know what pains she takes in Council every day, you would wonder; she spends all her time in taking care of her People, she is always consulting how to preserve them, or praying for a blessing upon her Endeavours for their good; she Scarce affords her self time for necessary Refreshment.
The Nation is happy, I warrant, there are few Ladies about her, would take so much pains to be Queen in her Place.
I have stood amaz'd to see with what Patience she attends in Council to hear Causes and Complaints, to redress Greivances and Consult with them for the Common Safety.
She is an excellent Princess indeed, and has not only care of the outward happiness of her People, but like a true Parent of her Country, she thinks her self concerned also to take care of their Souls; Witness her several Proclamations for Encouragement of Piety and Vertue, and for the Discouragement of Vice.
We had abundance of such Proclamations in former Reigns, but it was then a general observation, that about the same time, some very Lew'd and Debauch'd men were preferr'd, and advanced at Court, that made all the rest look a little like a Banter; pray Sir, can you tell me any Nobleman that hath been Advanced or taken Notice of on account of his Virtue, for that once known would be the best Proclamation to promote Piety and Virtue.
I have no very great acquaintance amongst the Nobility, I believe there are many, but I know one Noble Lord lately Advanced, that is a man of Piety and Virtue, and I doubt not, will always maintain that Character.
I wish I could hear his Name, for I would Endeavor to get his Custom, Prompt payment is a brave thing amongst us Tradesmen.
I am sorry I cannot oblige you with his name, without asking him leave, I am afraid he meets with many discouragements already, but if he were named, he wou'd be the standing mark for all the Debauchees in the Town to let fly their Randome Shot at; truly I believe there are many Virtuous and Religious Noblemen who conceal themselves in this Wicked Age for that very reason;
Well, if you know one Good man, I can tell you ten bad, that have got into places, notwithstanding these Proclamations;
Why, do you think that the Queen can know mens hearts, do you think that she is personally acquainted with her Officers; all Kings and Queens are forced to hear with other persons Ears, and see with other persons Eyes, and so are their Ministers too, therefore we must not wonder, that in all Reigns, more bad then good men are preferred;
The reason of that is plain, for they get the places that Solicite and make the most Friends; but good men are Modest and never seek for them.
I hope you will not loose a good Place for the sake of your Modesty, or for want of asking; but we that have no other Aim but the good of our Country, do not complain of any preferments whatsoever, it is indifferent to us who have the places, so they are well managed for the Service of the Queen and Country; if they are good men so much the better; if they are bad, perhaps the Example of such a Queen may reform them, if they do well, we are contented, if they do ill they must be contented to hear of it from us.
But it vexes me to see men of no merit, men that have formerly railed at this Court, men that are Enemies to the Established Government, both in Church and State, intrusted with the Administration of Publick Affairs in this happy Reign.
You must be content to let some weeds grow up together with the Corn, neither the Queen, nor her Ministers, have had much time yet to look about them; they are Buisy on the Grand Affairs of, how to preserve our Religion, our Liberties, and our Properties, from a Foreign Enemy; but they'llfind you out at last, and then we shall hear no more complaints.
I thank you Sir, for your Reprimand: I confess it do's not become a Man of my profession to be speaking of these matters, for it naturally raises a Jealousy; and I am afraid there are too many that hunt after faults and Male-Administration, and make great complaints of this nature, when they really are angry at nothing, but that they are not preferr'd themselves.
Truly Sir, I am always Jealous of any man that is very violent in these matters; let us have a little patience, and I doubt not as fast as ill men are found out, good men will come into their places.
This Bill of Conformity will help the Queen, and her Ministers to know men; but pray Sir, who are our great Officers in all the high stations?
Thou hast a mind to be a States-man, I am afraid you will be as great a Politician as your Ploughman.
In troth Master, since I am got into so good Company, I would willingly learn as much as I can, that I may baffle my Ploughman, and keep him close to his Work, and if I could learn so much as to free my Neighbours from fears and jealousies, and settle their heads to their Husbandry; I believe you'd have your Rents better paid.
Indeed you wou'd Master; pray give him a little Instructions, for he is a leading Member in our Parish, I assure you, and makes a great Figure at a Quarter-Sessions, he is generally Foreman of the Grand-Jury, and will baffle a Whigg Justice very handsomely.
Prithee leave of thy Old distinctions of Whigg and Tory, I know no distinction but one, and that is between an Honest Man and a Knave, between those who love their Queen and their Countrey, and those who do not, between those who are for the Established Government in Church and State, and those who are against it.
Right Master, I know no other neither, but when I dare not venture to call a man, least he should break my head, yet I can say he is awithout danger, and that is the same thing in my understanding; but I confess we often mistake, and call an Honest Man a Knave, and a Knave an Honest Man, and so I doubt we do not always apply the Name of Whigg and Tory as it ought to be; but pray excuse my rudeness, and do not deny my good Friend a little Information.
I do not need much entreaty in this matter, for I would have all the Freeholders ofknow what great care is taken for their common safety and wellfare in this particular, and first you haveDanemarkEngland,England,.
He is a Prince of an extraordinary disposition indeed, but among all his other good Characters, pray don't forget his ready submission to the will of his late Sovereign, his constant, and I may now say dutiful affection to the Queen, his former tenderness of his Children, and great condescention and kindness to all his Servants.
This is a certain sign of good Principles, as well as of a good Disposition, but since you are for recollecting my memory, give me leave to recollect yours too, and to entreat you not to forget his Conformity with the Establish'd Government, both in Church and State, for tho' as a Foreign Prince, he was bred up in a National Church abroad, that differs in Ceremonies from ours; yet he has order'd the Lyturgy of the Church ofto be Translated into the, orLanguage which he best understands, and so by using the same, hath given a noble and Princely example of a Christian and Dutiful submission to the Establish'd Government, in order to comply with the Laws of the Land, and preserve the Unity of the Church.
This was a noble Compliance indeed, and I pray God his Princely example may have the good effect, that may reasonably be expected from it, we should then be a happy Nation, and entirely United among our selves.
Pray Sir, how comes it to pass that some Men do complain of this Prince's Bill; certainly the Husband of a Queen ought to have a great deal more than the Wife of a King, besides the possibility of surviving was very remote, and the Advantage of obliging him was very great.
One reason is, because he is good; for you never knew Wicked Men love a good Man in your life; and some persons are pleas'd to fancy what I believe they'll find themselves very much mistaken in; that by such proceedings they make Court to the Successor, but that wise Princess well knows, that they who are ready to support one Prince will be ready to support another; and what the People give out of the Civil List, they can easily supply to the Crown another way, if ever there be an occasion for it; which there is great odds there never will;and she also knows that such sorts of Complements are more for hopes of preferment to themselves, than any real kindness to the Successor.
No Question of it, but I am very well contented to bear my share of the Prince's Bill, if it ever takes effect; I don't doubt but he will deserve a great deal more from the Nation; but I perceive he is so good a man at Home, the Queen cannot spare him abroad. Pray what kind of man have you to be Admiral at Sea?
We have Sira man of undoubted Courage and Conduct, Loyal to his Queen, Zealous for the Interest of his Country, a true Lover of the Seamen, and heartily belov'd by them, and all that know him.
But I have seen some scurvey papers against him; as if he had taken French Money;
Ha, Ha, he has taken some, that is certain, and has endeavoured to take a great deal more, if he could have got at it, but the Bird was flown;
O, you mean at, that was a lucky hit for him, for his friends the Whiggs had a rod in pickle for him, if that Job had not prevented;
Nay, that Job did not save him neither, for he was under as strict an examination as he could have been, if that had never happened; but such was his Integrity and Conduct, that even the L--ds bestowed a Vote of Commendation upon him;
I am sure the C--ns unanimously Voted the thanks of their House to him, for his great and signal Serviceto the Nation, which he received with the presence of an Admiral, and returned with the Language of an Orator;
What an Admiral, and an Orator, a man of Courage and of Conduct too, Loyal to his Queen, true to his Country? Nay then, so far we are Safe, now for our Armies abroad, who is General there this Summer?
You know well enough, the same as the last, only his Loyalty to the Queen, and great Services to his Country have been the meanes to advance him from Earl, to a higher Title of Duke of
I like that way of Rewarding great men very well, for it pleases them, and Costs us nothing.
I am for rewarding publick Services every way, I
know by my little Affairs in the Country, that Frugality in
such cases, is no better than Folly.