What moody, musing, winding up thy Politicks? Come prethee what project on Foot now? For I know thou art a Man of Projects.
O my dear! why 'faith I'm just now going to your House at, that Famous Nursery of your Name and Family.
What to the Parliament House? Prethee what Business hast thou there?
Why, to tell you the Truth, I'm going to try what I can do in order to stem that Tide of Blood that runs with such a mighty Torrent from the Veins of my distressed dear Country-men.
What some Project of Peace on foot,? 'Tis so upon my Life, and the Grandhas made thee Mediator. Well, thou'rt a rare Fellow; a most excellent Undertaker. I see thou hast not thy Name for nothing, no more than I.
No 'faith, he has not employ'd me; nor am I going about his Business, but my own, and my Countries.
As what prethee?
Why look you, I intend to propose it to the House, the carrying on a vigorous War against, or carrying on the War againstwith vigour; take it which way you will.
A very pretty Proposal. Why this has been proposed, and resolved on, Seven years agon.
Why ay this is true; but you see, and we all see, that here is nothing come of it. Therefore I intend to undertake the Business my self, my dear: And first, I'll know of our wise Senate how many Millionsthey will give me to do it; and how many Years they are willing to allow me to humble this great and mighty Monarch of.
Well, and what then?
Why then, for Six Millionsand Seven Years to effect it, I'll undertake the Business.
What alone, and without an Army?
Ay, ay, alone; and without an Army. Give me but Money enough, and let me alone for Undertaking?
As how prethee?
Why thus, do you mark me? Look you, as soon as I have got the Money, away go I into, live great, spend the Money, no matter how; look on peaceably, and be a Witness of the King oftaking several of our strong Towns; and when theArmy have done the Business, they cut out for that Campaign, and are gon to their Winter Quarters, away come I home again; tell the Parliament what noble Feats I have done, ask them for another Six Millions, return toagain the next Season, and do just as I did before; and so go on till the Seven years are expired: And if this won't reduce, and save the Lives and Reputation of our braveBoys, the Devil is in't.
Ha, ha, ha, by my troth thou makest me laugh; a most incomparable Project! O rare Mr.! But thou'rt not in earnest sure?
Not in earnest? Yes, in good gerning earnest. Why pretheewhere is the Difficulty? Is there any Difficulty in my going into, and back again? Is there any Difficulty in my standing by, whilst thetake our Towns? Isthere any Difficulty in my asking the Parliament Money? And can there be any Difficulty in my taking the Money, when they frankly give it me? Where, in the Name of, then lies the Difficulty of carrying on my Project? Now, Mr., what occasion have you for laughing?
Ha, ha, ha; Oh I shall die; ha, ha, ha; Oh I shall kill my self with laughing. Why the Devil's in thee sure to talk at this rate.
Now can't I, for the Soul of me, understand where lies this merry Conceit; nor what in the Name of Fate it is that thou laughest at. I ask thee where's the Difficulty in my Undertaking, and thou fallest a Laughing.
Ha, ha, ha; why no, my noble, here's no great Difficulty in thy going into, and back again,But the Difficulty remains Man still of conquering. And the Difficulty is, That the Parliament should be such a Pack of Fools, and Asses, as to give thee such a Mass of Treasure as thou hast projected, to the impoverishing and sinking the Nation, to carry on a Project that has neither Head nor Tail; to carry on a vigorous War with, and here's no War commenced, nor like to be, according to thy Project.
Shaw, shaw, you talk like an Apothecary. Why is it not the same Thing for the Parliament to give me the Millions for looking on, and seeing our Towns taken, as to give it to aMan, who takes with him a mighty Army, and does no more with it than I do alone? Nay, don't I deserve it infinitely better? For do I hazard any one but my self, and that not much you see? Do I harrass a Hundred thousand Men off their Legs, one Year after another, to as little purpose as to set our Dogs to bark against the Moon? Do I let Men die like Dogs in Ditches, and starve them for want of Bread? Do I lead on an Army to Face the Enemy, cry holoo, set them on, and then run away, and leave them to be sacrificed? Where's the Wonderment then in giving me these mighty Sums, who am an honestMan, for doing alone better Service than theMan, and all his Army? Why don't I maintain the Honour and Reputation of our Country, and Country-men, infinitely better than he? For I'm resolvednever to put it to the hazard of a Battle, or being shamefully beaten, when I know we must be beaten so often as we fight. What think you, Mr., I think the Case is plain and clear: And yet if the Parliament gives me these formidable Sums presently, they are a Pack of Fools, and Asses. But to give it to thisMan, who has no more Right or Title to it than I have, they are a wise Senate. Prethee shew me the Wisdom for the one, and the Folly for the other, and now you had best laugh again.
By my Life I begin to think thou'rt in earnest indeed.
Why have I not Reason to be so? I don't see but the Project may take. I have as much Money as he 'tis true, but still I save the Men. And if the Parliament is so prodigal of their Countries Money, as to throw it away to no purpose, may it not as well, nay better, be given to an honestMan, as well as to aMan? Besides, I could find ways to spend the Money at home, and so let it circulate, and not impoverish the Nation. And is not this better than theMan's sending it abroad to be circumcised, and so sent home to us again to set us all together by th'Ears?
Come, prethee leave off this Boffoonery, and be serious. What, in the Name of, should make thee imagine that the Parliament should give thee such vast Sums of Money for no Service; only for looking on, and seeing theconquer, and take our Towns?
And what, in the Name of, should make thee approve of their actually giving it to aMan, for the very same Non-service?
Prethee has not thisMan (as thou callest him) a formidable Army at his Command, to oppose the Growth and Greatness of the Power of, to hinder them from making any further Progress in their Conquests, and to carry on the War with vigour against them?
Ay, ay,; and let the Nation Squeek and Groan on; so long as we Laugh, the Care is taken. Prethee who may they thank for their Squeeking and Groaning but themselves? Was not almost the whole Nation mad for aKing, and a War with? And now they have them, they are sick of them; but so long as we the Representatives are Gainers by it; so long as theStadtholder is kind tous, and feeds us plentifully with Money, let them be sick, and dye, and be damn'd; we matter it not, for we are resolved to give him Money still. Look you,, you know one good Turn deserves another: And so long as our K.is kind to us, why should not we be kind to him? Especially when we can do it at so cheap a Rate, as the picking one Pocket to fill another: 'Tis but robbingto pay: And so long as theKing feeds usMen with goodGold, he shall never want it old Boy.
O most incomparable Patriots!Men,Devils rather, Pick pockets, Betrayers of your Country, Hang-men of your Fellow Subjects and Country-men, the Peoples Scourge and Plague; have we entrusted you with our All to do us Justice, and to redress our Grievances, and ye make it your Business to undo us, to rob us, to enslave us? Ye have already beggar'd the Nation; and what is the Consequence of Beggary but Slavery? And thus ye go on in your Villany, and laugh at us. 'Tis but robbing, ye cry, to pay: But whenhas no more Money, how, in the Devil's Name, will ye pay? And 'tis almost come to that already. But I suppose whenhas no more Money, he is to be stript, sold, and sent a Slave to, or some of thePlantations, to make room for them to Lord it here. Ye Crocadiles! Ye brood of Vipers! O if it was but Lawful, with what pleasure I could curse ye! O! unhappy! betray'd by thy own Children! What is there never anthat has the Courage to run through the Streets of, and cry out to the People, We are betray'd? No trueMan that dare stand up for Liberty and Property?
Why how now,, thou'rt Angry.
I think thou art a rare Fellow at Projects: But this wont do by any means. This will never take in the House; for what shall we get by it?
Get by it, what do you mean? If we don't get, at least we shall save.
As what prethee?
Why we shall save many a sound Drubbing, we shall save our Bones whole in our Skins, we shall save spilling our Blood, we shall save Three Millions of Money yearly; and I think this saving is a kind of getting.
Poh; all this is nothing, thou mistakest me. I say, what shall we the Representatives in Parliament get? What is it to us who Loseth, so long as we are Gainers? For 'tis not the Nations Business that we are concerned for now, but our own proper Interest. Will theKing bribe us, as does K.? Will he make us his Pentioners, and will he be more generous to us than K.?
He will upon my Life; provided ye prove as great Rogues to King, as ye did to his Father. Betray him as ye did his Father, kick him out of the Kingdom, and thenswear he has abdicated, and then vote your selves all Kings: And I'm sure all honest thinking Men will believe ye as good Kings as theStadtholder. Do this, I say, and the King ofwill give ye any Thing: Nay, I dare engage ye Three Millionsshall all be at your Service.
Why 'faith,, set this Project on foot, and I fancy it may take. Make us but sure of larger Bribes from theKing, and I'll engage for my Brother Rogues he shall have the Money. Why prethee Self-interest is our God, and Religion: And as we have for this betray'd our King and Country; where is the Difficulty, for a greater Interest, of playing the same Trick over again, and leaving the Prince ofin the Lurch, and becoming Friends to? Look you,, that you may not doubt of Success in this Affair; be assured 'tis our Principle, to sacrifice Father, Brother, King, any Thing for Interest.
Dear, I'm satisfied it is so. Well, I'll to the House, and propose the Project there; you assure me it will take? And then for, and the Business is done. But hark you,, you'll make your Interest in the House, and I will secure you out of the Three Millions: Let me see, -- Let me see, -- Five hundred Guineas for a Bribe. Be sure you lay before your Brother Rogues a Mass of Money, a Million at least of the Three shall be distributed amongst them, as a yearly Pention, to encourage them in their Roguery, and make them a Pack of thorough paced Villains; for those you know are the Men of Honour, the Men of Worship, in little.
Fear not,; if thou canst manage the Project right with Grand, and secure us the Money, the Business will most assuredly be done:
Fear not, it shall be done.
But stay, now I think on't, what art thou,, to get by this Project, in case it succeed? We you know are to give out of the Peoples Money Three Millionsthat theKing will be quiet, and keep within his Lines; and for this doing, the great Monarch is to give us the Representatives in Parliament, One Million back again. Good: This is just as we do with the Prince ofHe puts the Question,Will we pick the Pockets of our Fellow Subjects every Year, and give him out of them Six Millionsto carry on a vigorous War with? And our Answer was, Give us 500000for every such Sum, and the Business shall be done, as you see effectually it is. Now ifwill be contented with half the Sum, and redouble upon us whatgave us, I see no difficulty in the Business: For this way we shall get more, and oppress the People less. But then what will my honestget by the Project?
The Honour to do my Country Service, the Reputation of a true honestMan, and Lover of his Country, nothing else. And this I value more than all your sordid Gold, that ye have unjustly and barbarously squeezed from the Sweat and Blood of your Country.
Why then, my true honestMan, farewel:
And may'st thou grow fat with Honour and Honesty, whilst
we Knaves wallow in Gold, and rowl in Plenty. And so I
leave thee to think and wish for better Times: Ha, ha, ha.