Ha Neighbour, and where are you going in all this haste, if a Man may be so bold as to ask you the question?
Yes, it is possible, for as yet I know not.
Be quick then, for I have but a little while to stay.
VVhy, are you going to Market then, pray what de'y design to buy that you fear to come too late?
But pray where is it to be sold?
VVell, but all the News now is about, who as 'tis said on theofwas Tryed at the, for the Highest of Treason that witty Mischief could invent.
'Tis but just he should, and condemned too, nay, after that Drawn, Hanged and Quartered, who dare attempt the Deposing and Murthering of his sacred Majesty, who is the Breath of our Nostrils, as a worthy Judge wasonce pleased to say upon the Bench; and not only his, but to destroy all our lives and Liberties, by raising Rebellion and bring in aPower, thereby to enslave us to the Tyranny of the.
Proved, yes, under his own Hand, and by several witness of candid Reputations, who swore it positively.
By Libelling the King, to render him odious to his subjects, by Charging him with such things as no good Man can express without horror and detestation; by endeavouring to set all in a Flame, or Combustion of Civil VVar, which should be Carryed on under the name of the, so that the Father should have been against the Son, and the Son against the Father, to have sheath'd their swords in each others bowels, till all had been weakned and ruin'd, when as theArmy was to be raised here, and the powers ofwas to have broken in upon us, and so to have born down all before them.
Yes, this had been our case had this Instrument ofand Hell set on and mannaged by the art and cunning of the Jesuitick Policies succeeded.
VVhy, he haveing some small acquaintance with one Mr., being the Gentleman that was kept so long in the Tower, he came about theoflast to his Chamber, and there falling into discourse with him about several matters, began to commiserate him for the hard usage he had suffered, since his adhearing to the Protestant Intrest, telling, him if he would forsake it, and cleave to the Popish Party, he should not onely meet with great Rewards, but likewise be put into places of trust.
Yes, he seemed so to do, but it was onely to find what he would be at, for he knew him to be a great Villain.
VVhy then he began to open his mind, and proposed to him the Indicting of so venomous and Treasonable a Libell, that I think no Age e're heard the like, as for me, my hair stood an end when I heard it read in Court.
Nay, it contained what I will not presume to repeat; nor can I liken it to any thing, unless the Box whichsent to, full fraught with Plagues and dire destruction.
VVhy the honest Gentleman, for so I may well call him for detecting so horrid a Villany, disclosed the business to several worthy persons.
No I'le warrant ye, but gave the more countenance to proceed, and promised to take his Instructions for drawing up the Papers, and Appointed him a time to come for them, when as he had placed a Gentleman to over-hear the discourse that passed betwixt them.
Yes, he did, and uttered many Treasonable words, promising the Gentleman that he should have four Guinnys from theEmbassadors Confessor, and that he should be entred a Pensioner to theKing, and have several Thousand Crowns.
Not at all, for he boggled at it, saying it was a Treasonable Design, and that he knew not what to think on't; Think on't (said) why the more Treason the better, am not I deeper concerned in it then you? have not you my hand for it, and is there not many great Persons concerned in it, or words to this effect.
VVhy several Thousands Coppies were to have been dispersed amongst the People in Penny-Post Letters, and many put into Gentlemens pockets, and they apprehended with them about 'um, so that it could not chuse but blow up aflame of horrid mischief, for all the Kings good subjects were to have been brought into the Plot, and to be taxed for endeavouring to raise Rebellion and Insurrection, so that the Popes Agents thought themselves Cock-sure of prevailing against us, this being their last, but most dangerous shift, and shew'd it self to be the very Spawn of the Jesuits, but Heaven that has hitherto blasted their Designs, prevented it, and broke the Cockatrices Egg e're it could be hatched.
It was, and much more then I can remember; but stay, I had forgot one passage that was very material, which was, That one of the Gentlemen that gave Evidence against him (whose known Fidelity renders him of unspotted Reputation) because he would not be mistaken, marked the Papers that Mr.brought to him, and whilst he looked through a Crevice, he sawmake several alterations, crossing out some and putting in other some, and after he was departed, found those Papers to be the same he had set his private Mark upon, and that at the takeing them up, the Ink was wet.
No, but some days after, and carrying him before a Magistrate, he confess'd a Treasonable Paper to be his own hand-writing.
Truly little or nothing to the purpose, for he rather strove to Justifie what he had done, then any ways to deny or detest against such wicked designs, insisting that he had been Impeached by the Commons, and that his cause lay before them.
No, nor could he, for the Court before had over-ruled that Plea, and all the Judges ofgiven their opinions, it was in the power of the Court to Try him.
Yes, several, and many of them persons of Quality.
Why truly very little or nothingthat would avoid his Cause, for it was so foul that no good Subject could any ways countenance it, but rather their Evidence tended to his prejudice.
Why, to prove that he had been with them from the King about business of importance.
Yes, they agreed that he had been with them, but they did no ways believe his Majesty sent him.
No, no, he called several to testifie that he had received Moneys by his Majesties Order, the which he would have put an evil Construction on.
Well, but how came he off at last?
And do you think they believed him?
Why then they went out, and staying near an hour, they returned, and gave in their Verdict, That he was Guilty of the High Treason for which he stood Indicted; which Verdict was accordingly taken and Recorded: the Court telling them they had found a very good Verdict.
Yes, and gave such a Hura as made the Hall ring again.
Why he was found Guilty of High Treason.
For the most part in, and the Evidence Sworn against him in Court, was to this purpose, That he held Correspondence with theKing, and that he was to deliver up certain Towns upon the Sea-Coast to the, that they might Land an Army: and farther, that in order to the leavying War in that Kingdom, he had made several Collections of monies, and that he had endeavour'd to compass the Death of His Majesty, and enslave that Kingdom to, and the Insulting Tyranny of thePower.
Yes, and much more, even by his own Country-men.
Why truly little or nothing, forTreason is always attended with a guilty Conscience, only he objected against the Insufficiency of the Witnesses, alledging he stood Convicted upon record.
No, but being asked why he had not done it, his answer was, That he had not time nor opportunity enough to procure them.
Yes, one or two, I think, but their Evidence was not any thing material for his advantage.
No, but only endeavour'd to degrade some of the Kings Evidence, but could give no grounds for what they said, it being altogether groundless.
It's true, he might have done
it; nay, he said he did, but that they
being for the most part Priests, they durst
not come over without His Majesties
special