On my soul, thatsthe Piper that sits so gravely there: He is a notable Knave, Ile acost him, pretend acquaintance, and get something out of him; how, dost thou? I think there is no body left in the house but us two, if thou wilt I'le sit down by ye.
You are welcome, but I declare against all things that are not of English manufacture, let's have a Mug of Ale, and I'le joyn with you.
A match.
Sir, may I beg the favour of your name?
My name is.
A very good family; of the North or the West?
I'me of theof the North, where my family has flourished some hundreds of years: But lets talk now of other matters, and because I hear you to be book learned, I'le ask you what you think of the Dialogue twixtand?
I think it a very Scoffing Scurrilous pamphlet, and that the Author is within the equity of the Pillory; for he without any due regard to good manners, or truth, bespatters many of the Nobility, the most eminent Gentry, and Citizens with the basest and meanest practises of Forgery imaginable: For can any thing be more vile? Or anything more malicious? than to do, as, charged himself withal, namely to fill up Sheets with, and, &c. To amuse the Nation with numbers; as if they meant something further.
I must take upon me the defence, and therefore I believe the Authour was in the right as to the charge.
Ay, and for women to underwrite for their Husbands in thetoo.
I must and will undertake his defence, because of my alliance with him.
I thought so, for I'le be hanged if he be not of the noble house of thetoo. But heark you Captain, make good the defence of that,.
I'le say this, that there is nothing in that Paper thats either disloyal or Popish.
Not in point blank terms, but without much difficulty reducible to either of those heads.
What the Pox, you do not take the Author for a Papist or a Plotter?
He is one of thethough.
What's that?
telling the opinion of the People aboutPlot, sayes,: Which I have got turned thus into Meter.Some were such Sots they did not think, Some men so silly as to wink, Some lewder Knave believ'd it not, By which they did help on the Plot.
I must confess that's a very apposite application; but do you think then, that Author to be a Papist?
No, on my Conscience, but a Protestant Gentleman, because he somewhere sayes so, but he might as well have said Protestantish, as he scurrilously sayes in another place, but however he is in his Religion, I am sure he is a Papist in faction, as many others are.
On my Conscience you might as well have charged Mr. -- so.
None will be so impudent sure, as to fix any such imputation, upon such a Pillar of the Church, such a Steeple of Truth as he is known to be? but yet if a man consider his further discovery of the Plot dedicated to Dr., his Passion for him, if he be a Protestant, will be very sedate, for what Jesuit could lessen the Doctors testimony, or narrative of the Plot, more than he has done, by saying,, and then very wittily, according to his facetious way of scoffing, compares the whole thing to the raining of, he might have said, it would have made up the simile every whit as well; might not any dying Priest have said the same, and have salved all by equivocation though he believed not a word of the Doctors Depositions, as, I suppose, Mr. -- does not: Well, in fine Captain, had that discourse been put into Meter, it would have been the subject of many witty Ballads.
I vow. you are very rude with a Gentleman, that bears so considerable a figure in the Government, as tis known he does: I professe you deserve to be severely punished.
No, no, he did, he may say, he was some body, when he had the Superintendency of your little Books and Ballads, which brought in many a half Crown, before he came to that preferment, he may remember he was as mutinous in print as any body, because he could get nothing, then the Government lay under a male-administration, when the Advocate General which should have tryed him for his loyalty, which he can never be sufficiently commended for, came to be Chancellor of, he was about that time very pert with the King too, for giving greater gifts to a Lord, that had been of the other side, than suitable to his great mind; so to quiet him, it was allowed him to writ things like the Old, twice a week, which he did for about six years, with no small satisfaction to himself, till at last, he stuft his papers with such little things as wherelived, and how Goodmanwas choaked with eating a two peny Custard for a wager,That it was not decent to the grandieur of the Nation, to have such a publick Notary, and so the Gazet way of writing yet continued, was taken up.
This is passion, but after all, pritheetell me your opinion concerning Dr.his Depositions, for I'm sure you'r a man of observation.
I have read them, and I have read some other things, and have read him too by some small conversation, the measures I took from thence is, that I do take the Doctors Narrative to be the real truth which time will at last bring forth, though many are a little impatient about it, for he has not compass enough to inventsuch a lie, and so circumstantiated, for I assure you he is no Sophister, witness his indiscretions to the Episcopal Clergy, and his slight speaking of them, which must be imputed to his education, being bred a Phanatique, than turn'd Papist, now that's laid aside, he may be the same again, so I conclude him governed by truth then, because now governed by a thing like Conscience, but had he been a man of those intrigues, florid Parts, as the learned Author of, so well able to invent and polish a tale, with prophane swearing and other proper circumstances, as he has shewn himself all along to be in that discourse, I should have no more believ'd the Plot from the Doctors single testimony, than I believe the method of getting hands have been as he would insinuate.
Truly you must give him a grain of allowance, for he was inprison before the Kings return, and now begins to be uneasie by loss of his place, by the freedome of trade, which has been costly enough to some, and some other things in the world that are uneasie to him, which makes him very passionate at any thing like Fanaticism, which he takes every thing to be that does not absolutelywith his own. I must speak truth though I be his Cozin.
You put me in mind of a story when Bishopcame out of the, to exercise his Episcopal Office in Queentime, he behaved himself very extravagantly to some Gentlemen, that came to wait on him in his visitation, which when one of his Servants would have excused by his late coming out of Prison, a Gentleman replied, he is lately come out of the, and now he is fit to go to, but there is a Friend of mine one, that lives on, that cures all mad People, that arenot moped, as he sayes in his printed Paper, if he would repair thither, he might be accommodated, and this poor Nation at quiet, for his distemper is far from any thing like mopishness, being so mercurial a Gentlemanas he is known to be, and therefore as my Author says very curable.
There is no dealing with you, you are so bitter upon my Cozen, we'le call our old cause over again, I'm ready to do as I said, defend that Dialogue.
So you say, but heark you Captain, you may be a man of sence for all that, do you not think it a very flagitious thing for a little unknown fellow, to comprehend all the states, orders, and divisions of men, both Lords, Citizens, and Commons ofunder the opprobrious names ofand, names so reproachful, that the meanest spirit inwould make a repartee with a Cudgel in Answer to either of them.
He meant only the seditious part of them, I suppose that is them, that were for petitioning, which was pursued with great Zeal by all sort of Phanatiques.
From whence you most logically conclude it was a seditious contrivance.
Yes, marry do I.
Not so fast good Captain, there is no Law against it, and where no Law, no transgression yet that shameless Author would insinuate a disposition of rebellion from it: Otherwayes he would not treat the Petitionersat that scurrilous rate as he does all along, and truly Captain (for I do not love to swear nor talk prophanely, as that Author makes hisand, do very often,) had not his Majesty declared his dislike against it, as not suitable to his Royal will and pleasure,which modest men out of good manners would not oppose, the Petition had been subscribed, as generally as ever any was, for notwithstanding all his malicious charges against it, it was not, not ill in it self, but as it was circumstanced with the Kings will to the contrary.
But what say you, to all the Phanatiques so cordially joyning in it, may not that beget a suspicion justly, that there was something intended that might be, ill in it self?
Not at all, doth not the Scripture tell you that the Pharisees were great Sophisticatorsof the old Law, confounding it by unwritten Traditions? yet they are not blamed, neither is the doctrine of the resurrection disparaged, for their stout assertion of it.
You say well, then I see that a Phanatique may sometimes be in the right, as well as the wicked Pharisees, or the Papists.
Who doubts it?
percieve you are, though not for the defence, of Petitioning, yet for the defence of the subject matter of it, what say you to the.
believe it an unjust charge, as to the main; for though possibly some might be so indiscreet as to name that Oath, not with that due respects to his Majesty, yet I'mconfident none was ever so impudent as to demand, in terms, the bringing delinquents to Punishment, being that was so notorious a 1641 term, as must displease all men that are not of those principles, but possibly there might be something of trying the Lords in the Tower, which might give the Protestantish Author occasion of thatflourish, as if their Case was paralel to those worthy Lords and Gentlemen, then called Delinquents, than which nothing can be more vilely insinuated, but as to his last charge, that the Parliament was to sit as long as they pleased, I'm sure it is so notoriously false, as nothing but a man of a bold front could have said it, I wish he had been in, and a Subject to their Laws, when he said it.
Prithee why so?
They have a Law there, as I have been informed, called the Statute of, that if any man by prepense false suggestion or insinuation accuse a Lord, so as he may be capitally questioned, it is capital in the Accuser; if that Law was on force here, my little Fellow would be collered; for can any thing be more malitious, than to accuse a Body of Men of attempting a thing which cannot be acted without the greatest treason imaginable, as that of perpetuating a Parliament, for that's the English of sitting as long as they please, meant by the ingenious Authour?
He but tells you that a Country Justice said so somewhere upon the Bench, and so they are not his hiswords.
A Writer of Dramatique or Dialogue is to answer alwayes for what he makes the Persons speak, which might be the occasion of that Statute for the punishment of prophane Swearing by Players of interludes, which our Author is not free from, it may be that quality made him nameless, for fear some cross grain'd Cur of the Bench should have levyed the twelve pence's upon him. But this must be wholly an Artifice to blacken the Petition, for no Justice in the Country, norneither, though many of them, are far from Conjurers could ever be so fond to assert a thing, so wholly andin every parcel an untruth: but there may be strange children now, as there were intime, whose mouth speaketh vanity, from whom the Prophet prayed deliverance,144.II.
Why you are a strange man, to expect literal truths from a man that writes in my Friends mystical way?
Heark you Captain, if your Friend in his mystical way had abused me in particular, as he has almost the whole Nation in general, I would in down-right terms have broken his head, whensoever I had met him, and in the mean time have cudgelled you, noble Captain, till you had discovered his name, though I be but a Piper, call me? I would have him know, and you too, that I'm the 22th Piper of my Family, licensed by the Heirs of, now Lord, a Faculty saved to that Family by two Acts of Parliament; so we are no Rogues, like your South Country Fidlers, Captain.
You are very hot, cooler language would do as well, for hot words do no business.
Well, well; but what say you to that detracting passage, that it would be never the worse, if they,the men of Estates,.
Very well.
How can any thing be more base than this, to desire that the men of Estates should be out of favour at Court, because it would prompt them to revenge, as he very Christianly insinuates, the consequence of which must be a War, as he must hope: but I wonder he should, when he is a man of known modesty before an Enemy, if he be the man I guess; but he is a publick spirited man, and so hopes a War as the only expedientto set aside all Petitioning for the future: for to say truth, there will be nothing left upon such success as he proposes to petition for; but if there be no better conduct than his, there may be a mistake in measures: our last War was occasioned from such rascally Politiques, to press both sides to extremities, and foment all differences into the bargain too, as I have been told; but I hope to see a thousand such raskally Pickthanks hanged, before any thing of that happen.
But is not my Cosin very witty, when he says it is a blessing to have neither Friend, nor Money, and yet to design to be taken prisoner, as the way to both, and makes it out very prettily?
Yes faith he is, but why the pox doth he not pursue his own methods to preferment, take a Goal, for on my Conscience he cannot crack of either; for how he should have Friends that hath abused the whole Nation I see not, neither how he should abound in Money; for Lands he has none, I believe.
Then you thinka Goal is the fittest place for my Cosin?
Aye truly do I.
But do you not like his brave description of the benefits of a Prison, and the Rogueries of those that ply there to that purpose?
Truly like the rest, for from the converse of, he concludes all the Intrigues of the World to be managed at the same Religious Rule, and then makes hisan Officer of Address, as one may call him; but he keeps his Office no where that I can find out but in your CosinNoddle.
But what think you of the discovery of a new Plot, in case the Petition had gone on? of fivePetitions more, if the Parliament had met; one against the Lords in the, another for the sitting of the Parliament till they had gone through with what they had to do, a third for taking away Bishops Votes, a fourth for the remove of Evil Councellors, a fifth for putting theinto safe hands.
Your Cosin might do well to produce the draught of such Petitions, or at least name some-body besides histhat had seen some such thing, otherways he is to be taken for a Make-bate, and a Lyar; and truly we have reason to acquiesce under the Government of our gracious Prince, that cannot be provoked by such sycophantly Knaves to do any thing but what becomes him: But your Cosin shews himself a good man upon all occasions, by ranging all those Petitions together, as if to Petition for the Tryal of the Lords was equally criminal with the rest, can any thing more reflect upon the Honour of the King, Parliament, and whole Nation, than to insinuate, which must be a necessary consequence of so marshalling the Petitions, that a Petition against the Lords, impeached by Parliament for High-Treason, when a Court is in being that can only take Cognizance of their Affairs, is to be ranked amongst Misdemeanours of the highest nature; if this do not proceed from a design which I think is not very Protestantish of running the Plot into, I am mistaken.
But heark you, Minstrel, does not my Cosin go on bravely, when he tells us what dangerous Rogues the Citizens are, and what designs they have still on foot, to distract, if not subvert the Government, by contriving new methods of Petitioning, and telling us, that those? On my Conscience he is a notable man.
So he is, and a bold one too, I think, to asperse by intimation so considerable a body of men, as the City of, with contrivances against the Government, only to shew his Wit, without the least ground imaginable as I can see: I tell you, if it was in, as fond as he is of that Government, they would anger him, for he would without doubt be put to the question, that a discovery might be made of such grand designs in agitation; and if it proved all a Staff of his own, as I dare swear this is, then I believe he would be broke upon the Wheel, for endeavouring to bring the King into a jealousie of his good City of.
But is not my Cosin an excellent Casuist, by running his divisions upon Conscience?
Yes, in his scoffing way; but I must tell both him and you, in answer to his frequent running that expression,; though I am as far from believing that those pretenders are such, yet God hath a people that he will vindicate one day, to the confusion of faces of all them.
But has he not mauld thewith their Doctrine of Necessity?
He is too shallow for that; he hath a little droll'd upon the consequence of the Opinion: but I tell you Capt. whatheard aover a Pot of Ale say the other day, that every futurity, or thing to come, was certain in it self, whether it should happen or not, and that cannot be denied Captain.
It cannot.
If so, what room then for free Agency, when its impossible to remove a certainty: But asheard a Divine say once, no created understanding can comprehend the difference betwixt Gods certain foresightand predestinating, soleave it; andam sure he would not have medled with it, but that he could fix something of reproach upon the party, from the consequences of it, meeting with some bad practices of hypocritical men; but yet as generally as it is now decryed, it hath been otherway; for they that know any thing, know that most of the Bishops, and generally the inferiour Clergy were of that Opinion, and yet very holy and pious men in their Generations, for all his scoffs that he fixes upon that Opinion by inference, for none was ever yet so impudent to assert in terms what he makes histo do, and truly I do believe he is of theOpinion, that a thing may be sin in one which is not in another; for lying, though it be sin in most men, is not so in him as he thinks, he otherways would not have so much used it.
How came youto be such a distinguisher, I did not expect it from you?
My Mother was a Parsons Daughter, had little to her Portion but a few Books and Sermon Notes of her Fathers, which I used to read at spare times to the Neighbourhood, and so became thus skilful.
Well, what think you of his clawing the Rogues off for their old Rebellion, is't not manly and brave?
It is a thing that has been said a thousand times when it was so, but now it looks like breaking the Act of Oblivion, a thing that his Majesty, to his Immortal Honour, holds sacred; such a little Rat as he methinks should not be nibling, when the Lyon is unconcerned.
anddrunk, and why may not we within then? two Pots, and shut the door after you. But what thinkst thou, to page 26. isit not an excellent facetious discourse, displaying Villany in its proper colours?
It is rather a teaching people how to be Villains; like your fashionable Plays, teach more sins than they reprove.
My Cosin cannot I see get your good word, but I'le make you Friends.
As how?
You'l Pipe at his Wifes next Churching, and then I'm sure the half Ginney and the Frumenty will please you.
Let it alone till then; but in the mean time I'le give a short account of my sentiments of those ten Pages.
Let's have it then.
He begins with comparingand, a thing now that isand thredbare; there is a Book calledthat has done it more to the purpose, writ nigh forty years agone, but yet in his rails upon the later, he speaks ironically of the Plot, (when he calls the Jesuites the) as a man must needs conclude that reads the whole discourse, especially if that Author had any intelligence or correspondence with the Author of the further discovery dedicated to Dr.; and that flourish might have been as decently saved, besides his Pen too much resembles a Clever, cuts only one way, as a man may easily observe, by his constant pinching upon that party for the 1641. business, a thing that none of them has the face now publickly to justifie, and his passing by the Rebellion in, accompanied with the murder of nigh a million of Protestants, without the least reflection, though that Villany be yet justified, or at least not owned to be so by that Party, as it was atfirst abetted by the Pope; and then after all, as if he would make himself compleatly wicked, he scandalizes the Protestant Religion, which the late King of blessed memory own'd that he fought for, as may be seen yet by his Declarations, and the inscription upon his Coyns, stampt at the beginning of the late Rebellion; for by that is meant, as he makes his Citizen say, the Religion of the dissenters from the Church; a distinction that the late blessed Martyr would not have thankt him for.
I perceive you are very poynant upon my Friend still, but go on.
Then he goes on with teaching a method of Villany which he would call discovering, to inflame the Nation, and widen the breaches betwixt the King and his People; for why else should he, amongst other things, lay such a stress upon the Kings being one of the three Estates, and make such damn'd inferences, a thing decried by all sober men, because declared otherwise in the Preambles of several acts of Parliament, and yet the good King in a Message to the two Houses owned three Estates, when the Bishops were by Act removed, of which by consequence he must be one, but that may be lookt upon, considering the novelty of that disposition to be a lapse in the Secretary, and so no weight to be laid upon it. I refer you to the Declaration bearing date from,13. 1642. Then he falls upon the light and foolish antick gestures of the Conventiclers, with their fond metaphers not worth answering, because none so foolish as to adjust them, then he goes on, as if the Plot was onely a blind to enrage people, and that there was a real design to destroy the Hierarchy, and all the Sons of the Church, by the name of the Papists in Masquerade, and get all the places of profit to themselves.
Is not that very well hinted?
What are you a hinter, and a holder forth? so its well hinted of buzzing into the peoples ears to dispose them to Rebellion, of the Emperour oflanding upon35000 light Horse men, and a great many other Fopperies, not worth taking notice on.
To say truth, there are a great many little things in it, but there must be something to fill up, or else it would not come to account, it would not advance from the Stationer any thing considerable.
But he should have studied propriety of things to have made 'em pass the better: Is it not, think you, a well laid thing, to make hiswhom he represents, a cunning, projecting, canting Knave? to bring in a story by the head and shoulders of, and the ten Tables, and correcting himself with a thundering Oath, one that he afterward makes justifying the three Estates, and other intrigues of Politiques, it might have passed, had he laid the Scene amongst his friends in; and then saying that he had read in a Book that the Bishops inEighths time made the ten Commandments, and make foolish inferences from thence too: The whole thing is a lye, for no man ever yet read any such thing in a Book, but in his scurrilous Pamphlet; the nearest to it is, what Bishopreports of the Priests inabout that time, that they would have made the common people believe, the more to incense them against, and the Gospellers of that Age, thatand his Complices made the New Testament, or at least S.Epistles, but: I hope the ingenious Author is too wise to make reflections of that nature.
But I perceive you care not what reflections you make upon my friend.
Your friend is unknown to me, he should have set his name, and then it may be he had been safer, but I suppose his modesty would not permit it.
Well, is this all you have to say?
There needs not, I think, but one word more, at last he falls foul by hisupon, whom he calls Dog in a doublet or worse, but after all he ends in a panagyrick of his wisedome.
I do not like this eves-dropping, yet, I hope, I have said nothing, that I need care who hears: howeveris a good honest fellow, I have wasted some pence with him.
Come Gentlemen you have been in eager discourse, but I did hear the subject matter of it very well.
I was only making some passionate observations upon a Book twice or thrice printed, calledand, which he undertook wholly, and in every part to defend.
What youturn'd Advocate? mustbe reacted by you with a horse pox to your Captainship? How long is it since I releived you, and a thin starved thing yclipped your Boy, with ten penyworth of Pudding pies, when you and he had lived three dayes upon stewed fiddlestrings? I tell thee, how this fellow came by the doughty name of Captain, he was a foot Souldier intime, and upon a march stole a live Pike in an Inn, out of a Pale, and put it into his Breeches, becausehe saw his Comrade had done the like to a Barbel, but presently his manful roars made a discovery, so he was cashiered, pretended it was for his loyalty, and from that time dubb'd himself Captain: But as to the discourse, I tell thee Old Souldier, that if he, or thou, or any body that wears a head, God bless the King, should have call'd, or shall call me by the contemptible name of(though I be but free of the Porters Company) I would and will, if ever it be any mans ill luck so to do, all to be pudding-pie his Calves-head: What?
How I am now like to be worried betwixt these two learned men?andthe Pudding Wright: Well, well, but though you quarrel, my friend, for his names ofand, yet Mrspeaks very heavenly by the same Authors directions: speak against that if you dare, the best of you.
Mrspeaks truly of the Papists, but not all that a true Son of the Church might have said, he sayes in answer to the Charge, that the Papists loyalty was in their own defence, being in a manner necessitated to that side, that it was better, if so, than fighting against the King, and further that no man drew his sword in the opposite cause,, and, he might have added, if he had thought fit, that after the King was outed, not one Papist ever entered into a Plot for his Restitution, but the whole truth was not his business, whereas the Schismaticks, as he boldly enough calls some sort of men, asserted the Kings Cause in the lowest Ebb: and that so bravely both by outward force, and other less visible endeavours, that the Kings Restitution must be ascribed to them, as to the second cause, which made some amends for their former deviation, I tell thee, had the King had no better friends than the Papists,he had never seen the English shore again.
But have you read on?
Yes, and find the business about the three Estates repeated over again to no purpose, wherein the learned Author has with great reputation to himself proved the Snow white.
But what think you of his bringing inEpistle to the History of the Plot: is not that a heeler?
Like the rest, for I have not much to say about that Gentleman, eitheror, for they say he is a very pretty man at small matters, but those two Authors do most harmoniously agree in driving on, and fixing a worse Plot upon the Non-Conformists, which they both are careful to improve, which is by their favour a setting up of the worship of false Gods, to lessen, if not to destroy the worship of the true one, so whilst they would alarm the Nation with this Chymera of a Plot to be found no where, but in their learned Brains, the true Plot will weather off, or which is worse, go on.
I think you are as hard to please as, I had thought you had revered Mr.at another rate, than to speak so indifferently of him.
Indifferently do you call it? I wonder that I, or any other good Subject should do so, especially when it is considered who licensed, that Book, that deserved to be burnt by the common Hangman, as a great Lord said some bodies else did.
But did not he say then in excuse that he would license an answer to it?
It may be so but that resolves into this, that he would license any thing for the Fees of it.
I'le tell him what you say, and then i' faith he'lmaul you in a Ballad,as well as he hath done somebody else.
Pray Gentlemen not so fast, fair and softly goes far on a day.
But do you hear, how do you like Mr.description of the duty of Subjects, and Kings?
I shall tell you my mind as to that too, for I have read the Book o're; and we Pie men are old Dog at Politiques in this communicative age: Well, now as to that, by multitude of questions, he perplexes the Cause, for if he layd down for his position this truth,, there had been then no Room for a shift, but he makes hisask a knavish question,? The answer is in the negative, but a man might have shap'd another answer as pertinent.
As how?
When God gives over Kings to be wholly led by their sensual appetites, and to lay aside all manner of Justice, he often suffers the People to be so too, for the world is rather governed by example than Precept. There are many sad examples of that kind, as ofthe cruel ofstabb'd to death by his Bastard Brother.King of, once imprisoned, and when he had by miracle recovered his Estate, grew so barbarously cruel to all ranks of men, that the Citizens ofrose as one man against him, upon which news, being in the Castle, he fell into a fit of an Apoplexy, and died suddenly.the second of, who was deposed by his Unkle. And of later years Sultanthe Great Turk, whowas for his outragious lusts and other extravagancies, deposed and strangled in the. There is a living example of that kind,of, set aside and imprisoned by his Brother, who now injoys as the reward of his fact both his Brothers wife and Kingdom, and yet not so much as a Sword, or Pen manag'd in his behalf; by these examples, though it cannot be denied, but it is the Subjects duty to suffer patiently, and like theLegion, suffer themselves to be cut in pieces, rather than to resist, as Mr.well observed, yet nature in those Cases is often so strong, that there is no trusting to it.
I perceive then, that your opinion is, that it is safer for Princes to keep within due moderation, as to their administration, than to do otherwise, notwithstanding they have so much right on their sides, even as to this world; for if a Nation should lie under such unhappy circumstances, as to have the Prince and People at difference, the Divines of the Popular, as well as the other, would from Texts of Scripture, whether misapplied or no, not material offerto both Parties, as is well observed in an excellent Passage out of,44.
I perceive by this your Poets are an extraordinary sort of men, for as I have been told, that was written before the late Wars, and I see by this that there will never want upon the same unlucky occasion high Boyes on both sides, but thou hast a plaguy memory to remember all this stuffe, I wonder how thou dost it, I can hardly remember the Lords Prayer.
Nature alwayes supplies Fools and blind men with a special gift that way.
You may think there may be no harm in this Poetry, but,assure you, if my Cosin comes to know of it: he'l make you prove where you had it.
That's as easily done Captain, as to prove your ingenious Cosin to be a Pensioner to somebody, that he does not think fit to own.
You mean the Lords in the Tower I warrant you if you durst speak.
What if one did? you are ne're the better, its no Libel, neither will an Action on the Case lie for abusing CaptainCosin nameless: But faith, if you will Captain, we'l call for the other friendly pot, three double Mugs of Ale within there -- now lets talk in cooler terms.
I am for peace, but yet.
Where got you all this Latine? I did not expectit, neither with going to Sermons, nor crying.
They are the remains of my schooling.
You are then I believe a man of Intrigue, some Jesuit in disguise, pray give me your opinion, whats the best way to grow rich; for I am of the opinion of that Author, that cried,. My Masters and Friends, let us first grow rich, Then virtue'll come, or vice no matter which.
A very learned Colloquy amongst us three.
If by riches you mean preferment, I'le tell you mine opinion, and illustrate it by some Examples: first I do not like theway of Imprisonment in order it, for that meets with so many difficulties, as are not easily to be o'recome.
You tell me which is not the way, pray tell me which is, for without better directions, I'le ne're come to my Journies end.
There is a way, which has thriven well with a namesake of mine, and many others too, namely to abette the Republicaninterest, incumber the Prerogative with, the, and, so that it shall be a meer empty name, but be sure you be a parlish Pratlebasket upon that Subject, then you'l be taken off, as my Namesake is, by which he hath got to be either the third, fourth, or fifth part of a great Officer of State.
I cannot find out the interest of taking Men off, that is of hiring men to personate an honest man, for to be sure upon the first occasion they'l come to themselves, act the Knaves part again, for they are so still in their hearts.
You say well, but its often the luck of those Sophisters to be served so.
But may not an unwearied writing Books, in defence of the truth, do something considerable in the case, as it is the circumstance of my Cousin?
But little; for his way of writing is look'd upon by sober men, more to gratifie his passion upon a Party, and his itch of scribling, which is demonstrable enough by his Translations, than out of any noble end to his Prince, and so he is his own rewarder, by eating the daily dumplings it affords him.
You may run down my Cosin, in your Ale, at what rate you please here; but I say, and say again, that the Phanatiques are more dangerous Enemies than the Papists, both to the Kings Royal Person and Government.
I say, and say again in answer to you Captain, if there be one Phanatique in, that is notmad, that wishes any ill to the Kings Person, though I doubt many may be too sawcy upon the administration: and on the contrary, if there be ten Papists (I'le go toprecise number) that wishes prosperity to either, but in some equivocal meaning, I'le never pipe more, and so Captainbecause you are a man of quality pay thereckoning.
A match, and then I break up this famous Colloquy.
But I'le tell you a piece of news before we part: my Friend writes one of the weekly Books, and to be sure if he hear of our discourse, he'l claw you off in his next.
Which of them, the Popish Domestick called the true one, or the Fanatique eclyped the Protestant?
Neither, but the loyal one.
Thats like a Chimney Sweeper, when I lived inForrest, that cryed all white for the King, for its a great argument of Loyalty, to insinuate to his Majesty, that his People has some ill contrivements against him, by which he designs to put him upon his constant guard, which can be no easie posture to any Monarch; But I suppose his method is after the rate of, all the news he blesses us with is of his own happy contrivance, in which he has an extraordinary faculty.
I protest, you are a notable Fellow, I did not expect any thing of this from you.
I have a way for it, for when I exercise my Calling to please Gentlemen, we sometimes divert our selves with drinking, and then on course State matters or Religion are the subject of discourse, and I having a parlish memory bring all away; for I have a double Title to it, according to the late observation.
As how?
Faith I am like the once Mayor of,in eye-sight, andof Understanding.
I'le but ask you one question, What is the reason, that a strange Woman in Scripture-language should signifie an Harlot, and a strange Man in statutable English, to use the, should not signifie theto it?
Though it do not so fully, yet it does something of that nature by implication, for no man deservedly enjoyes that Character, that can boast ofmuch reputation to himself: But to what purpose this impertinent Sally? lets part, for we shall run from one thing to another, till we be by someto durance. Your Servant Captain.
Your Servant, Sir.
Your Servant, Gentlemen.