How nowhow comes this kindness betwixt thee andthe Barge-man? last time I saw you together at, you were for heaving Stones at one anothers heads.
O, that's long since, and utterly forgot; we are now good Friends.
God-a-mercy Horse, this Roguewas tugging up Stream whilst his Oars were ready to break at, and seeing us come up with three good Horses Towing our Punt, his Stomach came down, and he begg'd most devoutly to give him a Tow to; not a word of the Bell-Wether, or any of his usual Complements. I took mercy on the poor Rogue, and let him fasten his Wherry to us, and I think in my heart the Whelp has eaten us half a Stone of Beef to day.
Upon the honest word of a Waterman,I never eat daintier Beef in my Life, nor better Mustard, but not one mouthful of Mutton was to be seen.
Sirrah, one word more of Mutton and off you go; you cannot forbear your Roguery.
But pray thee,whither art thou making at this Time of the year?
Why, faith, thou knowest I follow the Court for the most part, and now I am going before it, and intend to get a goodat: Acquaintance is a main matter with a Waterman: besides, here's honestpromises me Lodging at his House; and when he goes for, his Wife and I canmake as merry as if he were gone anVoyage.
But, I hope, there will be another Voyage found out, they say the King will make us a way West-ward tofor our Barges, and has sent forthat can make Boats go by Land as well as by Water, and thenwill be. The saucy Rogues t'other day atwere ready to Brain us, and threatned to fire the Barges, because we belonged to. If the King would take my Counsel, he should come no more amongst them for one seven years, I would make the proud Rogues know themselves better.
I am not for that,neither, for that would quite spoyl our Ferry: when all's doneis.
And will be, that is, a Nest of unthankful Rogues that hate us Country Gentlemen, tho' they get all they have by us: What wouldbe worth, if it were not for the Country? And faith, since all the wealth of the Country is gotten thither by the Kings living so long amongst them, I hope His Majesty will even now live in the Country till their Money be brought into the Country again.
I could agree well enough to all thou say'st, but only for this, and that would quite be ruin'd if the King should leave.
For that, if thecome, they will dig so many Cuts to make therun from our Town to, I warrant thee, thou may'st get a New, and better than this, upon some of those New Cuts.
But do'st think the King will keep his Court atany long time? I heard our Parson say, for all this the Parliament would not be held at, because there was a Parliament once held there, and it was called the mad Parliament.
Thou may'st tell the Parson from me, that there has been many Parliaments held at, that have been worse than mad; and it's well if this last was not the madest that ever was yet.
I must confess there was a strange Touse whilst they were Sitting: Our Townsmen ofwould have talked so of the brave Acts they were a making, and what good they would have done to the Commonalty, and how they would have handled the Courtiers, and abundance more than I can remember. Thouwouldst have admired, but to say Truth, this Town of, though they be our Neighbours, is as Roguish a place as any is in. If I were worth to advise the King, I would make a great Wall betwixt the Castle and the Town, that should reach down to the River on the one side, and down toon the other side, and never a Gate through it, but for the Kings conveniency to go a Hunting into the great Park, or the Duke into the Forrest, and shut at all other times. Then would I build a New Town to entertain the Kings Court, should reach to the.
Still, still thisis the Burden of the Song,
But pretheetell us what this Parliament would have done for the good of the Commonalty that is talked on so much; thou carriedst Parliament men in thy Boat every day, and I know thou hast heard all their Speeches; I have heard them make Speeches as they have pass'd over here at our Ferry Boat.
Thou art in the right of that, for there is not one Member (for so we call them at) of forty, but they are still making Speeches: I heard one of them make a Speech to Deaf, an old Sculler, fromto the.nodded at him now and then, and he went on as Policitly as if he had been in the House all the while. When they landed at the, where I also landed my Fair, he bidgive him three pence, but wanting Change, he asked me for three pence, but I having ne're a three pence, sayes the Member to, I see thou art a right English man, a good Protestant, and, I dare say, hates the Popish Successor with all thy heart, and therefore I will give thee the whole Six pence.
'Twas well he had the Wit to Nod at him, being a could not hear him.
So it was, and that was enough, for I dare say, a Nod now and then, would have continued the Speech to. O, our Water-men have thousands such Stories as these of their Worships, they were for the most part so full of it, they could not hold it in.
But pretheetell us what thou heard'st they did in the House as well as out.
Well, in the first place they kept aat theon the back of thea long time before they sate.
A! what's that?
Why, as the Players Rehearse or Act over the Play in the Morning, which they intend to Play in the Afternoon: So, did they make their Speeches, and set all their Matters in order in the Tavern, before they met in the House.
Methinks, if it were needful for a Parliament to have such a Rehearsing, his Majesty should provide them a place to rehearse in: It is not very handsome in my mind, that the matters which concern his Majesty and the Kingdom should be medled with in a Tavern.
It's very true: but the Master of the House, he got well by them; and the Drawers of that House are become notable Boyes, they can talk of State Affairs, it would do your Heart good to hear them: and for any thing that I know, when these Boyes come to set up for themselves, and keep Taverns in the City, they may be the fittest men they will have to serve in Parliament: they will now, as young as they are, make fine Speeches to their fellow Prentices, when any Rout of them meets together, and have their Lessons full ready on any occasion; and will.
A Pox on 'em, 'tis such work as this that makes the King leave, and will undo us all at: But this is all still out of the House.
It is impossible I should tell you a tenth part of what they did in the House: but the remembrance of Men and Things they fell upon will put me in mind best; and therefore the first I think on, is the Kings Majesty, God bless him, him they cryed.
What, asof our Town cryed his Wife?
I don't know what he did, but they Voted that no body should either Borrow or Lend, nor Sell or Buy with him under pain of their Displeasure.
This is almost as ill as the Parson said of the, that the Pope would have done with Queen, for he forbade any Body to Borrow or Lend with her, Sellor Buy, Eat or Drink; Nay, he forbid her to come in either Church or Market.
But then to make him amends, they took care to kill him an Old Lean Lord at; and that's all I remember they have done for him since they met.
What did they then do?
Next they took the Duke into handling.
And what would they do with him?
They would have taken away his, whatever he had done to them I know not, but they were resolv'd to have worried him.
What was it provoked them so much against him?
They said he was a, and was for the Pope and the Plot; but the Truth on't is, I think the true Reason of their Cruelty was, because he put his Brother in mind who were, and had been Rogues, and were sure to prove so in the end: and for this they would never forgive him; and with talking with one another, they were got to that pass, they matter'd not what they said; for they were permitted so long, they thought no body durst gainsay them.
Why, I thought no man living durst have medled with any of the Blood Royal.
Thou art a Fool, did not they behead the last King, and kept this banished a long time? and all that was still a House of Commons.
What would they have done with the Duke thinkest thou?
Hang'd him if they could have catch't him, but being he was out of their reach, have taken away all his means, and all he was ever like to have, if (which God forbid) he should have surviv'd the King.
They were very bold.
Thou may'st swear that; when the Fore-man of OldShop, a blind Scrivener was so bold as to speak a saucy Speech against his Highness.
What was he, a Prentice?
No, he was out of his Time, and had set up for himself.
Why, I thought no such Hand-crafts men had ever been chosen Members.
Any body that has money to pay for Drink, Gentle or Simple that will spend his Guinneys upon some Town in theis good enough: for I'le tell thee, as I heard SquireHuntsman say, that he cared not for above three or four Couple of Hunting Dogs amongst twenty Couple, so they would give their Tongues and go along with those that were Hunters; no more do they in the Parliament care whether the greatest part of their Members have any Wit, or none at all, so that they will Vote with the Old ones.
Well, though it was sore against my will, I was Press'd once into the Service when the Duke was our Ambral, and I dare swear never a man in the Fleet had a better Heart than he.
Pox on you Rogue, you staid but one Bout and run away; but we that staid and were in both theWars, know the Duke well enough; and let them do what they will at, I am sure all the Seamen and Watermen inwill be for him against any Body but the King, God bless him.
And I am sure he'll never be a Rebel, as many of those that are his Enemies have been.
Rebel! they would like him better if he would stand in the Kings Face and do what he pleased, whether the King pleased or not; do'st not see how they lovefor coming home whether the King would or no.
Well, I hope to see the Duke at, and there he will be welcome, I dare say, letand the Devil say what they will.
For, surely it is notthat does all these ill things you talk of.
Thou art in the right of that, for I never heard that the Houses met together to Petition or raise Tumults, there's no fault in the place; 'tis some roguish People that lives in it, whom nothing vvill ever make better Subjects than they have been: I have knovvn them long enough.
But prethee, go on vvith thy Story.
Novv I think on't, I should have told you, that I am novv going to say, first of all, that is, vvhat they vvould havedone about the Church; for I have heard the Church should take place of both the King and the Duke.
Ay, but not of the Law, for I know a Wise man as any in, an Attorney, that says, That the Law was above both Church and King.
Why then, according to that Rule, I should first have begun with the Law.
No matter, amongst us we are not so punctual, go on, now thy hand is in, with the Church.
As for the Church, I carried a Member up to, and he told me, they had resolv'd to Overhall all the Nine and Thirtyof the Church, and that they had already heaved away Three and a half of them.
Belike, if they had gone on, they would have hove away most of them; Three and a half in one day was a great step.
No, I do'nt believe they would have hove them all away, but they would quite have new moulded them so, that one should scarce have known them. Ha'nt I seen an old Ship that has been a long time at Sea, when she has been in the Dock, her Rigging Overhall'd and Tarr'd, new Painted, Carved and Guilt, a man that has sayled in her, could scarce have known her.
Thou art in the right of that, and I do believe that the Church was grown very old and much decay'd, and had need of repairing, and it will never be done but by a Parliament. I was atlast Saboath-day, and there at the Meeting the Minister said, That the best Church in the World should be repaired once in a hundred years; and that the Church we now have, was repaired (but he had another Word for it) about a Hundred and Forty or Fifty years since.
Was it not? the Scholars attalk much of that.
Ay, Ay, it was, that he said; and that the Church (but more especially the Church-men) should be Reform'd.
Besides, this Member told me, the Parsons must use theno more.
That was only for the good of the. I carried a Clothier over the Ferry not long since, that said they werehereafter to wearSurplices, and the Bishops were to wear white, in stead of Lawn Sleeves.
And then for the Bishops Courts, that as we call the Bawdy-Court, they would have mauled those Rogues to some purpose.
A Pox on 'em, they made me pay above five Pounds about a Bastard, a Whore laid to me, that a Scholar ofgot, I dare say; for I kept reckning, and the Child was got when I was gone down with the Barge to; and for want of a Flash, we lay above ten Weeks before we came again.
It seems thou diserved'st for it however.
That which troubled me most, was, that I must have done Penance in a White Sheet, and then my Wife and all my Friends would have known it; and so saith, I was forced to borrow the Moneys, and make my Peace with them: And after all, they would have had Ten Shillings more for a piece of Parchment no bigger than my Hand: I was e'en glad to pay them a Noble get clear of them.
As far as I could understand, they would have taken these Courts away, and have made the Bishops poor Gentlemen: They would have clipt their Wings, if not quite slaved them. O this Member, as we passed by, shaked his Head at it, and said, There were Raggs of Popery kept there; and so did he at, when I landed him at.
What did he mean by that?
Why, the Arch-Bishop oflives at, and the Bishop ofhath a Countrey-House at.
Well, butThou said'st, they would also have had a Fling at the Law.
For any thing of the Law it self, I heard not so much of it; but they were in hand, to have reckoned with almost all thein, some for one Fault, and some for others.
What had the Judges done?
Whether they had strained a Pin, to do something extraordinary for the King and the Court, I know not; but the main matter was, that most of the Talkative Men of the House,were Lawyers, and the only way for them to get Preferment, was by turning out of the, that they might get into their Places.
I think in my very Conscience, these Lawyers are the Bain of the Kingdom: For they are so accustomed to talk against their Consciences for Moneys, at, that when they come to talk in the House, it is the same thing: So that whatever they think for their Advantage, they never want broad Consciences, nor smooth Tongues, to drive on to the utmost.
Pray theetell me one thing, are not these Lawyers the Men, that either doe, or should understand the Law?
No doubt of it.
Well then, when the Rebellion was begun, and carried on in our King's Father's Time, and in his own, did not the Lawyers know, that the War was contrary to the Law?
Certainly they did.
Then do I say, That as many Lawyers as Sided with the Rebells in those days, deserve yet to be Hanged for what they did then.
O! but they were wise enough for that: For they got the Act of Oblivion, to pardon, not only their Faults by-passed, but those that were to come; and abundance of those very Men that talked the People into that Rebellion, are yet living, and as willing to do Mischief, as ever they were.
It goes beyond my Understanding, how, and why they are admitted to abuse the People at this rate: For if they can set poor ignorant Men on a Mischief, for which they may be Hanged, and can talk themselves off again, it is time for poor men to have a Care.
I am of this mind, that had I been the King's Advisar, when he forgave all the Rebells, I would not have forgiven one Lawyer; for they could not plead Ignorance.
And that it was a Rebellion is clear: For if it had not been, what need was there of an Act of?
Thou art in the Right of that too.
Nothing troubles me so much, as that these Lawyers, are not only Lawyers to follow and maintain the Law; butthey can make what they will to be Law, and what they like not to be no Law: Nay, they will hang the Honestest man in, and find Law for it; and save the greatest Knave, and find Law for that too.
Did not Judgepronounce Sentence against, andplead against him? And both these were great Lawyers: Nay, an a bungling Lawyer, that is a Justice of the Peace, at the Quarter Sessions, will take upon him to talk more than all the Bench, and be very angry at any Justice that dares oppose any thing he says.
There is reason for that: For there is not one Lawyer of twenty, but is certainly bribed (tho' they call it feed) of one Party in all Controversies, at the Sessions, and frequently by both. O they make great Gains at a Sessions; for there they are bothand. and all goes as they will.
I'll tell thee, for that I had a wrangling Quarrel once with a Drunken Fellow at the Ferry; and upon some Words, I up with the Boat-hook, and broke his Head. He went and fetched a Warrant for me: I was advised to go my self to the same Justice, being a, and bind my self over: Which I did, and would have given his Worship an Angel; for so my Friend advised me: He said, he would take no Moneys upon that Account: For indeed, it seemed, he had taken before from my Adversary; but he said, if I would give any thing to his Wife, I might: Upon which, I sent a fat Wether, worth a Mark, in the Night time to her Worship; and within two days, both he and I were sent for, before Mr. Justice; and after he had talked a great deal of Law, and seemed angry with us both, he made us good friends, and got both our Moneys.
There may a thousand Stories be told of them: I hope at one time, both the King and the Kingdom will see what they are, and never let them have more to do, than with matters of Law; and then those that employ them may take the mends in their own Hands, as I do, when I go to the Alehouse: for all mischief principally comes from them.
A Pox and Plague light on 'em, they will never be quelled: For they have always either one or other great Lawyer in Power with the King, and that keeps them up: So let ustalk no more of them. What did the Parliament next fall upon, honestthou hast a pure Memory?
They would have banished a plain bundance of Courtiers and Privy-Counsellors; and without any more ado, sent to the King to desire him (they called it Humbly) to turn them out of his Service.
But did they tell any good Cause, why they would have him turn them away?
None at all, but because they liked them not.
That was an humble Trick indeed; but sure they had some Reason for what they did.
For no reason, but because they were in Favor with the King, and themselves would have their Places: Nay, there be some of those men they complained of, were as ready to complain of those were in place before, such as the last Treasurer, and the like, as these are now against those they would have now turned off: for in all this Parliament, Doings, and Peaching one another, it is not for Faults done against the King, or the Government, but against the House of Commons.
But I hope these Noble Men are not turned out of their Services, are they?
No, they have scaped this Bout; how they will do at the next at, time will shew.
If they scaped at, I'll warrant them at, no man is Condemned there, but he has (as the Scholars call it)andfor it: But vvas that all their Faults, that they vvere in Favor vvith His Majesty?
God help thee, do'st not thou knovv, that it is a sufficientParliament-Crime to be a Favorite. I have heard my Father say, that he wore the Old Duke ofCloth, and was Master of his Barge; and that there was one Parliament before I was born, would have hanged him; but the Devil a Fault could they find, but his being in mighty Favor. So the King would not let him suffer.
But they put away my Lord, I can remember, that my self, and they say, because they could find no Law to condemn him, they made a Law.
So then, he suffered for breaking a Law before it was made.
So he did.
That is as much as to say, that if the Parliament have mind to hang a Man, or undo him, if they have not sufficient Law or Matter to do it, they will make some: God bless me and mine out of their Clutches.
But I have heard, they were so Civil, as when they made this Law against the Earl of, they then made it so, that no more should suffer by the same Law.
That was very kindly done to him indeed: I would rather, if I had been in his Cloaths, they would have saved me, and hanged who they would beside.
This shews plainly they had a particular Malice; and then down a must go, right or wrong: There are some of those Old Dogs yet alive that hunted him to Death, and would as willingly give their Mouth for making away more Noblemen.
I have heard many say, the King repented himself at, that he consented to the Earl's Death.
But those Rogues that procured his Death, never repented at all, nor does not do yet: Nay, they have tought some young Whelps to be as good Blood-Hounds as themselves. A Man has a brave time that should come to be tryed for his Life in any Court, and have half a dozen of these to chase him out of the World.
'Tis strange the Noble-men does not stand for one another against those Lawyers, who, if they might have their Wills, would hang them all: Especially, being there is no body of the Jury, when the Lords are to be tryed, but Lords.
They had such a Power when my Lordwas Headed, that neither the King, nor the Lords, durst stand against them: They made Routs of Prentices to run down to, and call out for Justice, and threaten all those Lords that would have saved him; and in the end they had his Blood.
I have heard many say, that there were very few of those many that prosecuted the Earl; but they were after Ring-leaders in the Rebellion against the King, and continued so to his Death,as violent against him, as they were against the Earl, and against our King that now is (God bless him) till the Souldiers and Seamen joyned withto bring him in again.
And yet I'll warrant thee, these were as ready to welcome Home his Majesty, and make shew of their Duty and Affection to him, as his best Friends.
Ay, and pretended they had as much a Hand in his Restoration, as the General that brought him in; and talked themselves, not only out of the Faults they had committed; but by Bribery, and means of some Lawyers, that had been Abroad with the King, they got suddainly into such Favor, that a Round-Headed Lawyer had more Power than a Cavalier Colonel that fought for the King all through the War: And so they have carried it ever since: And now thou may'st see what they have brought it unto, at long run: For nothing but the Ruine and Death of a great Number of the King's Courtiers and Counsellors will please them.
They will not stay there if they have leave to go on: The Old Game must be play'd over again; but I hope the King's calling them at our Town of, will mend this matter: For I have heard hundreds say, that if his Father had called theParliament thither, instead of, there had not been so much Mischief done as there was: But pray theewas this all they did?
This, no, not the hundred part: For any one Man's Fault or Suspicion, that he was against them, they would have ruin'd a whole Countrey. There was aNoble-man, I know not his Name, that they had a Spite to, that was Steward of a greatin; and out of Malice to him, they would have taken that Court away, tho' it was a great Benefit to all that Quarter of the Country: Nay, there was one day a Member, so angry at a Waterman, for asking an unusual Fare, for bringing him from some place, in the, that he said, he would have a Bill brought into the House, for his sake, to restrain the Numbers of Watermen; and that all the Wherries that go upon the River, should be forced to take a Licence, and should be Figured on the Back-Board, as the Hackney Coaches are. Upon which, the Waterman civilly reply'd,That, he hoped that being a Freeman of, they could never make him take a Licence: with that the Member said, Sirra, for your sake, and such sawcy Rogues as you are, we will have thatpulled down, as well as vve have pulled dovvn the Court of theof: That vvas the Court I vvas talking of.
I hope thou heard'st them say nothing of theBargesdid'st thou?
No, Hang you, you are belovv their Consideration; but they talked much about Seamen, and the Fleet, and against Souldiers: And then for the Papists, they vvould have utterly destroyed them; and no great matter if they had; for those Rogues have been the occasion of all this Poder, has been even since the Beginning of these Times: And they say, they Fired the City, and brought the Plague out of, and set it amongst us at.
How should that be? For vvhen the Visitation began at, I heard of no Plague in.
But I heard a Doctor, one of the Royal Society, say, as I carried him once, There be Rogues that vvill bring Bottles of Infected Air vvith them, if it were out of, that as soon as they are opened, vvill infect a whole House; then they take an Antilop, that no Infection can touch themselves: And that some Papists did this, I have heard a Justice in the City took Examinations upon it, and it was proved.
But what would they have done against the, and: The Scholars at, say, those are as great Enemies to the Church and the University as the Papists.
They would have made them as good Protestants as any is in.
Which way must this have been?
Why, they would have made the Church-men have left out some of their Prayers, and given over the Surplice, and some other Popish Tricks; and then they would have come to Church, and been all one.
That is, the Church-men must have become, and then all would have been right.
Indeed, I think they would not have yielded much to the Bishops: For they were bloody mad at them; and I think if they had sitten till now, they would have sent them to the Church from the House, to pray to God; but not to have letten them prate any more to the House of Lords.
It will be good for them to talk no such Talk at, the Bishops are in great Power amongst the Scholars.
Then as to their own Members, they turned them out, and took others in at their will and pleasure; and if they made any Fault, they expelled them; and wherever any stood in Competition for any Town, him they knew, would give his Vote along with them was admitted, right or wrong: And then they terrified all the Sherriffs, Mayors and Bailiffs in the Kingdom, besides abundance of Gentlemen, and other honest Country-men: For on the least Complaint of any Man's misdemeanor, or Information from any Member, immediately a Serjeant at Arms was sent for them, and so much a Mile, and Hour paid, and down on their Mary-bones to their Worships, and a sound Scolding from Mr. Speaker; or else to the Tower, or the Gate-House they went: The King, God bless him, never took a quarter of that State on him they did.
It seems they would have all the World to ask them Forgiveness, whether they made them any Fault or not; and they themselves would ask no body Pardon for what they had done.
It was brought to that pass, that two Foot-boys, Boxing one day in the Palace Yard, he that was beaten, proved to belong to a Member, and told the other Boy, if he knew his Master, he would cause him to be sent for in Custody, for keeping such a Rogue as he was, that had committed a Breach of Priviledge, in beating a Member's Servant. The Boy replied, if it would do him any Kindness, he would beat him again, and tell him his Master's Name into the Bargain; and would lay him a Crown, that tho' his Master should bid the Speaker, and all the House of Commons kiss his -- they durst not send a Serjeant at Arms for him. The beaten Boy much netled at his Speech, laid down his money, as the other did. Now, said the Boy, my Master is the King of, and I am comeover with some of his Servants, to fetch Horses out of: Go bid thy Master, and the House of Commons send a Serjeant at Arms to fetch him over.
Before my Heart, is was a good Answer: I hope he won his Moneys.
So he did; but it was put into a Waterman's Hands, and when it was demanded, says the Beaten Boy, Sirrah, give it him if you dare, if his Master be the King of, I'll make you answer it before the House of Commons. The Waterman durst do no other but give either their own Moneys: There is no contending with Parliament Men, or Parliament Men's Men, nor Boys.
And yet I know a Bayliff has nabbed several of them, and matters not a Straw to arreast any Member of the last Parliament.
That's nothing, they are now no Parliament-men; but let's see if that Stout Fellow dare nabb any of them when they are new chosen.
That I don't know.
O those that are in any danger of Bayliffs, are mighty cunning at their Times, and know their Hits to a Minute; they appear abroad ata certain Number of days before the Sitting of the House, as sure as Swallows against warm Weather; and after the Sessions they are, not one to be seen: except it be that we chance to carry them by Water from the Temple or, to; they have a strong Garrison in either of those Places out of Priviledge time, as they call it.
Well, but pray theelet us have it all out what they did.
It is impossible as I told thee, For me to tell a quarter what they did; they stopped, andCattel from coming to the City, and Pork, Mutton, Veal and Lamb, from any of those Places; and it was said, if they had sate long enough, they would have stopped, and.
And yet the City still doats upon these Parliaments.
Nay, they would have made such Laws about wearing of Cloth, and Woollen Stuffs, as would have beggared anhundred thousand Souls that are Silk-Weavers, Silk-Dyers, and such like.
What matter they, if they can but find a way to make Acts, to set their Grounds dearer, and rack their poor Tenants, they care not if half of the Kingdom starve.
And yet they talk so much for the General Good, and against the absolute Power of the King and the Court, how can they make this out?
They call that Power which they themselves both do act by, and would govern all by, the Liberty of the Subject, tho' no Subject, but a few Members have any Liberty at all: But if his Majesty, God bless him, should act by the same Power, and do the same things which they do; then they call the very same Power flat down-right Tyranny.
Do'st not thee remember,one day the last Summer, when our Barge lay againstStairs, there was a great Noise about the Head Bayliff of, breaking into an Embassenders House, to seize upon some Goods which belonged to a Man was condemned to be Hanged at; and upon Complaint of the Embassender to the King, the said Bailiff was taken and clapt into the Tower; and every body said, he would be hanged at the least, for breaking the Common Law of all Nations: But the next News we heard, was, that he had got some sort of a Warrant, was made by the Long Parliament, that set him at Liberty within three Hours after he was committed.
I remember the time very well, they call those Warrants, and they will fetch a Prisoner committed by the King, out of any Goal in; but not one Committed by the House of Commons: And this they call Priviledge of Parliament.
All these Gentlemen that were fetched up by Messengers and Serjeants, they might by the Common Law have chosen whether they would have come or not. There was a Knight in our County at, that was sent for by a Messenger, and he told the Messenger, he had something else to do, and would not come, and said he would justifie it.
Surely this was just about the time they were Dissolv'd, otherwise he durst not have been so bold.
He said he had been a Member himself many Years, and knew no Law to compell any Man to come before the House of Commons, unless they had a mind themselves; and therefore they sent to the King, to get his Majesty's Proclamation, to fetch him before them.
So then His Majesty's Proclamation, issued out at the desire of the Commons, is of Force; but when sent out by himself is worth nothing at all.
Why so?
Because I remember there were several sent for in Custody, for obeying the King's Proclamation against Petitions, and brought to their Knees: If therefore that had been a good Proclamation, why should any body have suffer'd for it? And for any thing I know, if his Majesty should have made a Proclamation to fetch up that Knight, or any body disobeyed their Messenger, it had deserved as much to have been disobeyed as that about Petitions, unless the House of Commons can make a Proclamation, contrary to Law, a good one, as this would have been: For, what need had they of the King's Proclamation, if there had been Law to have fetched those men before them.
Now if those Men were fetched up, did dare to sue, and the Lawyers did dare to do their Office, and the Judges did dare to give Judgment, I am of Opinion they might bring Actions of false Imprisonment against the Messengers that fetched them up: For if they had not full Power to punish those who did not obey them, then surely those who were fetched had wrong done them.
But I dare assure thee, neither Lawyer nor Judge dare meddle with any such matter: If any of these Gentlemen would be so ventersome, they will find no Law to stand against the Votes of the Commons, till they find they are as much brought under, as they saybrought them; they durst not prate in his Days, as now they do.
What did he do?
I have heard a Fellow of, say, he tumbled them, and made them do what he would himself, and not what they had a mind to; and not a word of Tyranny or Arbitrary Power.
But pray theesome more of their Doings.
I have told thee it is without end; and therefore I will tell thee the last thing they did, which was, they Voted, that if any man advised his Majesty to Prorogue them upon any Account but to disinherit the Duke, he was an Enemy to the King and Kingdom: Nay, he was a Pensioner to theKing.
What, whether he ever received any Money from theKing or not?
Ay, though he never received Penny of Mony from him, or any body else by his means or order.
For any thing I know, they might as well have said, that he had been my Lord Mayor's Bull-rider: I have often heard say, that a Parliament can make a Man into a Woman; and now I see, they can make a man into a Pensioner oftho' he be none.
What then was done?
That very day, notwithstanding all this, they were Prorogued.
Then surely, they will say, either they were Prorogued by the Advice of some Body, who, for that Advice, are Pensioners; or if his Majesty Prorogued them on his ovvn Head, then they vvill think, tho' they dare not say, that he himself is a Pensioner.
And vvithin fevv days after they vvere Dissolved, and ather order'd to be called at your Tovvn of.
Well, for all thatParson said, There vvas a Parliament called at, that vvas called the mad Parliament, yet vvill I be hang'd, if ever that vvas half so mad as this thou hast told us of: For according to thy Tale, this Parliament let nothing 'scape them; to his Majesty they vvould have given nothing, nor let any body lend him any thing; but vvould get from him vvhat they could: From the Duke they vvould have taken his Birth-right; the Church and Religion they vvould have cast in nevv Mould; the Bishops and Clerks, they vvould have nevv-fashioned, if not utterly laid aside, banished many of the Nobles, taught the Judges ofnevv Lavvs, and made them pay for practising the Old, terrified most of the Loyal Gentry of the Kingdom, vvith Serjeants, Messengers, andExpensive Journeys, the same with Mayors, Sheriffs and Bayliffs, Fault or no Fault, taken away Courts and Priviledges from several Shires, to their great harm, to revenge themselves of particular men; not only hinder'dCattel, and other Provisions, from the City, but Beggar'd many thousands of Families of Silk-Weavers, and other poor Handicrafts-men.
Nay, these very Men were got to that Height, they would have abused any Body they met with, Gentle or Simple, not paid a Farthing for crossing the Ferry, but said, they werein Parliament-time, as their Masters Letters were at the Post-house.
Was not this then as mad a Parliament, as that Parliament they talk on at our Town? If this next prove a madder than the last, if it sit at our Town, I'll give any man leave to hang me at the Mast of my Barge.
For all this, I believe they will not sit at: for they say, a many Noblemen have Petitioned the King's Majesty against it.
And I can tell thee, his Majesty said, they should Sit atfor all that.
Pray thee, who were these Noblemen that Petitioned?
I cannot tell thee who they were by their Names; but he that was the Rump's first General delivered it.
He! thou art a Foolhe is dead at least thirty years since: I remember I have seen him, as if he had been alive, in a Buff Coat, amongst the Tombs at.
Well, I am sure he bears the same Name, and probably it may be his Son; for this man follows that man's Steps: Then there was him that was General of the Horse to the Rump, that I am sure is the very Man himself, and another Lord that sate in the Rump House of Commons, with a Blew Garter about him, a thing was never done before.
That cannot be, I remember that Lord my self, he is dead, I am confident.
It may be then it was his Son; there was besides another, whose Father some say Beheaded the King; but if he did not, 'tis certain he was in Disguise on the Scaffold: And then he that setthem on all this, as it is talked, is a little, lame, purblind Lord, that has been a Man in all the Times ever since the first Rebellion, and still turned time enough to save himself, though others were Hanged for the same Fact: He now sets them upon all the Mischiefs done, and if he live to it, will leave them in the Lurch.
That's Old usual with him, and yet he's no better than those that stood it out to the last, and deserved Hemp many a fair Year since.
He'll come to it yet; for all his Cunning, the Devil will cozen him at last: All the rest were Covenanters, or their Sons, except one or two disguised Lords.
I hope his Majesty will remember what these men did with his Father, and not be advised by any such.
Well, when all this is said, I am still of Opinionis the fittest place in the Kingdom for a Parliament; for there every Body finds their Conveniency: His Majesty his House at, the Nobles their own Houses, the Members convenientAccommodation of Lodging, and every Body their Ease.
I question whether too much Conveniency for Parliaments be not hurtful to Business: For when they are less commodiously served, they will mind their Business the better, and make more haste with their Work, that they may get so much sooner home: Not but that I know, they may have all Conveniencies at our Town, and sufficient Accommodation for all the Followers of a Parliament that are requisite to attend it.
The plain truth is, there are now-a-days abundance of People do follow Parliaments, over what there used to be in former Times, as I have heard People say: And thishas such New Buildings, that it lodges them all conveniently, if they were five times as many.
Thou art in the right of itthat there does more People follow the Parliaments a late time, than formerly, that is, the Scoundrel Rabble of, who are ready, and have been this Forty Years to back any Seditious Petition; and to come down toand, like a Land-flood in our River, that threatens all the Countrey: These encouraged by Discontented Members, when they cannot get the Lords to joyn intheirmalitious Acts, threaten no less now, than they did to his Majesty's Father, God bless him: And I think it no great loss if these Gentlemen be left at Home to mind their Trades at.
But the Scholars of, are thought, by many, will be as unmannerly as the Prentices in.
I'll tell theeif the Parliament will behave themselves as they ought, to the King's Majesty, and the Royal Line, and offer no Injury to the Church, Bishops, Clergy, University, nor Scholars, and give the King his reasonable Requests, I'll warrant thee, the Scholars will be as civil as can be; but by my Faith, if they find either the Church, or themselves touched upon, it will be a hard matter to rule them: They are like Seamen, one and all.
Still I am for Old, thou knowest the King has borrowed many Hundred Thousand Pounds of the City and theCompany, and never needed to want Moneys for a fair word to the City.
It's very true; but he always paid double Interest for what he had of them: So that it was a greater Courtesie to the City, to lend it, than to the King to have the Loan. But now that Business is over, they will lend no more Money, but upon Parliament-Security: Had they continued to have been the same City they were in 1660, and some Years after, I believ the King would never have removed the Parliament to; but since they now are become that City they were in 1640. I think the King does wiser to remove the Parliament to, that True, Loyal City, where every man loves the Name of the King, and that shewed so much Fidelity to his Father: Then let the Parliament and the Factious City ofsend him toas they did his Father.
Then let us all go to, and pray for the good Success of this Parliament.
How does all our Friends at the Court at? 'Tis strange,thou shouldst come again so soon!
Thou knowest, I told thee, I mostly follow the Court; and 'faith, at this time, he had been a cunning man that had gone before it; his Majesty gave not so good warning of his Return to, as he did of his going to.
But what saysnow to his mad Parliament? I hope he has no reason to complain of this Parliament.
But the Town ofwill have reason to complain while they live: But the best on't is, somewill have Houses to set in, at as good Rates as they took them: Had his Majesty made a Cocking, or a Hunting-Match at, he had done it a better Turn, than to have brought such Guests as these were.
I heard some say, they were so mad they were called from, that they resolved to do something at, should make them be suddainly sent away again; and so bilk the Town of their Expectation.
They say the Town much matter'd not the Court, and the Mayor, and the Aldermen of, were as much against it as the Common Council is at.
O, that is because the University is so much for the King, God Bless him, and his Houshold: For this is a certain Rule, if the University be for the Court, the Town will be for the Country, as they call it: Nay, if the University be for Jesus Christ, the Town holds themselves obliged in Conscience to be for the Devil.
But stillthis does not answer what thou said'st of this Parliament, which thou would'st a warrant would do such brave things, if they sate at.
I must confess I was mistaken, as my Father was before me: For he took once aBoy to be his Prentice; and tho' he knew him to be a little light-finger'd, and given to Lying and Swearing, yet he hoped if he could get him to, he could cure him; and took infinite Care and Pains about him, and daily told him what would be the end of him, if he would not lay aside hisTricks, and become a down-right, honestBargeman; but all in vain, what was bred in the Bone, would never out of the Flesh: He fell by little and little, to down-right Thieving, and Hang'd he was in the End; and as my Father afterwards learned, the Rogue's Father and Grand-father, and many of his Kindred had been Thieves before him.
What's all this to the Purpose, what have either we or the Parliament to do with thy Father or his Thievish Prentice? He was not the first Bargeman by a hundred, that have been Hang'd.
Well saidhere's a precious Story indeed, and nothing to the Purpose.
You don't know the meaning, I perceive, of a Parable, or an; when ye have taught these Shavers at, with your Rehearsals, and at, with their Votes, Resolves and Stories, to nose their Master, and abuse their Fellows, then you send 'em down to, to be cured of the R-- When 'tis too late they are no more be reclaimed than a Sheep-Worrier; nor will any thing cure them, but that which cured my Father's Prentice: Now there's the precious Story you talked of so much. And yet for all this, you cannot dash us in the Teeth with anyActs of Parliament: Had their Noses been kept to the Grindle-stone as close at, as it was at, they would not have been so high in the In-step. I was sure, if they sate at, they must either make good Acts, or none at all.
A will have it one way or other; theseRogues learn to wrangle of the Boys, and will never yield Right or Wrong.
Well, but for all his Bragging, there was that done at this Parliament at, was never done at.
Pray thee what was that?
There was as near a Lye, not to be the down-right Lye, given to the King, as Heart could think.
How so man?
I'll tell thee, for Example sake, If I should say, it is an unwarrantable thing for any man to pull downgreat Park Pail, and ride through toMarket, if thou sayest this is a warrantable Trick, tho' all the World knew the contrary, do'st not thee come very near to give me the Lye, what thinkest thou by this?
Surely he that did this, had his Breeding at, or at.
But if he had a foul Tongue, he had a good pair of Heels, for he gave Ground a Hundred miles, in a very few Hours.
That was but to be out of the way while the thing was hot, it will quickly be forgot I'll warrant thee, once in a short time, I shall see this very man come in his Coach to, with a Quoif on, if not a Red Gown. Such mannerly Behavior as this, has been an only way to Preferment.
But I think he better deserves to go upin a Wooden Chariot, and have a Horse Night-Cap put on at the farther end.
These kind of People do no more matter what they say, than a Dog does that has stolen a joint of meat from the Cook: they only run away for a while, and when they think all's quiet and forgotten, then they come again with as much Confidence, as if they had never done no mischief at all.
The reason of this is, because they never light of the Whip for their Roguery, and so scaping Scot-free, makes them so bold.
Ay, Ay, let a man suffer a Prentice to prate and talk, and the next, he gives you two words for one; and then, if you offer to correct him, have at your Ears, Blackof, that was an honest, good Fellow, as ever took an Oar by the end, suffered his Prentice so long, that when he would have corrected him, it was too late; and being a lusty young Rogue, he threw him o're Board into the; and had not I come by, by chance, he had been drown'd.
Nay, nothing madded me so much, as that the House of Commons praised this Fellow, and order'd him Thanks for his Complement he made.
O bravestill; for at, they always used to have so much good manners, as to give his Majesty Thanks for his Speech, whether it pleased them or not; and now they thank a man that gives him the Lye.
But pray, my Masters, what did they do that little time they sate; or, at least-wise what would they have done?
I'll tell thee, thou sayest, the Parson told thee of a Parliament once at, was called the; I think this may be called theandParliament: They were in hand to make such a King of the Duke, if he should have Survived his Brother, as thou never heard'st of in thy life.
A King, why, theKing, that they keep a Close Prisoner, in an Old Castle, at the Rock of, is anEmperor in Comparison of that they would have made him: A must have had the Name of a King, but none of the Power; nor have lived in any of his Dominions, or within 500 Miles. Would not this have been a brave King?
Pray thee tell me, what have they to do with?
With? O, they make a good Title to: ForConquer'd it for the, and these being theHeir's, they thinkbelongs to them as well as: For as sure as thou stands there, they keep the Commonwealth's Title a Foot in their minds, though they dare not publickly own it.
How should that be?
I'll tell thee, if I have a Crown in my Pocket, and thou hast a mind to have it from me, there is but three ways to get it, either by Slight of Hand, to pick it from me, or by words, to persuade me out of it, or take it from me by Strong Hand. Now the first and last not being so convenient nor easy: if thou canst use Words to make me give it thee, is not that the best way?
No doubt of itthen Words have prevailed a great way, and will possibly be attempted farther; but if those will not do, thou knowst what follows next: Besides, it is apparent, they aimed now to make a Push for a Commonwealth: For they affronted the King in the first place, as I have told you; then in the next place, they Voted the Lords Denial to Try, was a Denial of Justice, and Hinderance of Discovering of the Popish Plot, and twenty Stories more they called it; which was as much as to say, they were not fit to sit in that House: For if they were unjust in their Doings, and countenanced the Popish Plot, what worse could have been said of them? And if this had taken, at the next Vote they had been useless, and then welcome theagain; they would only have wanted him that was Headed at Tower hill Twenty Years ago, what did you call him?
I believe thou meanest Sir.
Ay, Ay, that was he, if he had been alive to have joyned with the Purblind Lord, and the Colonell with Cut Fingers, and a few more, all had been right.
Pray theewhat would they have done with this, what is that Fellow?
'Faith, I think no Body knows what he is; but I take him to be a Cross-Biter; but if he chance to be Hanged, as he is like to be, it is doubtful he will be Cross-bitten himself.
Why the Parliament were Bloody mad at him, and would needs have Hanged him themselves.
Othou knowest not Parliament-Craft, the next way Home, sometimes is the farthest about: If they could have gotten the Lords to have received the Impeachment against him, they would have kept him alive, and played more Tricks than thou can imagine; they would have made him Bowl off and on, as thou doest at Nine pins; and made his Evidence good and right in what they had a mind; and errand Lyes in what they liked not: And he has been as far from Hanging by their means, as the Lords in the Tower; only they would possibly have found Law to have Bailed him; which could not be foundfor the Treasurer, whom they know they have no power to Hang, unless they do with him, as with the Old Earl of.
But for all their Cunning he may yet come to be Hanged; and if he be, stand clear, I believe there will be Stories told, some will not be willing to hear.
Before my Heart, you two are gotten very cunning at State Affairs, I believe you did nothing but listen and hearken after News.
If the Parliament had sate at our Town a Twelvemonth, I would not have wrought in my Barge an Hour; but if ever Parliament deserved a By-Name, this littleone, deserved that I have given it, both for medling with what they did so simply, and medling with those People and Places out of their Power.
Well, but now this Parliament is Dissolved, all this is over, and now they have power to Vote, nor Act, nor nothing; neither and I hope we shall have Quietness, and the Court at.
It's true, they are unroosted from their Publick Sitting Places, both atand; but the Men that shape out all the Work are not idle; that will appear e're long in theof, and from other places where they have Power to set Mischief on Foot.
I remember Gafferof, had a Dozen Men and Boys that laboured his Barge; and to his Cost, he found they were all plotted together to Rob, Steal, and do him any Mischief they could: Nay, would almost tell him to his Face, they would have what they list: He was a Quiet, Honest Man, and loved not Trouble, and hoped, in vain, for Amendment a long time; but at last, he took a Resolution, and turned them all off at once, and got a New Floor full, that knew nothing of the Roguery of the other Crew; and then all things went well with him.
He was in the Right of that: For if he had left any of the Old ones in the Barge, they would have corrupted all the rest.
Do'st not think, there are some Oldhas done a great hurt amongst the Members?
I am for a New Floor full, or none at all; there's no Hopes of any Good fromOld Crew.
Gafferhad a special Care, not only to keep his New men from companying with the Old Ones atand at; but also, that they should not come and Rob him by Strong Hand.
They durst hardly do that; for then it had come to: However it was Wisdom in him to have an Eye to them: For they met often together, to consult which way to be revenged of him; and however he knew the Laws of the Land would protect him, vvhich must protect every Body.
I pray, and give him 
Povver to put
his Lavvs in Execution; and then, I think, none but his 
Enemies vvill have occasion to repine; and let the Disbanded 
Reformadoes do what they dare.