, What have you to say as to the Crime you are now to die for?
I have spoke as much as I can speak already, and can speak no more.
In what shape did the Devil come to you?
The Devil came to me once, I think, like a Lyon.
Did he offer any violence to you?
No, not at all, but did frighten me, and did nothing to me: And I cried to God, and asked what he would have, and he vanished.
Did he give thee any Gift, or didst thou make him any Promise?
No.
Had he any of thy bloud?
No.
Did he come to make use of thy Body in a carnal manner?
Never in my life.
Have you a Teat in your Privy-parts?
None.
, Was not the Devil there withwhen I was once in the Prison with you, and under her Coats? the other told me that he was there, but is now fled; and that the Devil was in the way when I was going towith my Son who is a Minister. Thou speakest now as a dying Woman, and as the Psalmist says,. We find thathad seven Devils, and she came to Christ and obtained Mercy: And if thou break thy League with the Devil, and make a Covenant with God, thou mayst also obtain Mercy. If thou hast any thing to speak, speak thy mind.
I have spoke the very truth, and can speak no more: Mr.I would desire they may come by me, and Confess as I have done.
, Have you made any Contract with the Devil?
No.
Did he ever take any of thy bloud?
No.
How did he appear to thee first, or where in the street? in what shape?
In a woful shape.
Had he ever any carnal knowledge of thee?
No, never.
What did he do when he came to thee?
He caused me to go and do harm.
And did you go?
I did hurt a Woman sore against my Conscience: he carried me up to her door, which was open: The Womans name was Mrs..
What caused you to do her harm? what malice had you against her? did she do you any harm?
No, she never did me any harm: but the Devil beat me about the Head grievously because I would not kill her: but I did bruise her after this fashion
Did you bruise her till the bloud came out of her Mouth and Nose?
No.
How many did you destroy and hurt?
None but she.
Did you know any Marriners that you or your Associates destroyed by overturning of Ships and Boats?
No; I never hurt any Ship, Bark, or Boat in my life.
Was it you orthat did bewitch the Children?
I sold Apples, and the Child took an Apple from me, and the Mother took the Apple from the Child; for the which I was very angry: but the Child died of the Small Pox.
Do you know one Mr.about these parts, or any of your Confederates? did you or them bewitch his Child?
No.
, How did you come in to hurt Mrs.? did you pass through the Key-hole of the Door, or was the Door open?
The Devil did lead me up Stairs, and the Door was open: and this is all the hurt I did.
How do you know it was the Devil?
I knew it by his Eyes?
Had you no Discourse or Treaty with him?
No; he said I should go along with him to destroy a woman, and I told him I would not: he said he would make me; and then the Devil beat me about the Head.
Why had you not called upon God?
He would not let me do it.
You say you never hurted Ships nor Boats; did you never ride over an Arm of the Sea on a Cow?
No, no, Master, 'twas she,
for she said when she was first brought to Goal, if that she was hanged, she would have me hanged too; she reported I should ride on a Cow before her, which I never did.
, Did you see the shape of a Bullock? at the first time of your Examination you said it was like a short black man, about the length of yourArm.
He was black, Sir.
, Had you any knowledge of the bewitching of Mr.Child, or did you know a place called?
No.
Are you willing to have any Prayers?
.
;
.
You are lookt on as the woman that has debaucht the other two: Did you ever lie with Devils?
No.
Did not you know of their coming to Goal?
No.
Have you any thing to say to satisfie the world?
I forgive them, as I desire the Lord Jesus Christ will forgive me. The greatest thing I did was to Mrs.; and I desire I may be sensible of it, and that the Lord Jesus Christ may forgive me. The Devil met me in the street, and bid me kill her; and because I would not, he beat me about the head and back.
In what Shape or Colour was he?
In black, like a Bullock.
How do you know you did it? how went you in, through the Key-hole, or the Door?
At the Door.
Had you no discourse with the Devil?
Never but this day six weeks.
You were charged about 12 years since, and did you never see the Devil but this time?
Yes, once before: I was going for Brooms, and he came to me and said,; and would help ease me of my Burthen: and I said,.
Did the Devil never promise you any thing?
No, never.
Then you have served a very bad Master, who gave you nothing. Well, consider you are just departing this world: do you believe there is a God?
Yes.
Do you believe in Jesus Christ?
Yes; and I pray Jesus Christ to pardon all my sins.