Mr., What do you know concerning this Plot?
I know nothing of it, neither one way, nor another.
Do you know of any Contrivance of Mrs., to kill the King?
No; rather the contrary.
Do you know of any attempts to:
I will tell your Lordship what I do know, if thesewill not be too nimble for me. I have suffered aof late in relation to a Plot, as if I had known of a Plot; but God is my Witness, I know of none, unless it were a Plot to bring Sirover to theInterest. That Plot I had some Concern in, and had some knowledge of Mrs.Concern in it; but she was so far from doing any thing, that she was willing to bring over with him the three Gentlemen turn'd out of Commission when Sirwas. So that how she could be acting for the, and against theat the same time, I do not understand.
Mr., You are a man of Learning, pray will you give yourof the things that you know in relation to Mrs..
Mrs.was not committed upon my Accusation; therefore, I hoped she might have been tryed without my. But when I was in danger of myLife, when I lay in the, Mrs.was reported to be a third Witness against me, and then I raked up every trifle: but if I had thought it Treason, I would have discovered it before. And as to that particular Business concerning Mr., thatsometime since did come to me, being my old Acquaintance, to ask my advice in his Affairs, and he had then an Affair of so great moment, that it was necessary to, which was to go to the Lords in the Tower. I asked him what to do? saith he, I can say enough against Dr.to serve them, and take off his Evidence, and asked me if he should do it. By no means, Mr., said I. Mrs.afterwards told me, this, and onewere willing to tell some Stories or other of Mr.and Mr., and I told her this very Story; saith she, you being acquainted with him, it is possible you may do some good upon him, and saith she, I had as lieve as ten Guineys, that you could do it.
That is, when that you advised Mr.not to meddle with any thing against Dr..
She said, she did not care if she had been at the Charge of ten Guineys, if he would be honest and discover the Truth. And, my Lord, she did say she had heard Mr.talk of aPlot that would off thePlot.
Did she say, that she had heardsay there was aPlot, and that he was to have a Commission among them? and did she say, that she had heard him say, that he hoped under the colour of that, thePlot would go on? or did she say it of her own accord, that she hoped that would carry on thePlot?
My Lord, I cannot remember particulars.
There is a great deal of difference betweensaying it, and her saying it.
I have no reason to spare her: but I am unwilling to speak any thing that is contrary to truth, though she hath done me the greatest Injury in the World.
How came you to talk of aPlot?
It was only common Discourse as it was at Coffee-Houses.
Had you heard of it before she spake of it, that you say it was common?
No, not till she spake of it.
Did Mrs.tell you of anyPriests or Jesuits coming hither from beyond the Seas?
Upon the going over of one, I think she did say she heard there were some more coming over.
What to do?
God knows what.
Did she speak of any Plot or Contrivance to kill the King?
No, she was always an Enemy to Plots, or else I would not have kept her Company.
Did she say there were, or that she heard there were several Priests and Jesuits coming over?
My Lord, I think she said she heard it. And I have said several times to her, thewould be destroyed: but she answered, she was afraid the Nation would be destroyed first.
Did she say she was afraid of it, or, that the Nation would be destroyed first? I ask you once more, we must try People according to their Oaths. By the Oath you have taken, when you said you thought thewould be destroyed, what Answer did she make?
She said she was afraid the Nation would be so; because, she said, abundance of the best of the Nation went into other Nations, to weaken our Nation, and spend their Mony, and therefore she was afraid the Nation would be destroyed before them.
What Discourse had you with Mrs.passing through?
My Lord, my memory hath been exceedingly bruised; but I remember, my Lord, as I was going through the Abby in a rainy afternoon, she said, this Abby was formerly filled with, or something to that purpose, and, saith she, what if it should be so again?
Are you aor a?
A, my Lord.
He talks as like aas can be, was it, what if it should be filled?
She said, what if it should be again.
What did you say to that?
I only smiled to hear a Womans Discourse, my Lord.
You make all the Company laugh, What did she say of the Temple?
That thehad been filled withtoo.
And what then? Did she talk of filling it again?
Saith she, this Place was filled with, and thewith.
This may do well enough: but what did she say else concerning the?
Nothing, my Lord.
Mr., I was none of the Tribe of forty one.
Now tell me what she said: Mr, keep it in your Hand.
My Lord, she put it by way of Interrogation to feel my Pulse.
What did she say else?
There was nothing but transient Discourse, my Lord.
We must ask you what the truth is, and you have looked upon your Paper. Now, consider what you say, and consider that you are upon a solemn Occasion, and are to testify it in the presence of God Almighty. I would have you tell plainly what it is, and neither to make it more, nor stifle it.
It was only transient discourse.
Say what it was. Was it, this Place was once filled with?
She said that thehad been filled with, as thehad with.
Look upon your Paper.
You have looked upon the Paper, and pray tellus what she said. Did she say she hoped to see this Place filled with?
My Lord, I do not remember that word hope.
How long have you been acquainted with Mrs.?
Ten or a dozen Years.
Did she never ask you any Questions about the Life of the King?
My Lord, when the King was very ill at, and all People were fearful that he would die, she did move the Question to me.
What Question?
To know whether I thought his Majesty would live or die: but it was her fear that he would die.
Had you seen the King?
No, my Lord.
How then did she expect you should give her an Answer? from your Art?
From my Art, my Lord.
Did she desire you to consult your Art, how long the King would live?
She did as I said.
What did you say to that?
I would not tell her, becausehe was my Soveraign.
VVhat Answer did you make?
I told her I would not meddle with it.
She would have had you consult your Art or Scheme, or whatever it is, to know whether the King would live or die?
It was something of that.
And you said you would not meddle nor make with it?
Yes, my Lord.
She desired you to make a Scheme?
No, my Lord, I can't say she mentioned a Scheme; but she asked the Question.
What did she ask else?
Only that Question.
How often do you believe she spake of it?
Never, my Lord, but when he was ill. I will not baffle any thing that may conduce to the safety of the King, and Kingdom.
Indeed it is very conducible to the safety of the King and Kingdom, if any go about to destroy him, and with evil Intentions to ask how long he will live, and you ought in Duty to God, and your Soveraign, to declare it. Did she ever make any enquiries about the Kings Death more than what you have said?
No more, my Lord, and then she was fearful he would die.
Did she say she would go to some Body else?
My Lord, when she perceived me shy, saith she, I see you are afraid of me, I will go to some other.
For what?
To satisfy her Curiosity, as a great many do.
What Curiosities did she ask besides this?
She would ask me sometimes about the Condition of Bodies, whether they would be prosperous in the World, and several other Questions
Were you nice in these Curiosities?
Truely, my Lord, I was shy of meddling with any thing, when I heard there was a talk about Plots.
Was you nice to give her satisfaction according to her hopes concerning these things you call Curiosities, questioning whether one should be well wedd, how many Children she should have,VVere you scrupulous in that?
I think I might not be nice in that very particular.
How came it then, that she would go to another?
She asked me something about Mr..
For what?
How to get him out of Prison.
Pray how came she to say she would go to another? You were not shy to give her an answer to these Questions.
It was something about Mr., My Lord, she asked me something about some Deeds or Papers which he was to search for or seize, which concerned Mr..
She had better have gone to one of the Clerks than to afor them. But why would she go to another?
Because I was shy.
You were not shy in these things about. Did she not say when you refused to meddle vvith the death of the King, that she vvould go to another?
Yes, my Lord.
Didyou any thing for her at that time?
My Lord, I did calculate a Scheme, vvhich since I found to be for, but I knevv not forwhom it vvas vvhen I did it.
How! Can you apply one Scheme to any Body?
My Lord, when Mrs.came to me, she gave me the time of a Persons Nativity, and I set the Figure of the Heavens to that Sign, to know whether he were a Person fit to be trusted, her Husband being ato get in Money.
For ought you know,was a Woman, and the question was, whetherwas with Child, and he happens to be a Man. -- How did it fall out?
I have forgotten, my Lord.
When did you know it was for?
My Lord, never before I came before the King and Councel, neither did I know his Name before; for he went by the Name ofbefore.
What other Discourse had you with her? Did she not at any time talk of Mr.?
She did say, she had heard of some People that were to discourse with Mr.: she had heard such a thing; but I don't know whether she knew any thing of it or no.
What discourse had you about that?
She told me, there was a Woman to go down toto beg Mr.Pardon; for he was penitent for what he had said in some Tryal or other.
Call another Witness.
Mr., pray give the Court an account of what you know of Mrs., the Prisoner at the Bar.
My Lord, I accept against that Witness.
Why so? You must show some reason, and then we will do you Justice in God's Name.
If I can prove he was whipt, and transported, pilloryed, perjured,he is no Witness. The last time I was upon my Tryal, he threatned some of my VVitnesses, that if they would not Swear as he would have them, he would kill them.
If you can shew any Record whereby he is convicted of any thing, that can by Law take away hisTestimony, do it.
He has been Indicted for Burglary.
VVas you Indicted for Burglary?
I will take it at their Proof.
Do you know?
I remember one. I saw him burnt in the Hand at the.
Is this the same Man?
I do believe it is the same Man: but I have not seen him these several Years.
Let every Body have their right in God's Name. Have you any more?
My Lord, I can prove him perjured.
Have you any Records to shew he was perjured? is he convinced?
No.
Then you can't do it.
My Lord, I can prove him guilty of Forgery.
If you don't produce the Record, you do nothing.
That which she calls Forgery, is not that which the Law calls Forgery: it is counterfeiting Guineys.
Can you shew he forged any Deeds. If you can prove that he hath committed Forgery, and be not convicted, it is no Errour.
Have you your Pardon? She hath proved the Conviction of Felony, prove your Pardon.
I have the Copies of several Records here in Court, which will be sworn to.
Did you ever seeand Mrs.in company?
No, my Lord, but I have been imployed for Mrs.in several Businesses of Charity to get Prisoners out. VVhen Mr.was in Newgate, she imployed me to get him out.
VVhy was she so kind to?
My Lord, I don't know that: but she bid me get him out, whosoever staid behind.
VVhy should she get him out? Did she tell you what she would do with him when she had him out?
No, my Lord.
VVe bring him for a VVitness, that she had a great kindness for.
VVhat discourse have you heard betweenand?
I never saw them together but twice. It is a Year since I came from them.
When you saw them at Dinner or Supper together, what other Company was there?
Her Husband was with her one time.
What did they talk about?
They were talking about the Prisoners that were Condemned.
Where was it? at her House?
No, at my LadyHouse.
How came you there?
I carried Notes backwards and forwards.
Did you never hear no discourse about the Plot?
No.
What Intimacy have you known betweenand Mrs.?
Did you ever see them together?
Yes, very often, my Lord. She said that thewould turn to a.
Who did she say that to? to?
No, my Lord, but I have heard him say those words, and that he would make it his Interest it should be so.
What did you say to him, when he said he must turn Rogue, and discover all their Plots?
I said he would be no greater Rogue than he was before.
You were pritty nimble with him.
He thought he should be hanged.
For what?
If he did not turn Rogue, he thought he should be hanged.
You were very often together in your Chamber.
Who gave you your Cloaths?
Her Husband was gone to Church one Morning, and he was with her in her Chamber.
I can't see why you should prove this matter too far.
is a civil young Woman.
She said she would do my business for me, and I go in danger of my Life.
What do you know of any Intimacy betweenand Mrs.?
I have seen them together.
What did they talk about?
Mrs.proposed a match between Mrs.and I, and they used to talk of that when I was with them.
Did they talk of the Plot at any time?
No.
Did you ever hear them talk of the King?
No.
Have you any more?
Not till Mr.comes.
Have you any Record to shew he was put in the Pillory.
Yes, my Lord.
What say you to this Outlawry?
It is not the same Person.
We ought to be very careful in these Concerns, else we may do a work this day, may make all the Kingdom rue it. It is a sad thing that People of a vitious profligate Life, both before they came to Newgate, and all along in their Life time, should be suffered to be VVitnesses to take away the Life of a worm. I question whether he will come again, or no, he hath been gone a great while. Such are fit to be imployed to find out: but hard to be believed when they find out.
Captain, is this the Man that broke?
My Lord, I can say nothing to that; but he was brought by anfrom thence to me.
was he burnt in the hand for Fellony?
Yes, my Lord, I believe he was.
He made me believe as though he would flie, I believe he is. VVe will not hood-wink our selves against such a Fellow as this, that is guilty of so notorious Crimes. A man of Modesty after he hath been in the Pillory, would not look a Man in the Face. It appears that after he hath been burnt in the Hand, he hath been outlawed for Fellony, and so it doth appear by Record.
Such Fellows as you are, Sirrah, shall know we are not afraid of you. He produces us here a Pardon by the Name ofof, and says, his Father and Kinsman are both of that Name and Place. VVill you have him Sworn whether his Father or Cozenwas ever convicted of Felony. It is notorious enough what a Fellow this is, he was in. I will shake all such Fellows before I have done with them. Have you any more to say? Are there anyhere?
My Lord, this is enough to discourage a man from ever entring into an honest Principle.
What? Do you with all the mischief that Hell hath in you think to brave it in a Courtof Justice? I wonder at your Impudence, that you dare look a Court of Justice in the Face, after having been made appear so notorious a Villain.
Indeed, if he be the same Man, he is not fit for a.
And that he is the same Man is very notorious. Come Mrs., What have you more to say?
Enough, my Lord.
You have said enough already. Come Gentlemen of the Jury, this is a plain Case, here is but one Witness in a Case of Treason, and that not direct, therefore lay your heads together.
VVhere is? Is he gone? Call him.
No, my Lord, but with the leave of the Court, will fetch some.
Let ago with him, and return before the Court rises.
My Lord, that cannot be, for I can't return so soon.
Then let him be committed.