Mr.I would know one thing, will you undertake to Swear positively that this Person was one of the Persons who stept before you? Will you take it upon your Oath, That the Person, the Prisoner at the Bar, went before you?
I will take it upon my Oath as far as a Man can do, for one Man, 'tis possible, may be like another both by his Voice and his Face; I can Swear I believe he is the man.
You are Satisfied upon the first Sightthat you had of him in the Countrey, that he was the Man.
Yes Sir, and he can tell you that by a very good token, for I had like to have run him through.
We must not expect that there can be exact and positive Proof, for men that commit Offences of this Impudent Nature, don't usually call Witnesses to be present to see them done; therefore we would come as near as we can to Circumstances, whereby a Fact of such a Nature is to be proved. Mr., Do you believe that the Prisoner at the Bar was one of the Persons that went before you in.
Upon my Conscience I do believe he was the Man.
What a Clock was it?
About Eleven a Clock, or between Ten and Eleven.
When the Link came there, was there Three, and do you believe by the Light you had by the Link that that was one of the Persons that was there.
I saw his Face and Habit, and believe he was.
What Habit had he on?
He had a Grey Cloak, a Compaign Cloak and a Coat, I think Lin'd with Red. It is impossible to give an Account of every particular under those Circumstances I was in.
It is not to be expected that a man under your Circumstances, should be extraordinary precise in Circumstances; therefore it is I asked you, that according to the best of your Apprehension, you might acquaint the Court with those Circumstances that may be remembred by the Jury, that they may see there be no Injury done to the Prisoner at the Bar; but that Right be done on both sides, and that in every Circumstance.
Now Sir we will call Mr., with whom he had this Discourse the next day.
Will the Prisoner ask him any Questions?
Truly Mr.knew me in, and knew me as well as any man in the City.
Did you not very well know him?
It is very possible I might see him, and often at Assizes and Sessions, but not to know him, nor did ever know whether his Name were, or what it was. Your Lordship sees many Persons here and often, and it's possible do not know them; he lives I think a Dozen Miles from me.
That's a wonder; If it please you, Sir, my Wife is a near Relation to you, both by Father and Mother, and I have spoken with you in your Chamber.
'Tis possible she may, but I do not know it.
Pray Mr.give an Account of what Discourse you had withthe day after the business was done.
We went to the Tavern, and drank Two or Three Bottles of Wine, and we had some Discourse concerning Mr.; it was about Eight or Nine a Clock in the Evening the next day. Some Discourse happen'd concerning his miserable Condition, and how he was hurt, and of that Nature.
How many was there in Company?
One or Two more.
What House?
At theinin, and among the rest Mr.was talking of it, and said he,, the word was,, or,.
What time of Night was that?
As near as I can remember, it was about Eight or Nine the next day in the Evening.
The very words that Mr.Swears when they went to Cut his Throat.
My Lord, If you please, there was Mr., and another, and I spake nothing but what I heard as News, that they had killed him if he had not on Armour.
For that matter Mr., you shall have your time, and you may call up other Witnesses, but the Gentleman positively Swears you said these words; and if so, I'll assure you, it does not look as if you were a Kin to him, or your Wife either.
Mr,. What did you hear thatshould say inabout this Business?
What said he about this business of Mr.?
My Lord, All I can say is this, I being at the Stating some Accounts between Mr.and Mr.: I asked Mr.for some Horse-hair to make a Fishing-line. Mrreplyed,Glocester,Herbert JonesGlocester. I asked Mr.what was the occasion of his haste? Said he,Arnold's.
What time was that?
About the 5th of.
Mr., What can you say concerning this thing?
I desired Mr.to meet me, that we might even our Accounts, and upon the 5th oflast he met me, and I desired Mr.to be present as a Witness.
Where was it.?
At, And as we were making up the Account, said Mr.to Mr.,?replyed, He left very good Horse-hair at a Farriers in: And he asked him why he left it? He said he made hast for fear of being taken and stopt for Mr.business. I cannot say whether he call'd him Esq;, or Mr., or what; he seldom used to give him so good words.
What do you know concerningbeing at the Cutlers?
If it please you, Sir,was at the Cutlers.
Name the time when, and the place where.
The 5th of, at a place calledin, Mr.and, we came there, and Mr.asked, Whether he would mend him that Sword or no? But Mr.had some business that he could not get time to mend it that morning, but would do it in the afternoon. Says, Where have you been, you have been hot at it? What have you been Fighting with the Devil? No, said he, with damn'd.
What did you say when the Cutler asked him, Whether he had been fighting with the Devil? and he said again no, not with the Devil, but with damn'd?
said he must not speak such words, andWife pluckt him by the Coat and bid him hold his Tongue.
Who was by?
There was one.
Was onethere?
I think there was another indeed by the Apprentice.
There was the Apprentice, but he does not know his Name, and, and, and his Wife.
What did you hearsay about the Rapier?
He asked me in the Afternoon before Mr.was hurt, Where he might buy a very good Rapier?told himcould not tell, He had then a good Back-Sword in the House.
Tell the Court what Acquaintancehad with Fatherthe Jesuite since Executed.
My Lord he told me he wou'd go to the Executioner and perswade him not to Execute Mr., buthad the Executioner lockt up, andwould not suffer him; butdid see him very active at the Execution, a dipping cloaths inhis Blood.
What do you say as to his coming to his Lodging?
We went to several places that day, and at Eight or Nine, or between Eight and Nine, we came to thein St., andleft him at the Kitchin Fire, and went up into the Chamber, and drank a considerable quantity of drink; and as near as I can guess, it was between Twelve and One a Clock before he came to his Bed: for after I was going to Bed, about One of the Clock, I heardcome up the Stairs, and bid me Good-night; he called at my door just as I was pulling off my Breeches to go into Bed.
What time was this?
As near as I can guess it was between Twelve and One, or very near One.
At what House was it?
Thein St..
What did you say when the Maid was making the Bed.
I asked her who it was for? Andshe said for a Man that was not willing to lie with any Body.
What time did you come to the House?
About Nine.
Did you stay in that House till that time?
I lay in the House Sir.
You were not out of the House all the while?
No Sir, I was not out of it.
And you are sure that you did not see him again till he came to your door going to Bed?
Yes Sir.
What time was that?
Nigh One.
You see the Contradiction between this, and what this Fellow says upon his Examination, where he says he was a-bed at Nine a Clock.
Where did you go at that time?
We went toto one, and she told us her Husband was gone to Exercise at the next Church; I do not know the Churche's Name, and there we went and looked upon the Souldiers, but did not see him. We came back to his House again, and the Gentlewoman gave us a Tankard of Beer, or Ale. And after that we went back, and we had a mind to make sport with a Countrey Fellow we had with us, and went into, from thence we went to thein.
You went to, and what did you spend there?
Six Pence and he paid it.
Whether did you go from thence?
Into.
How long did you stay in?
It was not long Sir, about an hour.
Where after that?
From thence to theand staid till Eight or Nine.
Who did you meet withall between yourgoing from theinto the?
We met with oneand another, and one.
What did you drink there?
We did drink both Ale and Brandy.
Well said, how long did you stay there?
We staid there a pretty while, an hour or more, or two hours.
What time of Night was it that you went from thence?
About Eight or Nine.
And then you went to your Lodgings?
Yes.
Did you Drink at the?
No, we drank not all together.
And there you stay'd till Twelve or One a Clock?
Yes.
But can you remember, as near as you can guess what time was it you saw this Maid making of the Bed?
I cannot say positively, but I judge it was about Twelve a Clock.
As to that Circumstance of his coming home at Twelve at Night, desire Mr.to give an Account of his Examination, what time of Night he came to his Lodging.
Do you believe that ishand?
That is a Copy.
He did confess before a Justice of the Peace that he was at his Lodging at Ten a Clock: This I heard him say, and I believe he won't deny it; and I heard him own this Examination; my Man will prove it.
Deny it? Yes I will deny it, there was no such word said: I did say, Mr., I went to Bed then.
The Jury must take notice of this, That upon his Examination, he says, he came home byNine; which is before the thing was done: but by proof he did not come in till Twelve, which was after the thing was done.
We will give you now Gentlemen an Account of this Mans Principles.
This is the business,says, They came together to their Lodging before Night, but he left him at the Kitchin-Fire, and went into another Room to drink with some company; and this Mr.says his Bed was not made till Twelve a Clock, and that he himself went to Bed about One of the Clock, and that he heard the Prisoner at the Bar while he was pulling off his Breeches, call to him, and therefore he took notice of that as a Circumstance; that he does particularly remember he did not go to Bed till that time; and he says he did not stir from that place after Nine a Clock.
There is a Contradiction in that.
There is no Contradiction: The other Witness says that he came along with him at Nine a Clock.
I will tell you where this is a Contradiction.
He says he came to the House at Nine a Clock, but he came not to Bed till after One.
The Evidence does not go so far:says they came to the, and left him in the Kitchin at Nine a Clock, and he went into his Chamber and staid up till One, and all that time he did not come to Bed.
So far it lies upon him to give an Account where he was between Nine and Twelve.
Heark you Sir, have you had any Discourse withconcerning the Plot, and concerning the Lords in the Tower? And what did he say to you?
I had some Discourse with him concerning the Papists, he said that it was the best Religion, and that those that were not of that Religion should be Damn'd: I alledged against him, and told him the contrary: I thought not. Can it be such a Religion said I, that will Act such things against the King and the Government? Says he, If any says there is such a Plot against the King or the Government, he is a Rogue, and a Thief.
What did he say of the Lords in the?
Nothing more.
How long ago was this?
When was this?
This was, my Lord, about a Twelve Month ago.
Did he speak any thing to you further concerning the Plot?
Not further.
My Lord, I beseech you I may speak to this man, Do you hear, Sir, Were not these the words that I said when you charged me to be a Papist, That I knew of no Popish Plot, and they that said I was a Papist, or knew any of the Plot, were Rogues or Whores, or worse.
You said thus, That the Papists were the best Religion, and that those that were not of that Religion were Damn'd.
Have not you been a Papist Sir?
I am not now.
Will you say that I am a Papist?
I say you defended it so much I thought you were. Said I, I wonder it being such a good Religion, that they vvould offer to Act such a thing against the King and Government. Said he, He that says this Plot is Acted by the Papists, is a Rogue and a Thief.
How long ago is this?
A Twelve Month ago; you remember it well enough; you remember when you sent for me to the.
What discourse have you had with him concerning the Plot.
What has he said about it?
He said, If the Lords in the Tower were Executed, there would be a greater War than ever was in; and swore that if these Lords were put to death, it would cost more Blood then ever was spilt. And I asked him again, Why they should not be put to death if they should deserve it? For if a poor Man had done such a Fault, he would be hanged out of the way presently. He said again, They did not deserve it, for there was no Plot at all.
Pray Sir, Who was with you when you say I said these words?
I was atHouse.
Did not you say thatdiscoursed this with you?
Is this the man that spake it, upon your Oath?
Yes this was the man.
What didsay to you? Do you think my Lord, I would say such a thing to such a man as this is?
Do you hear Mr., for that matter it is not the question, the man has sworn it, except the Jury know of their own knowledge that the man is perjured, he is not so as to me.
It is the first time that I ever took an Oath.
Mr., What have you heardsay concerning Mr.?
Sir I vvas in Company vvithand another, and vve had discourse concerning one, andsaid --
What was that?
I being in company with him, we fell in Discourse about Justice, how he was Wounded.
Where was it?
In, at, the second day of:answered us, That he could not see but he wounded himself.
What day do you say?
The Second day of.
He did Discourse the 5th day ofat, I would faign know when he came through.
What did he say about Mr.?
He thought that he wounded himself, says his Wife, How could he wound himself in his Arms? Said he, It was himself or some of his Friends.
Or some of his Relations.
Some of his Friends.
Mr., Pray tell how you found Mr.when he was Wounded.
I found Mr.Bleeding.
Tell what Wounds there were.
Two in his Arm, Two others upon the Face, another upon the Throat, which bled very much; another two upon the Breast, and one in the Belly.
What depth might that be?
Two Inches and an half long.
Where else?
There was another upon his Breast.
What depth?
They were not very deep, but there was one upon the Belly Six Inches and an half; there was Two through his Arm, and a Wound and several Bruises in his Head.
This is likely to be a fine Contrivance, that he should do it himself, as likely as that Sirput his own Sword through his Body after his Neck was broke.
Do you believe a man could wound himself so?
No Sir.
I believe a man could do it, but I believe a man would not do it to himself.
Mr., Pray do you Acquaint my Lord and the Jury, what Discourse past between you andat theTavern in.
We drank one Bottle of, Mr.came in when the Bottle was almost ended. But by and by some Friends came in, and they asked him, What News, Sir? Said he, I hear of no News but a cruel Assassination upon Mr., but for my part I am sorry for it: But, said he, if any thing should be upon Mr., it is a very strange thing.
Were you there all the time Sir?
Yes Sir, all the time.
And you heard no other Discourse?
No he did not say Dam him, nor Sink him, for I hate such Company.
Mr.where do you live?
In.
What Sign do you live at?
At the.
What Trade are you?
A.
Now we will go on to the Discourse at, about their passing with such speed through.
Mr., They do not pretend you were in great fear, but they say you said so. It is not the Question, Whether you did stay long ator no? But the Question is, Whether you told this man so? Because the man asked you, Why you would leave the Hair at the Farriers in order to a Fishing-line? Truly I was in great haste, for fear I should be taken up about the business of Mr..
It is very true, and therefore we bring this Evidence to shew the Improbability that weshould say any such thing when it was false, and especially when it was to accuse our selves of a Crime.
Mr., Pray give an Account to the Jury of your passing through, and how long you staid there.
My Lord, I came with the Prisoner.
What day did you come through?
I cannot positively tell you the day, we went out of Town upon Friday, we came to, either Wednesday or Friday, and there we went to thein, and there staid an hour before we went to Dinner, it was a publick time, the Quarterly Sessions, and several People came to us to hear the News, we told them, and were as sorry for it as any Persons could be, and did confess it a very ill thing. We went from theafter we had Din'd to the, and drank several Pints of Cyder. I believe by the Oath I have taken, we were several hours in the Town.
Do you know Mr.is acquainted with Mr.?
I do believe Mr.has great reason to be acquainted with.
Yes now he has.
Was he chief Constable?
Yes he was, and certainly Mr.in Reason would take notice of the Chief Constable.
Mr., I am informed that you know this Gentleman goes to Church, and receives the Sacrament. Give an account what Religion he is of.
Always a Protestant, I saw him at Church within this half year.
I can shew a Certificate of my going to Church, since I came to Town.
There are many people that can go to Church to serve their turn.
And my Lord I have taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.
An excellent Protestant to Discourse so of the Plot, I must needs say that.
How old are you?
Between 15, and 16.
Hark you, do you know the danger of forswearing your self?
Yes Sir.
What is it?
I am in danger of Everlasting Fire.
Very well.
My Lord this is the Apprentice to the Cutler, in whose Shopsays we had such Discourse:pray tell my Lord, and the Jury whether you were by, when onecame into your Masters Shop, when he andwere talking abouthis Sword.
Sir,, came in the morning, and brought a Sword, my Master was not within, and he told me, give this Sword to your Master to be mended; so I took the Sword, and laid it up till my Master came in; when he came in, I told my Master of it, and when he came again thiswas in the Shop, saidto my Master,? says he; says my Master,Giles,, says he,Arnold.
Hiss 'm Hiss.
It does not become the Decency and Gravity of a Court of Justice, to be humming and hissing, when Facts are Trying of this great Concernment.
It was the common discourse there, That Mr.had been Assaulted.
You have been in a great Combat, have you been fighting with the Devil? What did he say to that?
He never met with, my Master asked him, Mr.,, Sir,Arnold.
You did not hear his Wife bid him hold his Tongue.
No Sir.
Did he tell you how he did break his Sword?
No Sir.
My Lord, here is Mr.can tell, that I was sitting down in a Chair, and broke off a piece of the Guard.
You will do well to prove it Sir.
Was there any Discourse in the Countrey about Mr.?
Did they not talk any thing about Killing the Devil?
No Sir.
If your Lordship pleases we will call Witnesses to give an Account when we came to Town, and where we were all that day; and we will call the Maid that Lockt the Chamber door after we were in bed, on the same Night when this Fact was committed.
, Pray tell my Lord and the Jury whencame to Town?
If it please you my Lord, I came to Town andtogether.
What time of day was it?
It was Twelve a Clock.
Who is thy Master?
What time of Night was it Friend, when you heard him call to your Master, and bid him good Night.
About 11, or 12 a Clock.
You say about Nine, you were at your Lodging with him, did your party company with him?
Yes Sir, we did.
Where did you go at that time?
We went into the Chamber, and drank Two Pints of Brandy.
What time of Night was that?
After Two Pints of Brandy, I wonder how he can remember any thing.
Tell what time of the Nightcame in, where you were in his company; what time of Night it was?
Speak as loud as thou would'st do if thou wer't at home: When was this?
The Thursday after.
The Thursday inWeek, or the Thursday in the next Week?
The Thursday inWeek; we were never out of Company; when he came home to his Lodging I believe it was near Ten a Clock.
Where was your Lodging at the?
At the.
Good Woman, did you go with him to?
No not I.
Were you with him at the?
No not I.
Were you with him in?
No Not I.
He did not go out of your Company at all?
Yes about Ten a Clock.
Woman you must be mistaken, he came to Town at Twelve or One, and might be in thy company, but it is plain he went to a Brokers in, and so to theat, for I guess it might be so: Then they went to, and spent Six-Pence, and after that they went into.
My Lord, she don't say she was with us all the while, but we came to an House where she was, and several other People our Neighbours.
She says you did go out sometime: Now see whether I mistake you.
Yes you do mistake me.
He went out, did he?
Yes he went out after we came into the City, he and some others, and then they came back to me again in two or three hours.
Then you were two or three hours at Dinner. Now I ask you, After they came back, was you with him all the while?
Yes that I was.
Where was it?
At the.
That is the place in.
No, indeed, it is in.
When did he go to Bed, do you know that upon your Oath?
We were in the Inn between Nine and Ten a Clock, nearer Ten then Nine, and I saw him sitting taking a Pipe of Tobacco.
What time was that?
A little after Ten I believe.
He sat there till he was call'd away to do his business.
, Pray do you tell my Lord and the Jury about what timewent to Bed?
Indeed Sir, he went to Bed between Ten and Eleven.
How long was it that he came to his Lodging before that? Can you say how long he was in the House before he went to Bed?
I asked him if I should take away his Candle, he said he would put his Candle out, but I might Lock him in, and take the Key; but I did not do it.
Did he go to Bed as soon as he came in?
No, I think he did not.
You made the Bed, did not you?
I did.
Upon your Oath, what time of Night was it?
I think it was nearer Eleven than Ten.
Did you make the Bed after he went into it? What time did you make the Bed upon your Oath?
I made the Bed about Ten a Clock.
I ask you, do you remembercame into you and asked you any thing about making the Bed? Do you remember he was in the Chamber?
In whose Chamber?
Didcome in when you were making the Bed?
He was not there that I knew of.
Was not I in the Chamber when you made the Bed?
No, I don't remember you.
My Lord, when this Maid went to make the Bed, I went into the Room after her, and had some discourse with her, we lean'd together upon theWindow, and I told her I was in Love with her, I told her, if she liked of it, I would Marry her the next Morning: I did it to make merry, for indeed I am a Married Man.
What time a Night was it?
About Twelve a Clock.
If you forget your other Sweet-Hearts, can you remember this? Do you remember now he was there?
I remember he was there.
Mr., Pray do not laugh at my Witnesses and make May-Games at them, it is not the part of a Gentleman.
And she told me that he would lie by himself though the house was very full.
Do you remember any such Discourse?
I do remember that Mr.did come in.
What time of Night was it that he was making love to you?
I think about Ten a Clock.
Time passed merrily away with you then.
It was Twelve a Clock.
Why do you say so? Our house was all quiet presently after Eleven.
Why will you say so? Were not we Singing and Roaring together?
Come don't be angry, you were not angry when you were making love together?
I am not angry indeed Sir.
Tell my Lord what time of Nightcame into his Lodging, and where it was?
It was inWeek he came in, and so were drinking at thein St., and from Dinner, and from Nine a Clock.
How? You did not dine there, you din'd at the.
Yes we din'd there, but from Nine a Clock, we were there till Twelve.
How do you know?
I was there with him.
After Twelve a Clock you say you left him?
Yes.
Where did you leave him.
In the Kitchin.
Are you sure?
Yes my Lord, I am sure of it.
I ask you, because I have an unhappy Memory, you are sure it was Twelve a Clock when you saw him in the Kitchin, and here is a Maid saw him go to Bed at Eleven.
Have you any more? You know the matter that was the occasion of the dispute t'other day I would not by any means, that in a Cause of this publick Concern, there should be any pretence for any to say they were surprized; therefore call as many Witnesses as you please.
What can you say when Mr.came into his Lodging?
It was about Ten a Clock. I gave his Horse half a Peck of Oats.
Where?
At thein
Do you know how long he staid before he went to Bed?
No Sir, I cannot tell.
He speaks honestly, this Man.
Have you any more?
There is another, a Translator, my Council knows his Name.
What is your Name Sir?
Go on.
I say thiswas at my House between Eight and Nine a Clock.
Where is your House?
My House is --
Can you say any more to it?
No.
What have you to say?
Sir I went with mr.home, and it was between Nine and Ten a Clock, and I saw him in his Lodging, and I saw him in the Morning.
Are you sure he went to Bed when you made it?
It was between Ten and Eleven a Clock.
You see how they Contradict one another.
Is your name?
Yes Sir.
You say you are certain you left him in the Kitchin at Twelve?
Yes Sir.
But here is one that says he went to Bed by Eleven.
O Lord no Sir.
These are your own Witnesses Mr..
You see how they contradict one another.
My Lord, I met some of my Countrey-men about an hour before Night.
What day?
About Thursday Sir.
What Week was it in?
I believe in, and I heard them say that Mr.was come to Town, and Mr.and he was to have an Hearing the next day.
How long was you in his Company?
I had been in my Friends company about an hour before he came, and we staid till near Nine or thereabouts, and then we parted, and I never saw him afterwards, till last Munday was Seven-night.
What say you?
Mr.was in my company, and staid till about Nine a Clock, or thereabouts, and then we went away, and I saw him no more for that Night.
Have you any more?
No.