Pray, my Lord, give me your Favour, I would notinterrupt you; but to make things clear as we go, I desire to ask you, when you came first to Mr.House, who spake first, when you were all met together?
Every body discoursed what they pleased.
But who gave an Account of the Reason of the Meeting? Will you please to recollect, and tell what you know who began the Discourse?
Something introductive to it was said by Mr., we being at his House, as 'tis natural to conceive for any Gentleman at whose House People are met, to say, Pray let us sit down, and talk of our Business. Something leading and introductive was said by him.
Pray, my Lord, as near as you can remember, will you give an Account what was the thing he began to discourse of? Did he seem to take any Notice, or have any Knowledge of your Meeting, and other things before?
It was a general Hint and Intimation to us of the Ends of our Meeting, that we were there come to consult and advise one with another how to put things into a better Method and Posture than formerly: And he desired that we would sit down and discourse of these things. My Lord, I would not charge my self with Particulars positively.
Upon what Questions did you debate and consult, my Lord?
Those were started severally. Some would speak of the Time when it should be, whether it were not convenient now or when? Others offered something concerning the Places, whether it should be begun in the City or in the Country, or both together. Others took it into Consideration what Persons were to be prepared in the several Countreys to be assisting in it that were probable to carry it on. And then some discoursed concerning the raising of Money, and then what summ should be raised, and I think that was started by the Duke of; but I am sure the summ that he named was 20 or 30000The last thing that was talked of, but which was concluded to be the thing principally to be taken care of, was the setling such a Concurrence and Correspondence withthat they might chime in at the same time, that so we might give as many diversions both from home and abroad as could be at one and the same time.
My Lord, Did Mr.discourse of this matter?
I cannot speak to the Discourse of any one in particular; for I cannot say it was put to the Vote as we formerly express it, but it may be said we were all consenting and concurring.
Did any of you dissent from the Riseing?
No, no my Lord.
Did any of you oppose it at all?
No, no, That was discoursed of as a thing resolved.
I ask you this Question, my Lord, Was there any sort of Complaint made of the Government, That it was uneasie and that occasioned you to enter into these debates?
There was I cannot say a Complaint, because there was no Person to complain to; but it was spoken of as a matter of greatgrievance, that such a Force and Violence should be put upon the City in their Election of Officers, and the tendency of that as to all Juryes tho' I cannot distinctly remember the particular things.
You say you were talking of a Messenger to be sent intoto my Lord ofand others to chime in with you in this matter as you say, pray did you come to any Resolution about that, and what did you resolve upon?
That there should be one only at that time. And afterwards it was the matter of the debate at the next Meeting, which was that Meeting at my Lord, which was about this time twelve-month insometime.
How long after the first Meeting at Mr.was that?
My Lord, I think it was about a fortnight.
Who was there?
The same Persons that met before. But then there was little spoken of but the Business of.
Was Mr.there at the second Meeting?
He was there.
At my Lordyou say it was?
Yes.
What Resolution did you come to then?
Then we came to a Resolution that some Body should be sent, and we began to discourse who was fit, and Col.he propounded, to some of the Company he was known, to others not; but those that did know him did approve of him as a fit Person.
To whose Province was that comitted of sending this Person into?
Col.undertook it himself.
Did the rest consent to it?
Yes, no body did oppose it; but left it to him.
Did you Name the Person then that was to go?
He was not so named as to be with any solemnity approved or disproved; but it was left to Col.to manage it, and he namingas a fit Person (he told us that by the by not to put it to the Question for our Approbation) and some of us knew the Person, others did not. I was one that did know him, and did think him a very fit Man to send.
Pray, my Lord, who was the Person? Be pleased to tell the Jury so as they may know it.
Had you any discourse with Col., my Lord, afterwards that he was sent?
Yes, my Lord.
Pray give an account of that?
About three or four days after this Meeting at my Lord, I went to Visit Col.at his House, and while I was there in the Room, he went to his Cabinet, and out of a Drawer where there was five or six hundred pound in Gold as I could guess, he took a good many pieces, I do not know directly how many; but he took out so many as he said was threescore Guineys that he was going to carry to, I went not in my own Coach, and therefore went away with him in his Coach, and he set me down atat my own Lodging. I went no further, but he did, and he told me afterwards it was conveyed to him, and that he did go.
How long was that after your second Meeting at my Lordwhere you say you intrusted Col.to send one into?
I think it may be less then a Week, four or five days, that I saw him carry the Money. After this he said, he had given him this Money, and was gone: And when he was dispatched, in a Week after I was making enquiries after him, and Col.said, he had not heard of him since he went away; but about a fortnight or three Weeks Col.said he had heard of him, That he was atand stay'd there; but he wondered he could hear no more of him. I then went into, and when I came back from thence, he told me, he was come, but I had never seen him, not to this day, indeed I had once appointed a Meeting with him at Mr.Chamber; but something or other happened, we did not meet.
We have done with my Lord, if they will ask him any Questions they may.
They know their time, when the Kings Attorney has done with any Witness then they may examine him, if they please. If they will not call your other Witnesses.
Will you ask him any Questions?
No, no, by advice they are to ask him nothing.
We shall give your Lordship and the Jury an account in the next place, that we have tracedinto. And for that we shall call some Witnesses which indeed we did not produce before at any Tryal, because we had not then discovered so much. We shall bring you the Person at whose House he lay at, and the very Messenger that was sent with him to conduct him a by-way into. Calland.
Look you Gentlemen, You that are at the Bar, there you must let the Jury stand by themselves. I see there are a great many others intermingled with them, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, If any whisperer talk to you, we expect that you should tell us who they are; for we will suffer no remarks to be made but what are openly made to the Court, and the Jury by the Counsel of both sides.
Swearand.
What is this Man's Name Mr.? Friend what is your Name?
My Name is,
Pray give my Lord and the Jury an account What you know of any Person that lay at your house some time since and whether you have seen him since? My Lord this Gentleman did not knowbefore, and therefore I desire Mr.may be called and examined again. Mr., do you know?
Yes, I know him very well.
Had this Gentleman a view of?
Yes, he had. He was brought wherewas, and this other Person was by before him too, and I was by when they had a view of him.
Now pray give an accompt what you know of the man you saw?
Where is?
He is in the Kings Bench Prison, and he was brought bytobefore the King. where these two persons were brought likewise, and there this mandid own thatwas the man that was at his house; and the otherowned that he travelled towardswith him, and that he was hired to shew him the way into.
Didsay any thing?
He would not Answer any thing at all, nor say a word.
Pray give an account Mr., who it was that lay at your House, and when it was, and what he said was his Business, and by what name he went?
Indeed his Business I did not know; but he was at our House about the middle of, it was thereabouts.
When was it? what?
The last.
You say he was at your House last, pray tell the Court where that is?
At.
Do you keep any Inn there?
Yes.
What Sign?
The Sign of the.
And what did he do there?
He stayed there one Night and went away, and returned again in twelve days or thereabouts, and came to my House again.
Whither did he go from you?
He wentas I suppose, I know no further.
But when he first came to your House, which way went he?
He wenttowards, as he himself said, And desired to have one to shew him the way: And I sent for this Man, and when he came to him he hired him to go with him, and I was by.
When he first came to your house about the middle ofwas twelve month, Whither was he bound then,or?
He was going to, that is.
And you say after he came back again, and lay another Night at your house.
Yes, ten or twelve days after he did.
And which way went he then?
Then he cametowards.
Did you take exact notice of the Man?
Yes, I saw him before his Majesty and the Council.
And upon your Oath that same man you saw there was the same man that lodged at your house inwas 12 month?
Yes, it is.
What name did he go by at your house?
He went under the name of Mr., but what his Sirname was I can't tell.
Had he a servant with him?
He had a man with him that stay'd at our house during the time of his going?
What did he call his name.
Did he desire you to furnish him with a guide?
He told me his Servant did not know the way, and his horse was a little lamish, and desired me to get a guide for him. For after he had dined at our house it happened to be a rainy day, and he could not go further that night, and therefore desired me to get him a man that knew that Countrey, and I sent for this same man, and he hired him; and he went along with him next morning, my Lord.
Whither was he to go?
Truly I did not know; but he told me he did not know the way into, and I directed him to a Gentlemans house atin the way.
Is that the Road to?
Yes, the high Road to one part of.
Did he tell you to what part or place ofhe was to go?
He named the West of, I think he named, but I do not know what place certainly he designed for.
Then where is?
Here.
Had you a view of this man they call?
Yes, I had.
Give an accompt, whether you saw him in the North and when and where.
This man, Mr., sent for me. I live atand there I keep Hackney Horses to serve any Gentlemen, or be a Guide to them as there is occasion, and Mr.sent for me, and when I came he told me the Gentleman wanted a Guide into. We immediately agreed, it was upon Thursday night before that we call.
When was it say you?
It was the Thursday before, so they call it with us, that is.
Ay, they call it so in those places, because 'tis the Even of the Fast of, the beginning of Lent -- Well go on.
We went away on Friday the next morning on our Journey towords, and the 2d day which was Saturday in the afternoon my horse tired, whereupon he left me with my horse and took the Mans man of the house where he left me to guide him, for my horse would not ride up with him being tired, and he resolving to go on, and he bid me follow him on the Sunday morning toTown, which I did, and we stayed there all Sunday. And on Monday morning I saw him take horse and another man that was his guide, and away they went, as I think, he said towardshe was going. And he pay'd me, and I returned again from him toand left him.
Pray how far was this, you say you went with him to, how far distant is that from?
Tomy Lord?
Yes.
'TisMiles my Lord.
How nearis it?
'Tis within someMiles of theBorder.
Did you see him at any time after that?
I saw him at his coming back again; being athouse, his Wife asked me if I would go up and see the Gentleman that I went with towards: So I went up, and he made me eat and drink at the Table with him.
What Name did he go by?
He went by the name of.
Was there any Servant with him?
There was a Man that came with him as a Servant there, and was all the time at, that he was gone towards, till he came back again.
Mr., Did this Man seeat the time the other saw him?
Yes, I did.
And is that the Man that went by the name ofat, and that you went with towards?
Yes, It is.
And when they charged him with it,did not deny it.
Did you go any by-Road to get into?
No, 'tis the Road Gentlemen usually go to, and so on; because 'tis something the nearer way to that part of, as we judge it to be, therefore Gentlemen use it.
Is it an high-open-Road?
Yes, 'tis the high-open Way to that part of the Country.
My Lord, Pray were the Names of any of thementioned at your Meeting, that were to be sent for?
Yes; There was my Lord, Sir, and one.
Now, my Lord, We will give you an account, That aswent into, so these persons soon after came into.
My Lord, We desire that my Lordwould name thosethat were to come.
There was my Lord, Sir, and one, one that was of my LordName and Family; and there was another Name, but I can't remember what that Name was.
We shall give you an Account, my Lord, That they came immediately after this to Town; and at the breaking out of the Plot, they Absconded.
Mr., Has my Lordhis Pardon?
Yes, my Lord, he has.
Then your Lordship may be covered.
I can't tell, but they may ask me some Questions.
Then you may be uncovered when they ask them, in the mean time your Lordship may be covered. Swear Sir
Pray Sir, will you tell my Lord and the Jury what you know about the, and Sirbeing in Town? Or any otherthat you know of?
My Lord, I did see those Gentlemen in the beginning of last Summer. Sir, and Mr., andthe Son, I did see; but the Father I did not, but I do know he was in Town, tho I saw him not.
How do you know it?
I had Messages from them.
Sir, You say, you saw Sir, and?
Yes.
Did you see any body else?
I saw Sirthe Son.
What became of them upon the Discovery of the Plot?
Sirdid Abscond, and Mr.was taken into Custody.
What became of the others?
Thewere both in Custody.
Did you see any Commission they had?
I did see a Commission that Sirhad.
What was it for?
To make a Purchase of some Plantations beyond Sea, I think it was.
Ay, where my Lordhad an Interest.
It was some of the.
I did omit that passage my Lord --
Pray was it discoursed then, what should be the Blind for these Gentlemen that were notorious Dissenters, that they should come to Town fromabout?
It was to carry on a Plantation in. TheGentlemen were personally known to my Lordonly; and my Lordwas to write the Letter to them, and, I suppose, did.
Mr., What do you know of thesecoming to Town; and what became of them afterwards?
My Lord, about the beginning of, or, or thereabouts, I had some Information, That there were someGentlemen that had been shifting up and down, and at that time were about, lodged there secretly. I immediately went with the King's Proclamation, and some Warrants that I had to apprehend some Traytors that were fled: And when I came, I found that Mr.having Notice of them, had beat up their Quarters, and they were endeavouring to escape by Water; but there they were catched. There was Sir, and, and Sir, and some others, I know not the Names of them all; truly I can't tell whetherwas not another, but SirI had in my Custody, andwas immediately committed to the; and the rest of the Gentlemen I afterwards took in a cunning Hole by, in a back house. And when I came there, I found them lyeing on the Bed in the middle of the Day; and had them Prisoners in my Custody two or three Months; and then they were all sent out of my hands intoPrisoners. Six of them there were, my Lord, that I saw.
We have done my Lord, only we desire that a word of a Record may be read.
What Record is it Sir?
Of CollonelAttainder.
My Lord, We shall desire your Judgment, whether that Record ought to be read against Mr.; I perceive by Mr., that 'tis a Record of the Conviction of Mr., which ought not to be given in Evidence against Mr.upon this Indictment.
We make use of it, to shew how upon former Tryals, upon this Evidence, Verdicts have gone.
We are in your Judgment, my Lord, if by Law it may be given in Evidence against Mr., who is neither Party nor Privy to it, nor Indicted for the same Offence.
Let it alone then.
Well, Mr.does not press it. What say you to it, Gentlemen, for the Defendant?
What do you mean by that, Mr.?
By being a Witness against the Defendant and others, he has procured his own Pardon.
That is a little harsh Expression --
My Lord, I explain my self thus --
'Tis an harsh Word, and too roundly expressed; You had need to explain your self; 'Tis a little too rank, as though the King's Pardon were to be procured by Blood.
And consented to it?
I would not strain any thing my Lord, further than the Evidence is.
Nor do not Misrepeat it neither.
I design not any such thing, my Lord.
But you do though: For he Swears it, every one of them consented.
By silence it must be then. For he does not say, That he said any thing. He Swears only Collonelundertook to manage it, to send a Person; and my Lordto write the Letter.
And all the rest Consented to it.
My Lord, and Gentlemen of the Jury, I desire to make one Observation, before we call our Witnesses.
Pray do not take up our time altogether in Speeches, but go on to your Evidence.
I desire to observe but one thing, my Lord.
Make your Observations at last, but spend not our time in Speeches. I know you will expect to be heard at last, and so you shall whatever you will say.
Call the Earl of, the Lord of, and Lord. Mr..
Now we have him here we must begin with him, my Lord. Mr., Pray what did you hear my Lordsay at any time concerning this Conspiracy, and who were concerned in it, and who were not?
My Lordcame once to the house of Colonel, I believe it was about 8 days after the Imprisonment of Colonel, and when he was in the house, I ask't him, What is the matter my Lord? he did answer me, he was told there was a Plot against the King and the Duke, and one general Insurrection to be made, and that Colonelsent a man into, to which thing my Lordsware laying his hand on his breast, saying,Sidney; and I said, what is the matter, my Lord? are you afraid? and he made answer to me,. And he asked me about the Goods of Colonel, because of the Plot and such things, and he desired to have them removed to his house; and he said, rather then go to the Tower he would do any thing.
Speak again to the Jury that did not hear you, what said my Lordto you?
He said, rather then to be a Prisoner again he would do any thing.
Who to be a Prisoner again?
My Lord.
What things were spoken of?
He said he would do any thing.
Were you speaking of the Conspiracy? Of the Plot?
He spake of the Plot, and said he knew nothing of it.
What did he say Sir?
He said to me and swore, he knew nothing of it, and called God to witness.
Pray did he then say he would do any thing rather then go to the, when you were talking of the Plot and Conspiracy?
Yes, he would do any thing rather then be a Prisoner again.
Pray what did he say?
He raised up his hands on high, and said, he knew nothing of the Plot, or of the Insurrection, or that Colonelhad sent any man into.
When was this?
I believe it was 8 or 9 days after the Imprisonment of Colonel.
What day of the Month, and what Month was it?
He was Imprisoned about the end of.
My Lord, It would be necessary that I should make an answer to this, and I know not whether I should make a particular answer to every one: for here is a whole set of Witnesses, I see.
No, let them alone. You must not interrupt them, they must go on with their Evidence; and when 'tis a fit time for you to answer them, the Council for the King will call you.
Pray sware Mr.
Pray Sir,will you please to acquaint my Lord and the Jury what you know, of what my Lordhas said of the Plot, and who were concerned in it?
My Lord, what I have said is in the Paper of Mr.Tryal, and truly I can say no more than what I said there.
pray speak out Sir, and tell it again to this Jury.
I was told I spake it very loud then.
Pray Sir speak as you please, We wont direct you in what Key you shall speak. Speak in what Key you will.
Then if you will have me speak it, I will speak it as loud again. My Lord, is Mr.here?
Yes, there he is.
In the first place I do not know Mr., My Lord, I cannot promise to speak the very words that I spake the last time, I cannot make them so fit as one tally fits another.
Consider, Sir, you were not Sworn then, you are Sworn now, That is the difference, and therefore pray consider of it.
My Lord, As near as I can, I will repeat the same words again, I had little Acquaintance with my Lord; But meeting him often at my Brothers House, (and being he was extraordinary pleasant Company, I must needs say that he was so, and a Man of great Wit) and I coming from, he asked me what news of the Plot? I told him there were some People that were in the Proclamation, or would be, and I named their Names. Says he, I know none of them except, I think; and by chance I met him passing through the Old Exchange, and he saluted me very kindly. After this my Lordwas taken, and when my Lordheard that, says he, then we are all undone. And I very much fear it is a Sham Plot, since they have seized upon my Lord, and I doubt he is a lost man. After that, I think as near as I can remember -- The next thing was this -- If you look upon the Book, you will see what I said there.
We are not to look upon the Book, man. You must give your Evidence your self Mr., I hope you do not Swear by Book? Let the truth come out in Gods Name, whatever it be.
Ay, my Lord, We desire to have truth come out.
Ay, whether it be of one side, or the other, God forbid but truth should be spoken. Mr.go on.
Then my Lord Colonel,was taken, and says my Lord, I am extremely troubled for Colonel, for he is my very good Friend. said I, why are you not concerned for my Lord? He is of your Blood, says he, he is a man without exceptions. There is no man of such honor as he, but I am concerned for Colonelas that particular man that has obliged me above all the World, but I never heard my Lordname Mr.in all my life.
I'legive you a reason for it My Lord, if you please, why I said so.
My Lord, This is Evidence for the Defendant. If the Kings Counsel will call you afterwards to make Answer to any of these things, then is your time to speak. We will not let them interrupt you when you come to speak, nor must you interrupt them now. We are bound to hear both sides, and so by the grace of God we will do.
My Lord, I desire both he and his Brother may stay in Court, for I have something to say to them.
Pray what did you hear my Lordsay concerning the Plot?
He did deny it possitively, and said they acted nothing but what was Legal, and he said it 500 times over.
Did he deny it?
Yes he did.
But when he said they acted nothing but legally, what did he mean? Was this Plot legal?
I had former Discourses with my Lordat other times, and I asked him; My Lord, what tends all this to? Your going up into the City and making these meetings? says he, we intend nothing but what is legal. There is not one man in the Company that I know of, intends any thing else.
What was my Lord's Opinion of the Plot inor, or?
He said he knew nothing of it, nor could he believe there was any such thing. When those Persons were named that were to kill the King,, said he,.
When was this?
Whenand those other People were put into the Proclamation.
Mr., Then I will ask you your Opinion, whether in your Judgment, every man that was in the Plot could not have said so much?
I suppose every man in the Plot would have defended himself as well as he could, but I cannot tell what way.
Sir, did he barely affirm it, or with Asseverations and Imprecations?
My Lord, was not upon his Oath before me.
Mr.. Don't you believe a great many that were concerned in this Plot would deny it?
I am to give my Opinion only for my self, not for other People.
Have you done with him?
Yes my Lord.
Then go over Sir.
My Lord, I am troubled with Fumes, and cannot well endure a Crowd, therefore I desire I may have leave to be gone.
You may go if you please.
Call Mr.,
Then Swear my Lord ofand my Lord,
Well what do you ask my Lord of?
My Lord of, Will your Lordship please to acquaint the Court and the Jury, what you heard my Lordsay concerning the late Conspiracy?
My Lord, Some indisposition I have had of late, together with the great rigour of the season has confined me to my House this six Weeks, so that I should not come here but upon this Summons of a, which I thought I ought not to refuse. I suppose I need not repeat much of what was said at ColonelTryal.
My Lord, You must give what Evidence you have to give now,
My Lord, The Gentlemen of this Jury have not heard it, therefore you must say it all over again to them.
Sometime after Mr.was taken, my Lordcame to see me, and complaining of the Times, said, That all things were very sad and dangerous, and if ever he was questioned again, he would not Plead, but desire them only to count Noses, for the quickest dispatch he thought was best: I replyed, sure his Lordship was in jest. He said, No, he was in earnest, for he was confident if he came to Tryal, they would have his Life, let him appear never so innocent. I said, I hoped not so, it was only his Lordships fear, and because of that, I thought it might be presumed he would venture much, rather then be Tryed. And discoursing of the late Primate ofProphecy; He said, for his part, he thought the Persecution was already begun, and he did believe it would be very sharp, but withal, he hoped it would be but short; and then he began to wish himself beyond Sea till the Troubles were over; and in complyance with his Lordship I did wish so too. But as to, he did with great asseverations very much assert his innocency. He said, he thought he was not guilty of any of the things laid to his Charge; and spake with large Encomiums in his praise, as he had obligation to do, and seemed to bemoan his misfortunes; which I said I had then reason to believe he was real in, for I believe never any man was more engaged to another then he to Colonel. I told him there was a discourse of some Writings of Mr.that were taken; he said he was confident they could make nothing of any Writing of his; I told him, I supposed he meant legally they could not do it, This was the most he said, as to Mr., he mentioned nothing that I know of.
Did he seem to declare any Opinion about the Plot or Conspiracy in general, That there was any such thing or not?
I do not remember it.
My Lord of, Did you never hear my Lordbefore this complain of the Government that it was amiss, and was to be rectified?
Yes, he often did complain. Every body knows my Lord's way of discourse.
Pray will you ask him, if my Lord ofused to fall out with me upon those discourses.
My Lord was always good Company.
You mean, My Lord.
I understand what you mean by, you are a Learned man, I know.
My Lord of, if I apprehend your Lordship aright, my Lordwas discoursing of the Primate ofProphecy, and said he thought the Persecution was already begun, and would be sharp, tho' he hoped it would be short, and he wished himself beyond Sea till the Troubles were over, and your Lordship wished your self so too?
No, I said in compliance with his Lordship, since he wished himself beyond Sea, till the Troubles were over, I wished he were there too.
But I perceive all these discourses concerning the Government are reckoned but jests and matter of Laughter, but 'tis a very rank way of jesting I assure you.
My Lord, We call our Witnesses seriously, they are the Kings Council that jest.
Was this before my Lordwas taken?
Yes, but after Mr.was taken.
Well, who do you call next?
My Lord, Pray what have you heard my Lordsay concerning the Plot, and when?
My Lord sits there, and I believe he may remember it was about the 7th of, thebefore my Lord went into the Country, to the best of my memory, which was, I take it, the 9th of. Uponthe 7th at Night my Lord came to see me, I told him I was glad to see him abroad, and not concerned in the Disorders that were then so general; My Lord told me he had been wished joy by several, and he took it ill, because it looked as if he were guilty. 'Tis true, my Lord was a man of great finess and readiness in discourse, and came easily into all Company, my Lord said that was true, but he had so carefully behaved himself, that he was sure they could not touch him with any thing, nor did he know any thing of any body else that he could charge them withal.
When was this my Lord?
This was the 7th of.
Pray good my Lord, Why did you joy my Lord, had you any reason to mistrust my Lord?
No other reason, then because I knew he was a man of great freedom in discourse, and might be concerned upon that account.
And he would frequently discourse against the Government I suppose?
No, I never heard my Lord discourse against the Government in my life.
Sware Dr.
Pray will you Doctor acquaint the Court, what you heard my Lordsay concerning the late Plot, and when?
My Lordcame to see me the day after the discourse of the Plot broke out,I think it was, onit began to be talked of. The thing was little understood then, but in general a Plot was discovered, and my Lord with a great many Protestations, lifting up his hands and eyes to Heaven, protested he knew of none, and believed there was none, and spake of the whole thing as a Contrivance.
This was the day after the Discovery broke out?
Yes, the day after that I first heard of it.
Had you any other discourse with my Lord about it?
I had not seen my Lord before of some Months. And then he spake a great deal to me. He told me he had been in, and after that he went to the, and went so early and came away before the Company came, because he would avoid all danger. And he expressed great apprehensions of fear of Sham-Plots, and spake of False Witnesses and former designs of that Nature. The truth of it was, one had possessed me much with a belief of the thing, it being then but a secret, but he strove to dispossess me of that belief, and his whole discourse ran upon that for an whole hour, and expressed, as I said, great fear of some Sham-Contrivance, and spake much of false Witnesses, wishing that he were beyond Sea.
What, he spake as if there were like to be great heats and stirs, I suppose?
No, the talk was about the Discovery, which he said he believed was a Contrivance.
Did my Lorduse to come to you some times?
Yes, he used to come frequently to see me.
Dr., Pray let me ask you one Question, you spake of solemn Declarations and Protestations made by my Lord, what gave the occasion to such a Solemnity?
I will tell you the occasion truly, tho it was never asked me before. It was thus, I being possessed with the belief of the thing by one that assured me it was true, and would soon appear to be so, I argued upon that belief to convince my Lord, that it was true, and he argued a great deal to dispossess me of that belief. And I said, if there be any such thing I pray God forgive them that are concerned, but certainly it is one of the monstrousest ill things that ever wasdone; for hereby they have done all that could be done to ruine the Protestant Religion. He was smoaking a Pipe of, and he laid down his Pipe, and lifted up his hands and eyes to Heaven, and protested to me, he neither knew of any such thing, nor believed it, but it was all a Contrivance.
By his discourse, you possibly might understand what he meant, did he mean being privy to the Murder of the King or the raising of Rebellion?
There was not a word then of the Assassination, but it was all of the Plot in general.
Did he make no distinction?
We talked of nothing but Plot in general. For the particulars were not then known. It was only about the general notion of a Plot.
Pray what was the reason you had to believe it?
There was a Gentleman fromthat came to see me, and he did assure me it was true, as being one that had it from a Privy-Councellor. This was on thewhen the Council sate long about it; and nothing of particulars was then let out, but only a discourse in general of such a thing, and he said it would be found to be a certain truth.
But Doctor did not you a little wonder at the carriage of my Lord? That a man that was not accused, that you heard of, should make such solemn Protestations?
My Lord, he said just in this manner as I have told you, when I said,, he laid down his Pipe, and lift up his hands and eyes. Whether he thought I suspected him or no, I can't tell, he best knows his own thoughts.
Did he say a word of Mr.?
No, there was not any particular person named.
Doctor, he would not make you his Confessor.
His whole hours discourse was to dispossess me of the opinion and belief I had entertained of the Plot.
This was aboutyou say?
I cannot remember the very day of the Month, I believe it was the latter end of, but I am sure it was before any body was Committed, that we heard of.
Dr., you say you did believe there was a Plot then?
Yes, I did so, and he laboured to dispossess me of that belief.
Pray do you believe it now?
What a question is that, Mr?
I make no doubt of it, Sir, as to the Assassination.
My Lord, Why do you lift up your hands? you don't do well; for it is a very proper question.
Well call your next Witness Gentlemen?
Swear Mr.
Pray Sir, will you acquaint the Court and the Jury what you have heard my Lordsay about the late Conspiracy?
My Lord only said he knew nothing of the Plot; that is all I can say.
When was this?
Thebefore he was taken into Custody; then it was that your honour did say so, my Lord.
Ay, and 100 more I believe would say so, that might be concerned in it for all that.
Swear Mr.
Pray acquaint my Lord and the Jury, what discourse you had with my Lordabout his Pardon, and what he said to you?
My Lord, About the Month oflast my Lordsent to me to know how I did, and desired me to come and make him a Visit. The next day I went and waited upon my Lord at his Lodging at, and after the Complements passed, my Lord began a discourse of the Plot, and I told him, That I heard none of the Witnesses had their Pardons, but onlythe first discoverer. My Lord told me no, but he had a Warrant for his Pardon, and with that he plucked it out and shewed it me, and I read it. And then I told him Ithought it was of no avail without he had his Pardon actually under Seal. He said no, but he had their word and honour; But, said he, when I first received the Warrant, they said I should not meddle in it till I heard from them again, which I have not yet, and I ascribe it to no other reason but only this, That I must not have it till the drudgery of swearing is over.
When was this?
Inlast some time. So I then took my leave of my Lord; and my Lord desired me to come and see him at Night about 6 a Clock in the Evening, for he had a great many came to him, but then he should be at leisure, and had many things to say to me.
At that time did my Lord express himself as discontented, and that it was irksome to him to be brought as a Witness?
He only said those words that I have told you, and looked up and turned up his eyes towards Heaven when he said so.
Pray where is Mr.? sware him.
What do you ask him?
We bring him to prove that my Lordwas served with a, but is so ill of the Gout he can't come.
If that be all, there is no question of it, but that he was.
If your Lordship please, We will prove in what condition my Lordis, and then we hope your Lordship will give us leave to prove what my Lord has said concerning my Lorddiscourses with him.
No certainly, Mr., and I am sure you ask it not as expecting it should be granted.
I lay it before your Lordship and the Court.
Ay, you lay it before us, but you are a Lawyer, do you your self think fit it should be done?
My Lord, I must submit it to you.
Come, will you consent, that what the Duke ofhas said, shall be given in Evidence, and then I presume the King's Council will consent to your request.
I consent? Here is my Clyent, My Lord, in Court, I can consent to nothing.
But if so be there be leave given on one side to tell what another person has said, why should not it be consented to on the other side, that it be proved what a 3d person that is absent has said for them?
Ay, will you consent that we prove what the Duke ofhas said?
We don't know what the Duke ofhas said.
But you do know 'tis not Evidence, nor fit to be granted what you ask.
You know that 'tis not for your purpose what he has said.
My Lord, We must go according to our Instructions.
But you know the Law, why should you offer any such thing? your offering it will make thethat know not the Law, think that the Court put hardships upon people, in denying things which you that understand the Law know can't be granted.
I do not press it my Lord, but leave it with you.
Why do you spend our time in urging things that are nothing to the purpose, and cannot be allowed?
Now my Lord, We will go on to another part of our defence, and that is, to call Witnesses to the Reputation of Mr., and his behaviour, to satisfie you, that he cannot be such a person as the Indictment says, and as he must be if it be true what this Gentleman my Lordhas sworn.
We will first examine my Lord.
My Lord, We ask you to that question. Have you known this Gentleman Mr., and what a sort of a man is he?
I have good reason to know him. I have known him a great while, and have always believed him an Honest and a Prudent man, a man of Honor and Vertue and Integrity, my Lord; and I have had no reason to have other Opinion of him. I know he has been always ever since he came abroad into the World a man that hath loved his Study, and Books and a contemplative life. And therefore I should not be apt to believe, That he could apply himself to a thing so contrary to his own nature, and to that way that he delighted in, and had alwayshitherto applied himself unto, I mean to ingage in a design of so much Malice and Wickedness.
My Lord, You have had a long Conversation with the knowledge of Mr., you say. What say you as to his Disposition; Because this Indictment says he is a Person of a Turbulent, Factious, Seditious Spirit?
I have always known him a quiet peaceable man, not medling in Business, very Friendly, free from all Turbulency, not of much acquaintance nor desirous to make much.
Pray my Lord, upon the same Oath you have taken, have you not at any time heard him express dissatisfaction as to the Male-administration of the Government?
No, never to me in the least.
Not at the time of the lastParliament?
No, I never heard him then, nor at any time 
else.