Pray call your Witnesses together, and let me know who you begin with.
My Lords, We do not know what Place is designed for the Witnesses; but if they are to be on the other side, and this Croud do interpose between us and them, it will be impossible for us, who are the King's Council, to hear what they say, or know how to proceed.
There must be Room made there for the Witnesses; where are your Witnesses Mr.?
If you please to name them Sir, we will call them.
Call Mr., and Mr..
I know not how this is ordered, but way must be made there by the Bar, that the Prisoner may see the Witnesses, and they him.
Yes my Lord, by all means.
If your Lordships please, the Witnesses will be most Conveniently heard, if they come and stand here by us.
If your Lordships please, it will not be possible either for my Lord at the Bar, or for us to hear what the Witnesses say: Unless they be brought into this place to stand between us.
My Lord Great Chamberlain, be pleased to give order for them to be brought in thither.
The Witnesses must be brought to this place.
Give me the Name of him that you begin with.
We begin my Lords, with Mr.,
Hearken to your Oath Sir, the Evidence that you shall give on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queens Majesties, againstLordthe Prisoner at the Bar, shall be Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth: So help you God.
Mr., Do you give my Lords an account what you know of any Applications of Courtship made to Mrs.by Mr., and what became of it; and what you heardsay about her, or about any one else Relating to that matter.
My Lord, I had the Honour to be invited to Supper with my Lord, at thein, where I found Captainwith his Lordship.
When was this Sir, tell the time.
This was three Nights before this unfortunate Accident hapned, there I found Captain, and we supped together; and after Supper, Captainraised a Discourse of Mrs.and Mr.; says He, I should not doubt the Success of my Amour with Mrs., if I were not obstructed by, whom I design to be the Death of: This is Truth upon my Oath. My Lordwas in the Company; but I cannot say that my Lord made any Reply to the thing, or took any notice of it: But this Captaindid say, not only then, but several times before.
Did he say it at any other time in your Hearing.
Yes, several times before
Do you know any thing more of this matter.
No more, than that my Lordthat very Night that Mr.was killed, and Captaincame into the Scene-Room of the Play-House, and my Lordhad Captain,Coat on, and Captainhad my LordCoat on, and they changed their Cloaths in the Play-House. I saw them change their Cloaths; but what their Design was, I cannot tell.
When was that Sir.
That very Night that the Gentleman that is Dead, Mr., was killed.
You say, that my Lordwas present, when that Discourse ofwas, aboutat the Tavern.
Yes, but I cannot say my Lord took any notice of it, for he made no Reply that I heard.
Have you done with this Witness.
Yes, my Lord,
This is all that I know of the matter.
My Lord, have you any thing to say to this Witness.
No my Lord.
Then our next Witnesses Name is.
Mr., you have heard the Questions that have been asked, Mr., Pray will you make Answers to them; and give my Lords an Account what you know of this matter.
May it please Your Lordships, about 5 or 6 days before Mr.was Wounded, I was in Company with Captain, and he began Mrs.Health, I told him I would Pledge it. Says he, I am sure there is no Bar between me and Mrs., but; and I am Resolved to be Revenged on him, one way or another. About 3 Days afterwards I was at Supper with my Lordand Captain, and another Gentleman, and the same Discourse arose again, and CaptainWhispered me in the Ear, says he, I am resolved to have the Blood of. I told him I did not think it fit for him to speak so behind a Gentleman's back, and to me who was his Friend. I said I would acquaint Mr.with what he said, and I did not doubt but he would give him the satisfaction of a Gentleman for any Injury he did him. I heard no further Discourse at that time, nor do I know more of that matter, till the Night that Mr.was Wounded, when I saw him lying upon the Parlor Floor, and afterward saw him laid to Bed, and sate up all Night with him, and about four a Clock in the Morning I asked Mr.how the thing happened. He told me Captainkilled him basely; I asked him if his Sword was drawn; Yes, says he, but it was after I had received my Wound, for whilst my Lordtalked to merun me through.
At that time, when those Words were spoken at Supper, That he designed to be the Death of, was my Lord present?
Yes my Lordwas present, but he was Talking to Colonel.
Did my Lordsay any thing to whatsaid?
I did not hear him make any Answer to it at all.
Do you know any thing else in Relation to this Fact?
Nothing else but that Captaindid give a Letter to be delivered to Mrs., but I know not whether it was delivered or not, and he often told me he would Marry her with all his Heart.
You say you had that Discourse with, when he lay a Dying.
It was about four a Clock, and he died about One.
Was there any thing said about my Lordat that time?
Nothing but that my Lordwas Talking to him, whilst the other ran him through.
If I understand you aright, you say nothing against my Lord, but his being by one time at Supper whensaid some Words about; and then the other thing you say is whattold you after he was Wounded. That my Lord was Talking to him, whengave him the Wound.
Yes, My Lord, That is all that I heard.
Has your Lordship any thing to say to this Witness?
No, My Lord.
The next Witness that we shall desire to call is Mrs..
I have nothing to say to my Lord; but what I have to say, is to Mr.. About 4 days before Mr.was Killed, Mr.came to me, and spoke to me about Mrs.: He told me he was satisfied she hated him, I told him I did not believe she hated any body, or loved any Body: Yes, he said, she did love some body, but he had thought of a way to be even with that Body. Upon theNight before Mr.was killed, he came to me as I was coming out of the Dressing Room; sayeth he, Mrs.let me speak a Word with you, says he, you are very great with Mrs., and I desire you to be so kind, as to speak to her for me, and I would beg of you if you would give me leave to give her this Letter from me: No, said I, Mr., I beg your Pardon; you say she hateth you, and if she hateth you, she will not love any body that speaketh for you; and I am not fond of creating my self Enemies in the House, knowing I have some already. What Enemies, saith Mr.,do you mean? And then repeating a great Oath, I shall find a way with him speedily.
A way, with what?
A way with him speedily,said it of Mr..
What do you call this Witness for, Mr.what use do you make of her Evidence against my Lord?
My Lord, the use that we would make of these Witnesses is to give an Account of the whole Fact from the Beginning to the End,Malice, and what was the Occasion of it, his Design in coming there that Night, and what he did, and to leave it to your Lordships, to Judge what influence this will have, how far it will affect my Lord. The next Witness is Mrs..
What is this Womans Name?
Mrs..
Mrs., give my Lords an Account, whether you were present with my Lordand Mr.at the Tavern that day that Mr.was killed, and what passed there.
I Dined with my Lordand Captain, at thein, and there arose a Discourse about Mrs.and, and my Lordasked me, if I thoughthad lay with her or no. I said I could not tell; presently after says my Lord, it will cost50 Guineas this Design. Saith Mr., if the Villain offers to resist I will Stab him; saith my Lord, I will stand by my Friend. When this was done, Mr.desired Mr.to borrow a Case of Pistols of Captain, and he said he would not borrow them himself, for he doubted, if he knew of the Design he would not lend them. When that was done, Captaintold me he had a Coach and Six Horses in, to seize Mrs., and carry her away into the Country; and my Lordsaid, he would stand by his Friend: And when my Lordwent away,said to him; my Lord if you be not there by Six a Clock, I am Ruined. Saith my Lord, upon my Word and Honour I will be at the Play House by Six.
My Lord, have you any thing to say to that Witness?
Yes, My Lord, I desire to have her asked, whether she is a Maid or a Married Woman.
You hear the Question, but I do not know what use my Lord will make of it.
You can easily answer, whether you are Married or Unmarried.
That Question is very fair; are you a Married Woman, or a single Woman?
I am a single Woman, my Lord.
Pray Mrs.Repeat the Words that my Lordsaid, whensaid if the Villain resisted, he would Stab him.
My Lordsaid nothing in the World, but that he would stand by his Friend.
Have you any further Questions,to ask this Witness?
I have nothing more to ask her my Lord.
What say you my Lord; would you ask her any thing else?
No, my Lord.
Then withdraw.
The next Witness we call is.
What is this Witnesses Name?
, my Lord.
What is his Christian Name?
If your Lordships please to remember, that the last Witness Mrs.said, Thatdesired my Lord, not to fail of being at the Play-House by Six a Clock, and that he was undone if he did not come; and my Lord promised upon his Word and Honour that he would come: Now we call this Witness to prove, that they met at the Play-House according to the Appointment on the 9th of.
My Lord, All that I know of this matter was, That my Lordand Captainwere at the Play-House that Night, and that which made me take particular Notice of their being then at the Play-House, tho' they had been frequently there before together, was that Captainhad my LordCoat on, and my Lordhad CaptainCoat on.
Did you observe any thing else, when they were at the Play-House?
Nothing but only some Words that passed between Captainand my Lord, when I went to ask them for the overplus of the mony for coming in, because they came out of the Pit upon the Stage; he said he would not give it me, but if I brought any of our Masters, he would slit their Noses or something to that Effect.
Speak that over again.
I asked them for mony, that they ought to pay more than the rest that were in the Pit, because they came upon the Stage, and they would not give it me, but he said if I brought any of our Masters, he would Slit their Noses, or cut their Faces, or to that Effect.
My Lord, will your Lordship ask him any Questions?
No my Lord.
Call another Witness then.
My Lords, with your Lordships Favour, the next Witness that we shall call, is the Coach-Man,.
Mr., do you remember the Day when Mr.was killed?
Yes Sir.
Pray acquaint my Lords, what Persons you carryed in your Coach that Day, whether you carryed my Lordand Mr., and to what place, and where you waited for them.
If it please your Lordships, Captainand my Lordcame in a Hackney Coach to my Gate, where I live, and I was just a going to set my Coaches into the Street for Hyre: They Bargained with me for six Horses, and I was to have thirty Shillings to set them down aton this side. I asked them whether they would have me bring all the six Horses with the Coach, No they said, a pair would serve to the Play-House, and the other four should stand at the Pounds end. So I went accordingly to the place appointed, over against thein, and a Foot-Man came, and Mr.and he bid me drive down lower. So I drove to my Lord ofDoor, or thereabouts; and there was some Souldiers that would have had me go in, and Smoak and Drink with them: I told them, I did never Smoak, and I did not care for Drinking any thing at that time. With that, my Lordand Mr.came into the Coach, and as they bid me, I carryed them into, below the Watch-House that stood there; they bid me turn about, and stand there; and then they went for a little time to the, so I did turn about, and staid as they bid me, and they tarryed a pretty while before they came again, and then they bid me drive back to the place from whence I came, so I Drove into, and they bid me stop next to my LordHouse, this was about Ten a Clock, and it being so late, I went Home, and sent a Postillion down, to take care of the Coach, so that what passed afterwards, I cannot tell.
What Day or Night, was all this you speak of?
Truly my Lord, I cannot tell what Day it was, it was in, as I take it, theand it wasI believe, I do not know justly.
Did you hear of the Death of Mr.?
Yes, I did.
Was it the same Day that you heard Mr.was killed.
No, I did not hear it till the next Morning.
You say, you went with my Lordand Mr.into, and there you stayed for them, whilst they went elsewhere.
Yes, I did so.
Do you know to what Houses they went?
They went to the, to the hithermost House on this side the, and they went below to a Door on this side of a House that is not finished yet.
Did you hear them use any Expressions there.
I heardsay to my Lord, I think there is a Man and a Maid talking, it was at the Corner House; saith, we are Betrayed, Damme saith he, my Lord, let us go and Thresh him.
What did they do then?
I did see them do nothing.
Whither did you carry them from thence?
To the place from whence they came, in.
Will your Lordship say any thing to this man?
I desire he may be asked, whether he had not Orders to go out of Town with us, as soon as Mrs.was put into the Coach.
If it please you Sir, I had Order thus, that when we were to go out of Town, I must Drive down into the, and then round about any way that was readiest and clearest to get to the Pound, that Order I had, and no other Order I had.
Who is your next Witness?
My Lords, the next Witness we shall call, will give you an Account what was done in, upon their endeavouring to carry her away, and for that we have here Mrs.her self.
What is this Gentlewomans Name?
Mrs..
Mrs., Pray give my Lords an Account of the whole of your Knowledge of the Attempt that was made upon you in, and what followed upon it.
My Lord, I was inat Supper at Mr., and at ten a Clock at Night,went Home with me; and coming down, there stood a Coach by my LordDoor, and the Boot of the Coach was down, and a great many men stood by it; and just as I came to the Place where the Coach stood, two Soldiers came and pulled me from, and four or five more came up to them, and they knocked my Mother down almost, for my Mother and my Brother were with me. My Mother recovered, and came and hung about my Neck, so that they could not get me into the Coach, andwent to call Company to rescue me. Thencame with his Sword drawn, and struck atand my Mother; and when they could not get me into the Coach, because Company came in, he said he would see me Home, and he led me by one Hand, and my Mother by the other. And when we came Home, he pulledby the Sleeve, and said, Sir, I would speak with you.
Pray, did you see any Body in the Coach when they pulled you to it?
Yes, my Lordwas in the Coach; when they pulled me to the Coach, I saw my Lordin the Coach. And when we came Home,pulledby the Sleeve, and said he would speak with him. As they led me along, my Lordcame out of the Coach, and followed us, and all the Soldiers followed them, but they were dismissed, and, as I said, when we came to our Lodging, thenpulledby the Sleeve, and said, he would speak with him. Saith,, another time will do, to Morrow will serve; with that, when I was within Doors,was pulled into the House, andwalked up and down in the Street with his Sword drawn. He had his Sword drawn when he came along with me.
Did you observe him to say any thing whilst he was with you?
As I was going down the Hill, he said, as he led me, he would be revenged.
Did he name of whom he would be revenged?
He did not name of whom then, but when I was in the House, several Persons went to the Door, and afterwardswent to the Door, and spoke to them, and asked them what they staid and walked there for; at last, they said, they staid to be revenged of, and thencame in to me, and told me of it.
Who said that?
Mr..
Were my Lordandboth together when that was said, that they staid to be revenged of?
Yes they were. And whencame in and told me, I sent my Brother and the Maid, and all the People we could, out of the House to, to desire her to send, if she knew where her Husband was, to tell him of it, and she did. And when they came in a Doors again, I went to the Door, and the Doors were shut, and I listened to hear if they were there still, and my Lordandwere walking up and down the Street; and by and by, the Watch came up to them, and when the Watch came, they said, Gentlemen, Why do you walk with your Swords drawn? Says my Lord, I am a Peer of, touch me if you dare.
Repeat that again, for I could not well hear you: Do you speak of what you heard from, or what you observed your self?
My Lord, I was within Doors, but I was listening at the Door, and heard this my self; they came up to them, and said, Gentlemen, Why do you walk with your Swords drawn?
Who asked that Question?
The Watch; and, says my Lord, I am a Peer of, touch me if you dare. Then the Watch left them, and they went away, and a little after, there was a Cry of Murder, and that is all that I know, my Lord.
My Lord, I desire this Witness may be asked, how long after this Passage that she speaketh of, was it that she heard Murder cryed in the Street.
You hear the Question,, What say you to it?
My Lord, I believe it was about a quarter of an Hour after, to the best of my Memory.
What do you mean, a quarter of an Hour after the Watch asked the Question?
Yes, my Lord.
My Lord.
My Lord, I desire to ask this Witness a question. If I heard her aright, I think she said, they threaten'd to be Revenged of Mr., I desire to know of her, whether my Lorddid threaten him.
I do not know indeed; but when Mrs.asked them what they staid there for? They said to be Revenged of Mr.. I did not hear them my self, but Mrs.came in and told me so.
Mrs., I think, if I did not mistake, you said, when the Watch came up, they asked them, why their Swords were drawn?
Yes, and my Lordmade answer, he was a Peer of, and bid them touch him if they durst, and they went away.
My Lord, the next Witness that we call, shall be Mr., at whose House Mrs.Supped that Night.
Mr., I suppose you remember the Night, when Mrs.Supped at your House.
Yes, my Lord.
I pray give an account of your whole Knowledge about this Matter, What happen'd that Night.
About Ten a Clock at Night, onthe Ninth oflast, going downwith Mrs., whom I Led just against my LordHouse.
Pray Sir, speak out, and tell us what time it was.
About Ten a Clock at Night, onthe Ninth oflast, going down, and leading Mrs., right against my LordDoor, stood a Coach, where two Soldiers pressed in between me and Mrs., and parted us: I asked what that was for? But they took hold of Mrs., and immediately they would have forced her into the Coach; Capt., whom I saw there with his Sword drawn, made several Blows at me.
Who would have forced her into the Coach?
The Soldiers would.
Pray go on Sir, what follow'd after that?
I say, Capt.made several Blows at me, and Cry'd you Villain, Stand. I received several of them upon my Cane, but there was none that hurt me; then I got Help, and they were prevented of carrying Mrs.away. My Lordwas in the Coach; I saw him in the Coach.
Did you see any Arms in the Coach?
I saw no Arms, but I saw a Bundle in the Coach, tho I could not tell what it was; and there was one in the Coach, that I saw was my Lord. So when we had got Help, we went down the Lane to Convey her home, and Capt.was with us, and my Lordfollowed at a distance. Capt.said to the Soldiers,. When we came to the House and Mrs.was entring in, Captainpull'd me by the Sleeve, and said he would speak with me. Said I, to Night is not a fit time, to Morrow is better, therefore pray stay till to Morrow Morning. But said he,.
You speak so low, that I cannot tell what you say; I did not hear that last that you said.
My Lord, I say, when Captain Hill pull'd me by the Sleeve, and said he would speak with me, I told him, that Night was not a fit time, to Morrow would do better: Well, saith he,I went in a Doors, and there my Lordand he staid for an Hour and a half, as I was told; I saw them not my self: But Mrs.came in and said, that they said, they waited to be Revenged.
Whom did they mean, your self that they would be Revenged of?
Mrs.said, they waited for Mr..
Did you continue in that House till after the Murder was committed?
Yes Sir, I did.
How long after you came into the House was the Fact done?
About an Hour and an half.
Did you your self hear or observe any thing to be said or done, from the time you came into the House, to the time the Fact was committed?
No, my Lord, I was in the Back Room of the House,
Pray, Mr., did you see Mr.after he was Wounded?
Yes, I did.
Then give my Lords an account what passed at that Visit.
Upon the outcry of Murder, I came out into the Street, where I found my Lordjust Surrendring himself to the Constable; and immediately I went to Mr.House, and I found him lying all along in his Blood upon the Floor; he seeing me, desired me to lift him up, which I did, and thinking he had been Dying, I asked him whether he knew me. He said Yes. Said I to him, Had you time to draw your Sword in your Defence? He said,.
Is this all you have to say, Sir?
Yes.
Will your Lordship ask this Witness any Questions?
My Lord, I desire he may be asked whether my Sword was Drawn when I Surrendred my self to the Constable.
No my Lord, your Sword was in the Scabbard when you Surrendred your self, but I cannot say that your Sword was Drawn before, or not.
The next Witness that we desire to call, is Mrs..
What is the Name of this Witness?
Mrs.. Pray Mrs., do you remember the Night when Mrs.Supped at your House, and Mr.was Killed? Acquaint my Lords with all you did observe that Night.
Mrs.Supped at my Lodging, and my Husband went home with her, and staying something longer than ordinary, I sent my Servant to know what was the reason of it: He brought me word back, that my Husband had like to have been Murdered, and Mrs.carried away. With that I went down my self towards Mrs.Lodgings, and there I found my Lordand Mr.walking, Mr.with his Sword Drawn before Mrs.Door; my Lordnot. So I went in, into the House; and after I had staid a while there, Mrs.came out to them, and asked them why they Staid there? They made answer, they staid for Mr..
Who made that Answer?
Mr..
Who was with Mr.at that time?
My Lord.
Was there any body besides those two, that you observed?
No, there was no body else that I saw.
Were their Swords Drawn?
Mr.then was, my Lordat that present was not: But Mrs.hearing that they waited for Mr., desired me to go over to Mrs.House, and speak to her to send to her Husband, and desire him to keep where he was, or come home with a good Guard, whilst I was telling Mrs.what I was desired to tell her -- But I should have told your Lordships, that when I came out to go to Mrs., my Lordhad then his Sword Drawn.
Were they there when you went out of Mrs.Lodgings?
Yes, they were.
And are you sure, that at that time when you went out of Mrs.House, my Lordhad his Sword Drawn?
I am sure of it, that when I went out, my Lordhad then his Sword Drawn; that was the Second time.
Out of whose House was that you went?
Out of Mrs.Lodgings.
Where were they when you saw his Sword Drawn?
They were walking before Mrs.Door, from one end of the Streetto the other.
What Street is that?
Howard-Street.
Pray describe to my Lords that Street.
They that stand in that Street, can see who goeth down to Mr.House, and who goeth up.
Well now go on.
Whilst I was desiring Mrs.to send away to her Husband, I heard Murder cry'd out; immediately I open'd Mr.Door, and he came in, and fell with his Arms round about my Neck to support himself, I suppose, and he said,had Murder'd him. I helped him as far as the Parlor Door, and there down he fell. I went up the Street and called out, and my Lordcame to me, and bid me take notice, he had no hand in the Murder, for his Sword was not Drawn. I told him, I could not tell that, for to my knowledge he had been in Mr.Company with his naked Sword just before.
Call Mrs..
You have nothing so say to that Witness my Lord, have you?
No, my Lord.
Is this all you have to say, Mrs.?
After this, my Lordresign'd himself up to the Constable, the Constable standing by me, I bid him Secure my Lord, which he did.
My Lord, I desire to ask this Witness, whether I Surrendred my self, or made Opposition, or offered to run away?
No my Lord, the Constable laid hold on you.
What Answer do you make to my Lord's Question?
I say, my Lord, the Constable laid hold upon my Lord.
I desire to ask her, whether I did not Surrender my self?
Not till I had desired the Constable to Secure your Lordship.
Did I make any Opposition, or offer to run away?
No, for the Constable presently took hold of your Lordship.
I desire she may be asked whetherRun away.
That I know not; I suppose he was gone away out of the Street before I came forth.
Swear Mrs..
Mrs., you are upon your Oath, pray declare to my Lords what you know happen'd upon that Night that Mr.was Killed.
If it please your Lordships, when Mrs.came Home, I found her Crying? I asked her what was the matter? She said, my Lord, and Mr., had run her into a Coach, with six or seven Soldiers, and lifted her into the Coach, and she said they were at the Door. Upon which, I went to the Door, and saw my Lordand Mr.walking along. Said I, are you the Gentlemen that have used Mrs.in this manner? My Lordanswered, Madam, said he,.
I do not hear what this Witness saith, she speaketh so low.
My Lordsaid, they had Six or Seven Pistols in the Coach, and could easily have suppressed the Rabble, if they would have carried her away; but he had no Design upon her for his own part, but only to serve his Friend; and that Mr.design was to take her out of Town, and keep her a Week, and see if he could perswade her to Marry him; and saith Mr.,Mountford. Why, said I to him, What hurt hath Mr.done you? Saith he,.
That wasthat said so.
Yes. So I went and told Mrs.of it.
Pray acquaint my Lords what my Lordsaid to you about this Matter.
My Lordsaid, he protected her, for if it had not been for him, thehad torn her in pieces; but if they had had a mind to carry her off, they could easily have suppressed the, for they had six or seven Pistols in the Coach: But saith my Lord,. So saith Mr.,. Why, said I, what hurt hath Mr.done you? Saith he,. So I went and told Mrs.of it. About half an Hour after, or more,came down, and when he came down, I saw him a little before he came to them, and went to him, and would fain have spoke to him, but he would not stay to let me speak what I had to say to him, but going on, presently he met my Lord. Saith he,. Saith my Lord again,Mr. Mountford. Saith my Lord,, Mr. Mountford,HillBracegirdle. Saith Mr.,Mrs. Bracegirdle,Mr. HillMr. HillMr. Mountford, Mr. Mountford.
Speak that last again.
Mr.and my Lord met; saith Mr., your Servant, my Lord; saith my Lord, Your Servant, Mr., I have a great respect for you, and would have no difference be between us; but here has been a thing fallen out between Mrs.and Mr.; saith Mr.presently again, Has my Wife disobliged your Lordship? If she has, she shall ask your Pardon. But Mrs.is no concern of mine: I know nothing of this matter, I come here by accident.
Who said they came there by accident?
Mr.said, I know nothing of this matter, I come here by accident. But, I hope, your Lordship will not vindicatein such Actions as these are: Upon that, I heard Mr.bid Mr.draw, Mr.said he would, and drew his Sword; but whether he receiv'd his Wound before or after, I cannot tell; it was in the Night.
My Lord.
My Lord, I desire this Witness may be asked, whether my LordSword was drawn when he talked with, because the Council opened it before, that the Watch came to them, and saw them with their Swords drawn when they were walking in the Street.
Mrs. you heard my Lord's Question: Was my LordSword drawn whilst he talked with, or no?
I do not remember I did see my LordSword drawn.
Were they near together?
They were near together.
I desire she may be asked whether I went up the Street to meet Mr., or he came down to me?
You heard the Question, Mistress, what say you?
Mr.came down to him.
I desire she may be asked whether she did not go to hinder Mr.from coming that way?
Yes, I did go to speak to him, but he did not hear me speak, or did not hearken to me; I took him by the Hand, and told him I would speak with him, but he did not hear me, but went on.
You did not tell him upon what account you would have spoke with him?
No, I had not time.
I desire she may be asked, whether Mr.Sword was within his Arm, or by his Side.
I believe it was by his Side.
I desire she may be asked one Question more, whether he could not have went home, without coming to Mr.and me?
He did come out of his way, his way was not by my House; he did come down the Street towards them.
I desire your Lordships to take notice, that he came out of his way to me. I desire to aske her: Did he come as if he was going to his own House or yours?
As if he was coming to mine.
I desire to ask her, whether I had any hand in killing Mr., or went to hold him, or meddled with him?
Not that I did see.
Have you any more to say to this Witness?
No, my Lord.
Nor your Lordship?
No, my Lord.
Then the next Witness we desire to call, is,.
, where do you live?
In.
Where doth he Live saith he?
In, my Lord. Pray how near is that to the Place where Mr.was Killed?
About ten or twelve Pole.
Did you observe my Lordand Mr.that Night, and where were they?
All that I can say to the matter in that Case is, I was in my own House about a quarter after Ten a Clock, and I heard a noise in the Street, and I went out, and saw two Gentlemen and two Lads about the middle of the Channel; one of the Lads had one of the Gentlemen by the Arm, just by the Channel, and said,. There was an Answer made, that they would be Revenged that Night, or to Morrow.
Do you know who the Boy was that used that Expression?
No, my Lord, it was very Dark.
Do you not know neither who returned the Answer?
No indeed.
But you are sure you heard those words pass?
Yes indeed, and I went to the Door afterwards, whilst they went to the upper end of the Street and returned again; and I saw CaptainBoy following him. My Lord, I knew Capt., tho he was not in the Cloaths he formerly used to come to my House in, and the Boy I knew to be his Boy.
Were those Persons together that you heard speaking so?
Yes, all four together, in a Confusion they seemed to be, for they were Pushing to and agen, and the Boy had hold of one of the Gentlemen's Arms when he bid him alter his Resolution.
Repeat those Words again that you heard him say.
Has your Lordship any thing to ask this Witness?
No, my Lord.
I spoke of this same afterwards, and so they have brought me here to give Evidence: That is all that I can say. I cannot Swear to my Lord, that he was one, I do not know that ever I saw him to my knowledge in my Life.
My Lord Steward, I desire he may be asked, whether he knoweth who that Boy was that made that Answer.
There was no answer made by any Boy, but begging and praying,.
Do you know who that Boy was?
No, I do not know what Boy it was. But when I heard Mr.was Killed, and my Lordwas concerned, I told what I had heard and seen, and so they bring me here to Evidence it. That is all I can say to the matter.
My Lord, we desire next to call some of the Watch, and shall begin with.
What is his Name?
. Mr., I think you are Beadle of the Parish.
Yes, I am.
Pray acquaint my Lords what you observed that Night Mr.was Killed, when you saw my Lordand Mr., the first time and the second time, when my Lordwas Taken.
When I first came down the Street, walking the Rounds between Eleven and Twelve a Clock, as I turned at the Corner out ofinto, I saw my Lordand Capt.Walking, that is, upon the Paved Stones; my Lord was walking towards me, and I asked, Who comes there? Saith my Lord, a Friend. Said I, What is the meaning of your Swords being Drawn? Return your Swords, and stand off. With that, he returned his Sword immediately. Saith he,? and he profered me his Sword; but the Constable was not there then, and I did not take his Sword; but, said I, God Bless your Honor my Lord, I know not what you are, but I hope you are doing no harm; No, saith he. With that, the Constable came immediately, and he profered the same to him; there were two Candles in some Maids, or Womans hands at a Door hard by, and I went to ask them if they knew the meaning of it; and there being a Neighbours Man leaning with a Bottle and a Glass against the Wall, whom I knew. I think they told me one of them had a Sweet-heart there; and my Lord said, he was drinking a Lady's Health, and as soon as his Bottle was out, he would be gone. That is all I heard of the matter.
Was Mr.there?
Yes, he was.
Was his Sword Drawn?
Yes, his Sword was drawn, and I asked what made that Gentleman with his Sword Drawn? and my Lordsaid, he had lost his Scabbard; but seeing this Neighbour's Man stand there, I went to the House.
Were both their Swords drawn at first?
Both their Swords were Drawn when I came first into the Street; but my Lord put up his Sword, and the other continued Drawn, by reason as they said, he had lost his Scabbard. And so seeing, as I said, my Neighbour's Man standing there, we went to that House to enquire if they knew what their Business was; we were not got into the House, I am sure not a Stone's cast within the House, but Murder was cry'd out, and we came back again, and my Master being nimbler of Foot than I, because he was a younger Man, came first into the Place, and Seized My Lord before I came; how the Seizing was I do not know.
Our next Witness is.
, you was one of the Watch that night when Mr.was Killed.
Yes, Sir.
Give my Lords an account what you observed that Night, in relation to my Lordand Mr..
The Constable and his Watch going the Rounds, divided themselves into two parts; I went downwith one Party; the Constable he went downwith the other Party. We were four or five that came down, and when we came down, my Lordand Capt.Swords were both Drawn; my Lordput up his Sword just as we came down.
Speak out Man, that my Lords may all hear you.
I say, the Constable and his Party went down, and another Party down, four or five of us, and my Lordand Capt.had both their Swords Drawn: When we came down, my Lord put up his Sword just as we came down, but the Constable not being come, I went and called him.
You say both their Swords were Drawn when you came down.
Yes, but my Lord put up his Sword just as we came down.
What time of Night was that?
It was between Eleven and Twelve.
How long before the Murder was committed?
A quarter of an Hour.
Do you not say, they put up their Swords as soon as you came down?
My Lordput up his Sword, butsaid he had never a Scabbard.
Did you ask them why they had their Swords drawn at that time of Night?
No, I went to call the Constable.
Have you any more to ask of this Witness?
I have not my Lord.
Nor you my Lord?
No, my Lord.
Pray go on then; whom do you produce next?
Our next Witness is
Were you one of the Watch that Night Mr.was Killed?
Yes.
Did you see my Lordand Capt.that Night?
Yes.
Acquaint my Lords where it was, and in what manner you found them.
In; I came along with the Constable, and I walked before them that went downwith my Lanthorn, and there was my Lordwith his Sword Drawn, and Captwith his the like: We asked them, whatthey did there? They said they were drinking of a Bottle of Wine:said to me, you may knock me down if you please: Nay, said I, we never use to knock any Gentlemen down, unless there be occasion; and then we went intoto the Tavern to examine what they were, and what they were doing; and in the mean time the Murder was done.
Did you not ask them why their Swords were drawn?
Yes, I did.
What did they say?
made answer that he had lost his Scabbard.
What said my Lord?
My Lordhad put up his Sword by that time we came up to him: That is all I can say to it.
If you have nothing more to ask him, call another.
My Lord, I desire he may be asked whether he came with the Constable when I surrendred my self?
Yes, and I took hold of your Sleeve, and you shook and quak'd and trembled, as if you would tear it to pieces.
I desire he may be asked whether my Sword was in the Scabbard when I surrendred my self.
Yes, it was, he surrendred it.
That was after the Murder was done.
With your Lordship's Favour, I desire he may answer my Lordfirst Question again, so as to be heard by your Lordships; What was that you were saying when my Lord surrendred himself?
I took him by the Arm when he surrendred himself up.
What then?
Then he quaked, and I had him away to the.
Hear my Question, you say you took him by the Sleeve, when he surrendred himself; what do you mean by that? is it that he had surrendred himself before you laid hold on him, or afterwards?
I took hold of his Arm, when he surrendred himself.
But was it before he surrendred himself to the Constable?
No, it was afterwards, my Lord; to have him away.
Then you did see him surrender himself to the Constable?
Yes, my Lord.
Then call Mr.:
Whom do you call next, Sir?
My Lords, we call'd Mr.; but they say, he is not come, therefore with your Lordships favour, we will call Mrs..
Mrs., I think, you live at the next Door to Mrs.Lodging?
Yes, I do so.
Pray give my Lords an account what you saw and heard that Night Mr.was kill'd.
I was at Mrs.House, and I went to the Door with them; and just as I went to the Door, my Lordcame up to me; and just as he came to the Door, Mr.came down the Street, and my Lord went to him, and imbraced him, and said, Mr., Your humble Servant, I am glad to see you; Who is this said Mr., my Lord? Yes said my Lord. What makes your Lordship here at this time a night, saith Mr.? Saith my Lord again, I suppose Mr.you was sent for; sent for, for what saith he? You have heard of the business of Mrs., I suppose, saith my Lord: No my Lord, saith he, I come by chance.
Who said that?
Mr., Sir.
Well, go on and speak aloud.
My Lord, Mr.. --
She is not used to such publick Examinations: If your Lordships will please to allow her to begin again, because she is in some Confusion, she will be the better able to give you what account she can of this matter.
Let her recollect her self, and begin again.
When Mr.came down the Street, I stood at the Door, and my Lordwas come to the Door, and my Lordwent to him and said, Mr.,, and Embraced him. Saith Mr.,Mohun?, saith he,? saith my Lord,Mr. Mountford., said he, I. Saith my Lord,Bracegirdle. With that, after he had said this, Mr.cometh up, and saith,, and would have drawn my Lord away. Saith Mr.,Hill. Upon this, as soon as he had said so, Mr.came up and struck Mr.a Box on the Ear. Saith Mr.,? And with that, he whipped out his Sword and made a Pass at him, and I turned about and cry'd out.
But you say, you sawdraw his Sword, and make a Pass at him.
No, his Sword was drawn before; but he immediately after the Box on Ear, made a Pass at him, and I turned about and cry'd.
Had Mr.his Sword drawn at that time?
No, he had not.
Are you sure he had not?
Yes, I am sure he had not, for as soon as he struck the Blow, he made a Pass at him.
Was my Lord present at that time?
He stood just by on the Right-hand.
How near to them?
They were all close together as well as I could discern.
My Lord, have you any mind to ask this Witness any Questions?
No, my Lord.
Have you done with her?
Yes, my Lord. The next Witness we desire 
to call is Mr., the
Constable.