Mr., Pray give an account to the Jury and the Court of the manner of Election and chusing of a Common Hall, and the manner of it.
My Lord, I have been almost 25 Years an Attorney, I always took it that the Serjeant of the Chamber had order to go down to the Clerks or Beadles of the Companies, to summon a Common Hall by such a day.
By whose Command?
By my Lord Mayor's.
In all your time did the Sheriffs ever summon any?
O no.
Pray Mr.thus, When they were met, what was the usual Method?
Before theandwere set, the People walked up and down the Hall till thedid come, but as soon as mycame, themade Proclamation,.
Whose Officer was the?
MyOfficer.
A Corporation Officer.
Now for the dissolving them.
When they have done the business,, as I take it, takes his direction from the, and he bids the Officer make Proclamation,.
Did theever dissolve them?
Never.
Did thedo it?
No, there was no such thing.
Mr., After myhad dismist the Hall, did you ever hear thekeep them together?
All the People went away, till within this three or four Years.
Since when?
Since Mr., about that time.
Ay, inandtime, then began the Bustle.
You say you have been an Attorney 25 Years, I would ask you, in all that time, Mr., in all that time did you ever know the Lord Mayor adjourn the Common Hall to a certain day?
There was never any occasion.
Answer my Question.
I never did.
I would ask you another Question, Mr., Did you ever know before the Election was over, when the Electors were chusing Sheriffs, or polling or debating it, did you ever know in the middle of it, the Mayor against the will of the Sheriffs adjourn it?
No, no.
Did ever the Sheriffs undertake to keep them together before these late times?
No, never.
Pray, Sir, this, Though it is usual, after the Sheriffs have taken the Poll, to acquaint my Lord Mayor; Did you ever know that the Sheriffs have adjourn'd the Common Hall, without acquainting my Lord Mayor?
No.
I ask you one Question more, Do you remember when there was a Poll between Sirand another?
No, I did not charge my Memory with it.
Do you remember when there was a Poll between Sirand Mr.?
I was about the Hall.
Do you remember when there was a Poll between Sir, and Mr.? Who did manage that Poll?
I did.
Are you upon your Oath?
Yes, I am.
When they were gone to the Poll, I went out of the Hall.
Did you ever look upon it that the Sheriffs had any thing more to do than others?
No.
Who were induced to take the Poll? Was it by the Sheriffs, or the Lord Mayor?
I have been appointed by my Lord Mayor. I do know that the Sheriffs have taken upon them to appoint a Poll, and then my Lord appointed his Clerks in the House to be assistant to the Common Serjeant, and the Town-Clerk; I never was but in two Polls, one for Mr., and another for my Lord Mayor. One went on with the Poll in one place, and the other in another.
But before that time, Sir.
I know nothing of that Sir, I was never concerned before.
Pray, Sir, Who used to manage the Poll before this time?
Mr., I would ask you a Question, Who managed the Poll before?
I have been in a Common Hall when they have been choosing Sheriffs, when several have fined. And it hath been upon the question when the Hall hath divided, and they have Polled in the Hall.
Who Polled them?
The Sheriffs and the Officers stood and saw them go out, and this is within these few years.
, I ask you thus now in all your Observations when there was any Contest, who was Sheriff upon the Election and the Divisions during the time of Election, and before it were at an end, who did manage it, the Sheriffs, or the Lord Mayor?
When the Court had been proclaimed, and the Recorder had spoken to them, my Lord Mayor and the Aldermen withdrew from the Hustings, and the Sheriffs and other Officers stood there with them; then the Commons proposed who they would have put in nomination, and they were put up; then the Sheriffs have turned back to the Gentlemen upon the Hustings to ask their opinions, how are your opinions concerning the Hands? We do think it goes so; then it hath been declared.
By whom?
The Common Cryer, or the Common Serjeant.
You say, as soon as my Lord Mayor withdrew, during the time of Election, the two Sheriffs managed the Hall.
In that manner with others.
, Do you remember who Adjourned the Hall, whenandwere Chose?
I can't tell.
Are you Sworn?
Yes.
Pray will you tell my Lord and the Jury what you have observed in particular, because I mentioned it in the time of Sir; mention how that was.
My Lord, when the Common Cryer hath made Proclamation, the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen being set upon the Hustings, Mr. Recorder makes a Speech; as soon as that is done, my Lord Mayor and the Aldermen retire into this Court, leaving the Sheriffs and me, and the rest of the Officers upon the Hustings, and I there manage the Election, and when the Election is made, I go up to the Court of Aldermen, and make Report of what hath been done in the Hall. I declare the Election, and I manage the Election, and do it as the duty of my Place.
Who manages the Election?
I manage the Election; I declare what is my opinion of the Election in the Hall; and I come and make Report to my Lord Mayor in this Court; then my Lord Mayor and the Aldermen, and the Recorder come down again. I remember particularly when Sirwas Lord Mayor, it was about the Choice of, and Alderman, and there was a great disturbance in the Hall; then I came into the Court, and after I had made my Report, I offer'd to give the Paper to the Recorder that then was: Sir, he told me that the people wou'd not hear him, and therefore he wou'd not take the Paper. Upon that Sirsaid to me, Prethee, do thou speak to them, they will hear thee if they will hear any body; for the Hall was in a great uproar, and they call'd to throw me off the Hustings, and then I made Answer to Sir; Sir, It is not the duty of my Office, and when I do any thing that is not my Office, Ishall expect particular Directions. Then, saith he, You must tell them, I must Adjourn them till, because I go to theto try the Assassinates of. Thereupon the Hall was Adjourned, and Proclamation made to depart; and my Lord Mayor attempting to go, was beat back twice or thrice, but at last they let him and the Aldermen go, and kept the Sheriffs and me till Evening. At last Mr.came up to me,says I, I am glad to see you, you will hear Reason, says he, why do not you go on with the Poll? I told him, my Lord Mayor had Adjourned the Hall: Says he, I did not hear it before; but now you tell me so, I will go out of the Hall: Says I, Sir, you will do very well to tell the Hall so; which he did, and some went away; and further Adjournments were made by the direction of my Lord Mayor.
I would ask you a Question or two; Who do you look upon to be the Chief Magistrate of the City?
My Lord Mayor, Sir.
Pray, in all your time till this, was there no Uproar? Did ever any Sheriff undertake to Control the Mayor in the business of putting Questions, or taking Votes?
Sir, there was never any dispute till Mr. Sheriffwas upon the Hustings, and then there was.
As whose Officer did you do it?
My Lord Mayor's, and the City of; I have nothing to do with the Sheriffs, for when there is a Writ comes for the Choice of Parliament men, directed to the Sheriffs, I never do it, but.
I speak of later Disturbances.
The first Dispute about Sheriffs, since I was Common Serjeant, was about, and that Poll was taken by the direction of the Lord Mayor, by the Town Clerk and my self; and our Books say, If there be a Dispute in the Common Hall, it must be decided as in the Common Council. It is in.
No,.
It is, they turn the white Book into a black Book now.
At that time, Sir, when my Lord Mayor was willing to go to the, Did the Sheriffs do any thing farther?
The Sheriffs did not meddle in the matter.
Mr, Pray give my Lord and the Jury an account of what you know of this matter.
I have been at a Court of Common Hall 28 years, my Lord, and have been concerned, I never looked upon the Sheriffs to have any concern there. And I do very well remember, Sir, I do remember and know; they did always in ancient times take advice of the Officers by, and they never did esteem themselves in those days, to be any more concerned than as the best Officers to be preferred before the rest: When my Lord says, Come up, they come in order, the Masters and Wardens of the Companies.
Who did do the business upon the Hustings?
All of them, Sir, altogether.
Was there never any difference about the Votes?
Sometimes they have stood upon it.
When there was a Question made to know who had the most, who decided it?
They generally asked one another, What do you think, and what do you think? I speak for 20 years together since the King came in.
I hope in God there hath been a King infor 20 years, though perhaps some of the Sheriffs that were then in Debate, would have had none.
Mr., I only desire to know this of you, because I know you know Questions; I desire, my Lord, to know whether he speaks it to be a matter of Right, or his Opinion; for we know Mr.Opinion will go a great way in this matter. Do you speak it as a thing of Right, or as your Conceptions?
Sir, it would be a thing very confident in me to determine of the Right, but only as I always esteem'd it.
Mr., I would ask you this Question; Pray do you tell your belief upon the Observation that you have made from time to time of the Practice there?
An hundred and a hundred Common Halls I believe I have been at.
That's good store.
That may be when there are many Fines; when I was Common Serjeant there were 5000 pounds Fines one year.
I desire you to give your opinion, you say they are all equal that are there.
Every Officer in his degree; for if 20 men go together, he that is best speaks first.
Were the Sheriffs allowed to be there, or no?
The Sheriffs are always bound to attend my Lord Mayor by their Oaths, unless they have lawful excuse.
Mr., Did the Sheriffs ever continue the Assembly after it was dissolved?
No, Sir.
Or could they do it?
I can't say that.
Did you ever know my Lord Mayor Adjourn the Court till the Hall had done?
I can't tell.
I tell you, Sir, Sirdid.
But the Sheriffs could not do it.
Nor he neither, for he paid for it.
Mr., I ask this Question; Who declares the Poll in the Hall?
The Common Serjeant.
Who directs him usually?
His Office directs it self.
I ask if the Sheriffs don't agree, who is elected before the Common Serjeant make Proclamation?
They always agree, unless it be very clear; I have known the Common Serjeant do it several times without disputing.
When Persons are put in Nomination, and the hands are held up; I generally ask the People about me, who have most, and particularly the Sheriffs, and so make Declaration.
The Officers ask one another, who they think has most? that doth not give them the Jurisdiction, that they chuse Officers without the Lord Mayor or Sheriffs: but, for ought that I see, these Officers have had more to do about the Choice than the Sheriffs have. These Officers consult one with another commonly, and conclude which side have most; and then report it to my Lord Mayor.
First of all, when they put any Question for any Officer in the Common Hall, the ususal way of putting the Question is,: And if the Election be clear, Proclamation is made presently: If not, the Common Serjeant asks,? Which being declared, they acquiesce. But sincecame in, there have been very hot disputes in the World; but before his time there were attempts made to keep Sheriffs off, but never before to get Sheriffs on. And after the Election is declared below, immediately they go to my Lord Mayor and report it to him: and then comes down the Mayor and Aldermen to the, and the Recorder says,. And then the Lord Mayor commands the Assembly to be dissolved., When the Common Hall is first met together, are not the Lord Mayor and Aldermen generally present?
At the first meeting.
When they are there set, give an Account what Proclamation is there made.
How long have you known it?
I have been in this place almost seventeen years; I always come with my Lord Mayor; I do make Proclamation by Order of my Lord Mayor, dictated by the Town-Clerk; and I take the words from the Town Clerk, and his words I say;LondonMiddlesex. I never adjourned the Court in my life, but by Order from my Lord Mayor; nor never dissolved the Court, but by Order from my Lord Mayor.
, I would fain know this; When my Lord Mayor is gone, and the Aldermen, during the Election, do you ever dismiss the Court before my Lord comes down again; and do not you take the very words of Dissolution from the Town-Clerk?
I do so.
And what is usual in your time when Sheriffs have fined off, who gives directions for a Common-Hall?
My Lord Mayor, Sir.
Who is it puts the Question, the Common Serjeant or the Cryer?
The Common Serjeant dictates the words to me, and I never take them from any other; I have taken the Paper into my own hands, but never but one year neither, when they were in a confusion; the time whenwas chosen there was some difference, I did read the Names that time, and never but that one time. I always take the words from the Common Serjeant; I never put any Vote, but what I have from the Common Serjeant.
Do the Sheriffs put any Vote?
Never, Sir.
I do not understand him; I think he did mean, whenwas chosen he put the Question by some body else.
No, no, he took the Paper in his hand. Before he used to take Dictates from the Common Serjeant; but there was a confusion whenwas chosen, and then he took the Paper from the Common Serjeant, and read it.
He gave me the Paper into my hand.
My Lord, they made such a noise that he could not hear me.
, how long have you been Common Cryer?
about seventeen years.
In all that time did you ever hear the Lord Mayor adjourn the Court to a certain day?
Yes.
To a certain day?
My Lord Mayor adjourned this Common Hall to a certain day.
I ask you upon your Oath again, Did you ever know the Lord Mayor adjourn a Common Hall to a day certain?
Do you remember that of?
If so be they be adjourned, to meet upon a new Summons, if there be occasion, no question but he may to a certain day.
Now we are upon matter of fact.
Did you ever know my Lord Mayor adjourn them before the Election of Sheriffs was over? Here is my Question, observe it. When after once my Lord Mayor is gone out of the Hall, when the Election begins, did you ever know my Lord come and disturb the Election, or adjourn it before it was done?
I never knew any thing of it before now.
, do you remember that instance intime?
No, Sir.
Have not you known my Lord Mayor dissolve the Court before the business hath been done; take up his Sword, and be gone?
When he hath a mind to adjourn the Court, and declare it, I adjourn it by his Order.
But have you not known him take up his Sword, and be gone before the Election is over?
did do that before the business was done.
, do not you remember, inCafe, that he did adjourn the Hall?
He dissolved the Hall.
Very well.
He did dissolve the Hall, and so hath every Lord Mayor since. My Lord, if your Lordship please, I perceive this Gentleman makes a Question, whether ever there was an Adjournment of a Common Hall before such a time as the Election of Sheriffs was over. I will give you an Answer to that Question, and a very fair one, and a plain one: I say, till the time of, inMayoralty, there was never such a thing as a Poll for Sheriffs.
Silence, that we may hear.
My Lord, we only ask a Question; we ask a Question, and take our Answer.
Will you give us leave to go on, Sir?
Sir, Pray how long it is since you were Sheriff of?
About 16 or 17 years ago.
You have been Sheriff and Lord Mayor of, I would only know, whether you looked upon it as your right when you were Sheriff?
No, nor never durst presume to think it: In those days it was not thought upon.
When you were Lord Mayor, did you order Summons for Common Halls?
Always.
Did you ever use to consult with your Sheriffs when to call a Common Hall?
Never, and I think no such thing was ever heard of under the Sun, till of late.
Sir, Did you ever Adjourn the Court before the business was done?
I never saw any such occasion, Rebellion was not ripe then.
Sir, Pray thus; Have you ever in a Common Council, or Common Hall, known my Lord Mayor rise before the business was done, and take his Sword?
I confess I must own it, That when things grew to a greater height, I was forced once in this place to cause the Sword to be taken up and go out, and the Court was dissolved, and durst not go on after I was gone.
Now my Lord, if your Lordship please, I desire to call the Sword-Bearer.
Sir, If I may without offence ask you, how old are you?
Seventy years of age, Sir.
You say, you never knew Rebellion ripe?
Good Sir, I perceive you are very apt to mistake I lived in 41 and 42.
Sir, Can you remember the Meeting in 48?
Ay, very well.
Then they usurped the very same Power, and an Act of Parliament to confirm it.
My Lord, I desire Mr. Sword-Bearer may be Sworn.
Pray Sir, in all the time that you have been acquainted with the Customs of, did you ever know when there was an Election for Sheriffs, that the Lord Mayor did interpose or meddle till the Election was over?
Sir, of late years I have not appeared, because of an Infirmity, I cannot be long in; but in all that time I used to appear, I never did observe any such thing.
That the Mayor ever meddled?
Nay, Sir, that the Sheriffs ever meddled: When I was Sheriff ofI durst not presume to meddle, but left the whole to my Lord Mayor.
Did you ever know when the Election of Sheriffs was in a Common Hall, that the Lord Mayor offered to disturb them till the Election was over?
Truly I do not remember any such thing. Sir, I would give you a full Answer, I do tell you, as it hath been declared; My Lord Mayor and the Aldermen came into the Court, and a Report is made; when this is done, they leave the management of the Affair to others, we come and sit down till it is done.
To whom do you leave the Concernment?
To the Officers that it belongs to.
Who are those Officers?
I never heard it disputed till just now.
Sir, you have been an ancient Citizen, do you remember that ever the Sheriffs presumed to hold this Court?
No, never in my life. -- You may confound any man at this rate.
Pray, Sir, in your time was there a Poll for Sheriffs in?
Truly not as I remember.
Do you remember any Poll in your time? If you don't remember a Poll, you can't remember who took it.
Pray, Sir, do you ever remember the Sheriffs appointed the Common Serjeant to take the Poll?
Never in my life.
Mr. Sword-Bearer, I won't ask you how old you are; I desire to know how long you have been an Officer in this City?
Three and twenty years.
I desire to know in all your time, who ordered Common Halls? Who gave direction for the summoning Common Halls?
My Lord Mayor always.
Did my Lord Mayor use to send for the Sheriffs, to know of them when they would be pleased to have a Common Hall?
I never knew that the Sheriffs did interpose in calling a Common Hall in my life.
, at such time as the business was done, when the Common Cryer had Directions for dissolving the Common Hall, pray who used to give these Directions all along?
It was done by the Town Clerk and my Lord Mayor's Officers.
Did ever the Sheriffs continue the Hall after my Lord Mayor had Adjourned it?
Truly I know no such thing.
, I would ask you one Question; If in case the Common Serjeant, or the Common Cryer, or any other Officers do put a Question that the Commons would not have put, who orders them to put the right Question?
I can't say any thing to that.
After the Common Serjeant comes up and reports what is done, then what doth my Lord Mayor do?
Myand thego down to the, and it is declared by the Recorder, or the Common Serjeant, by the order of my. -- I think mywent once down to give them some satisfaction upon a dispute.
Mr., during the Election did you ever hear them Adjourn'd before it was over?
No, Sir, nor never heard any occasion for it.
Theaffirms himself to be ato the, and not to theand; have you known a Common Serjeant say, he was a Servant to the, and not to theand?
I never was in a Common Hall upon any such dispute, I am with my Lord Mayor.
I have known a Recorder reprehended by a very learned Lawyer, for saying,.
I ask you who hath the management of the Common Hall in the absence of the Mayor?
I am always here waiting upon my Lord Mayor.
My Lord, if your Lordship please, we will rest here as to point of Right: Now, my Lord in the next place we will come to that which is a more immediate Question before you, and we will prove the manner of it, and the persons that are guilty; for that is the next step we are to go. -- Mr..
My Lord, they have laid in the Information, That the Sheriffs are duly Elected for one year next following, from the Eve of St.; now prove your Election to be for that year you have laid in your Information.
My Lord, they have certainly in Fact mistaken their Information. My Lord, They do declare that the Common Hall was held, according to Custom, For the Election of Sheriffs, to hold that Office from the Eve of St., for the year next ensuing: Now, my Lord, that is not so in Fact, nor never was, for the Election is for a year to commence onDay. They take on the Eve the Office upon them, but they do absolutely exercise the Office for a Year from that time, from the Eve. Now, my Lord, we say, that Day is excluded; we are sure it is a Common Case, it is known very well; as in a Lease, thefrom any Date, the Day of the Date is no part of that Lease, it is exclusive and no part of the Term, and therefore, my Lord, if they do not prove it as they have laid it, we hope they will be non-suited.
That is another piece of Law.
The Eve ofDay, we make this Objection, and put you to prove it.
Give us leave to go on: Gentlemen, let us prove what we think fit, and if we have not made it out, then make your Exceptions.
Mr. Serjeant, I think it is proper to put it now, for if there be no such Election, there can be no such Riot; for they have made it a Riot in a special manner.
, under your favour, it is not a time for it now.
This is the oddest way these Gentlemen take upon them so: I will not prove it; and pray be quiet till I come to my time.
Pray, Mr. Attorney, if we have an Objection to make, if the Court pleases we may be heard.
Certainly it was never known, that when Mr. Attorney exhibited an Information, to tell us how to prove it. Surely, Gentlemen, you will give us leave to go on with our Proof, won't yee?
Mr., How long have you been a Servant of the City? By whose Order was the Hall summoned?
By my Lord Mayor's.
Who hath Dissolved them?
My Lord Mayor.
Did you ever know the Sheriffs give any Order for the dissolving of it?
No.
Did you ever know it dissolved before the business was done for which they were call'd? Did myin your time either dissolve them, or send them going, till the Election was over?
I can say nothing to that.
Mr., I would ask you this, Sir, Did the Sheriffs ever continue the Hall after my Lord Mayor had dissolved it?
No, I never knew that in my life.
Mr., I would ask you a Question, I don't ask you who calls them, or bids them go home, during the time of the Election, did my Lord Mayor ever meddle?
My Lord Mayor withdraws.
Who are those among the Commons that manage the business when my Lord Mayor withdraws?
The Sheriffs, and the Common Serjeant, and the.
Who manages the Election? Who declares the Election? Who declares who is chosen?
When the Election is made below, then the Sheriffs come up, and the, and thealong with them, and acquaint my, and he goes down, and there doth confirm the Election, and withal, when the work is done he dissolves the Court.
Did you ever know a Poll for Sheriffs?
Do you take theto be an Officer of the, or an Officer of my Lord Mayor's?
I cannot be certain what he is.
If in case the Common Serjeant differ from them in declaring the Poll, is it not usual for the Common Hall to order him to put it up again?
Who does make a Judgment of Election, the Common Serjeant, or the Sheriffs?
The Sheriffs.
Do not the Common Serjeant make Observation as well as the?
The Sheriffs give their Opinions in it.
Now, my Lord, if your Lordship please, if they had done, we would desire to go on to our Fact, for otherwise for ought I perceive, we shall be in here till this time to morrow, and they say, we must not adjourn till the Cause is over. -- Mr. Common Cryer; heark you, Mr. Common Cryer, Were you present atDay when this business happened? Give my Lord and the Jury an account of the carriage then.
I was there at the beginning of the Election, I did make Proclamation, afterwards there was a Poll demanded, and the Poll was begun, and I went home with my Lord Mayor, afterwards my Lord Mayor came back again, and there was a Hubburb; but about 5 or 6 a Clock, my Lord Mayor came down upon the, and I adjourn'd the Court till another day; I did Adjourn it by his order, according as I used to do, and then I went away with my Lord Mayor.
But what usage had you in going out?
I went before my, I was not with him.
Where was the Adjournment?
Upon the.
Were the Sheriffs Polling the People then?
I don't know that, Sir.
Were the Sheriffs near the Hustings?
I don't know, I saw them not.
Upon the Election of them, when mycame to Adjourn the Court; were the Sheriffs acquainted with it: Where were the Sheriffs?
My Lord Mayor sent to them.
Mr., Pray will you tell my Lord and the Jury, what Directions you had from my Lord Mayor, and how he was used when he came out of the Hall?
Mysent me, my Lord, to the Sheriffs under thetwice to come up to the Council-Chamber, and they told me: One told me, he was upon the King's Business; and the other said, he could not come; and about half an hour after, my Lord, Sheriffcame up to my Lord Mayor into the Council-Chamber, and then immediately came down to the Court of Hustings, and Mr. Common Cryer by my Lord Mayor's order, did Adjourn the Court fromtillfollowing, and as we were coming out of the Hall, when Mr. Common Cryer had Adjourn'd the Court, and said,, a great part of the Hall hiss'd; and but that there were so many honest Gentlemen about my Lord, I was afraid my Lord would have come to some mischief; but coming to go into the Porch-yard, I saw his Hat off, and I went to catch his Hat, and caught one of his Officers by the head, that was knocked down, or fell down, that held uphis Train. My Lord, the Sword was at that distance, farther then it is between your Honour, and where I stand, and crouded far away, and when my Lord came out into the Yard; Gentlemen, says he, I desire you would go home to your Lodgings, and commanded them in theto depart: and says he to me, Pray go you back, and let the Sheriffs know, and tell them I have Adjourn'd the Court to. Upon my Lord's Command I went back to let the Sheriffs know that my Lord had Adjourned the Court till.
Both of them, bothand?
No,, t'other was by.
It was in his hearing, was it not?
It was in his hearing.
Did you see my Lord Mayor down, and his Hat off?
I saw his Hat off, Sir, but I can't tell how it came off.
You say, you saw my Lord's Hat off, can you tell whether my Lord was so courteous to take his Hat off or no?
I dare say, my Lord did not.
Did he, or no? I ask you upon your Oath.
I can't tell that, Sir.
I can't think that those Gentlemen were so extraordinary civil to my Lord Mayor, that when themade Proclamation,, that there should be hissing; those that hissed were not extraordinary civil to my Lord Mayor, and I believe you don't think so neither.
I ask you a Question, My Lord Mayor's Hat was off --
Ay, and it must be supposed it was to Complement those fine men that hiss'd at.
My Lord, if your Lordship pleases, I would desire to know what account any of them can give of the opinion they had of the King, to be sure they had a great opinion of his Representative: But my Lord Mayor I find was so extraordinary civil, that to this Rabble he must not only pull off his Hat, but fling his Hat on the ground to them.
I ask you whether you know that any of the Defendants in this Information did throw my Lord Mayor's Hat off, or no?
I can't say that.
It is not a farthing matter.
Here is a mighty Riot upon the Hat.
Now I desired them to keep back; my Lord Mayor's Friends did press back as much as they could to preserve my Lord Mayor; they prest more forward, as the other kept back, and I desired them to forbear; nay, commanded them in the, and upon their Peril and took my Cane to strike at some of them.
Did you?
He served them well enough.
He did so. Do you think a Magistrate is to be crouded and prest upon?
I struck at them, and said, Gentlemen, keep back, and entreated them and commanded them, and all would not do.
I would only say this,; What did you hear when Proclamation was made to depart?
My Lord, I was not in the Hall when Proclamation was made, but I heard them cry out, No; and I heard them cry out,.
Can you name any Person that said this?
My Lord, I laid hold on one man that cryed,; and the Rabble got him from me, one that I heard say so.
Mr. Common Serjeant, you say, you heard this; can you name any person?
I tell you I caught hold of him, and the Rabble got him from me.
Can you name any one?
I tell you I cannot.
My Lord, I hope that will not much prevail in this place, but I hope it doth justifie my Lord Mayor, for endeavouring to disperse the Rabble that came together to that height when the King was, to cry out,. And we don't give this in Evidence against any one person, for it was done in a tumultuous manner; but they were so fond of this man, as that they rescued him from him; and to fix it upon them, we will prove they were every one of them concerned in the Riot. -- Mr., What account can you give of this matter?
I was standing at the place where they Poll'd, and my Lord Mayor was coming towards it to protest against the manner of proceeding; and Sheriffcame to me, and said, Resist him, (I think) he hath nothing to do here.
That was,.
It was either,, or.
He says, he thinks he said,; but he is sure it was either, or.
Did you seethere?
I can't say I did: I sawjust as My Lord Mayor came down, not after.
Did you seethere?
I did not see.
How did they use my Lord Mayor?
I was not very near my Lord; I stood at the place where the Poll was taking.
, We desire to ask you this Question, that you speak particularly to, Was it before my Lord Mayor had Adjourn'd the Poll, or after?
It was just as my Lord Mayor came to Protest against the manner of Polling.
Was the Poll adjourn'd before or after?
It was after.
, you say, he said,, or; did he say it before the Poll was adjourn'd?
Yes, Sir, it was before.
Can you say what the words were?
It was either, or.
Which is?, Pray will you tell us what you did observe done at this time by, or, or any person else?
I came about 4 or 5 a Clock to the Polling-place where the Coaches use to stand, and I saw the Sword up, I suppose my Lord Mayor was there, and came to stop their Proceedings in Polling; and there was a great Contest among them; some saying, he had nothing to do there: He hath no more to do than I, says one; Another cryed, Stop the Sword, stop the Sword; and I laid hold of him, and got him a little way, and made account to have carried him to the Sheriffs, and the Lord Mayor, but some body got him away.
What did you observeanddo?
They encouraged the People to Poll.
After my Lord Mayor was gone?
Yes.
Pray you, Sir, did you observe either, orencourage the People to Hollow or Shout, or those things?
No, Sir.
Heark you Friend, heark you; How do you know thatorwere Polling? Are you sure they were Polling after my Lord was gone?
They were at the Polling-places, and they did not go away a great while after that.
From the People that were about them?
No.
We agree it in Fact it was so.
, Pray will you give the Court an account of what they did.
, What did you observe there?
About 5 a Clock, my Lord Mayor came to the Hall, there was with him then Sir, and Sir, now Lord Mayor, to the best of my memory; and he told them he disliked their Polling any more: and there came a tall black man; says he,Sheriff go on, it is your business, we will stand by you; about a quarter of an Hour after my Lord came out of the Hall to the great Croud, some of the People hissing, and some making a noise; and one came to the Sheriffs, and says he, Gentleman, why do not you make Proclamation with, and they continued there till towards 8 a Clock.
Did you hear no Officer Adjourn the Court?
My Lord Mayor went home, I saw him within doors, and I came back again.
Was there no Proclamation made afterwards?
By some of the Officers, but I did not take particular notice.
Who did you see here after you went home with my Lord Mayor, and came back again?
I saw here Mr.for one, and I sawcome in between 8 and 9 here in the Hall, and my Lordcame in, and several other Gentlemen.
What did they do when they came?
Heark you,, Was my Lordand Mr., and Mr., were they among the People?
After the Sheriffs came up, they went into theCourt,came in and out, and my Lordwent in to them.
Did they appear among the People up and down in the Hall?
They went through the Hall to and fro.
What was the Christian Name of that?
I know him, he that was Under-Sheriff last year: I know him well enough, and he knows me; yes, that is Mr..
I desire to ask this Witness a Question, my Lord.
Let your Counsel ask, my Lord.
I desire to know another Question; Did you see Mr.?
I saw Mr. Aldermanwalk in the Hall, but I can't tell whether he went into the Room, or no. After my Lord was gone, he did come up into the Mayor's Court, and came thorough among the People.
, you speak of my Lord; upon your Oath did you see my Lordwalk to and fro in the Hall, or only came thorough?
My Lordcame in at that Gate, and went thorough the Hall, and went in to the Sheriffs.
I would ask you this upon your Oath, Did you see him do any thing more?
No, I was there to discharge my Office.
My Lord, I own my being there; but only desire to ask a Question that will clear this matter.
I saw my Lordcome up those Stairs, and he went into the.
How long might that be after the Poll?
After the Sheriffs came up I believe it might be half an Hour, or a quarter of an Hour, near an Hour.
Did you see my Lorddo any thing more than walk?
I saw him come to the, and they would not open the Door at first; but they said, it is my Lord, and then they let him in.
Your own Councel is asking my Lord; I am willing you should ask a Question if your own Councel will let you. Gentlemen, my Lord would ask a Question himself, and you won't let him.
My Lord, Though I do not know this Gentleman at all, yet I will venture to ask him a Question: Pray Sir, did you see me speak to any one man?
I have answered that already, I say not.
Were the Books brought from the Polling-place by the Sheriffs before I came, before that I went in there? -- My Lord, I was there, and shall give you an account of it.
It had been better, my Lord, if you had kept away.
, pray will you tell my Lord and the Jury what you observed that day here after my Lord Mayor was gone and had adjourned the Court.
On theofI was here by order of Sheriffafter my Lord Mayor had adjourned the Court, and it was to call all men that were to Poll to come forward, for the Books were to be shut up, and I went away immediately, I was very hot and went away to the Three-Tun Tavern.
Did you see Mr.there?
Mr.was there and Mr.too.
Can you name any body else?
No, I can name no body else.
What did Mr.?
He ordered me to make Proclamation for all men them that had a right to Poll, to come and poll, for the Books were to be shut up.
Captain, pray will you give an account of what you observed?
I came down into the Hall, and did hear a whispering, whereupon I went to guard my Lord Mayor, my Lord Mayor came down upon the, and Proclamation was made for the adjournment of the Court; whereupon when proclamation,, was made, an hundred,I believe more, hist at that, I laid hold of one of them,, cryed they;, said I, and laid fast hold on him; but there was a very great crowd, and sayes one or two,Clark,; There was Mr.and Major; my Lord, said they, is in danger; said I,. My Lord Mayor was down upon his Knee, I can't tell how he came down,, this was the Cry, and. After coming down the steps, I pressed as near as I could to my Lord Mayor to keep them off;, said I,; I had my Sword in my hand, and with the pommel of my Sword kept them off;, said I,; and so I waited on my Lord home, and went and drank a glass of Sack. About an hour or two hours afterwards I came down to the Hall and found the People shouting,, said I,?, said I,. I saw the Sheriffsandwere concerned in carrying on the Poll, and this they continued to do for some time, at last,, said I,; and this was between 8. and 9. a Clock.
Can you remember any body else besides the Sheriffs?
No, Sir, I cannot.
Can you remember Sir.?
Captain, Did you know never a one of them that cryed out so?
No, my Lord, I was before Sir.
Major, pray will you give my Lord and the Jury an Account of what you saw onday.
My Lord, when my Lord came out of the Court I went after, and some cryed; but I got between them and some of my Lord's Friends kept them off; but when we came just to the going out, they gave a shout, and I saw my Lord Mayor's Hatt upon his Back,and I can't tell whether he touched the ground with his hand, but I was e'en almost down; said I,?
Who did you see there?
Indeed, Sir, I was almost down, and did not see their Faces.
Mr., I would only ask you, Who did you see, who did you observe to be there?
About 9. a clock at Night, or something before, I stood at the Door that leads to the, and there came in Aldermanand, and Old, an old white-hair'd man, and by and by my Master Sheriffcame out and told me,;, said I; and he went again, and there I staid till they came out, and then he went upon the, and I went along with him when he came out.
Who went with him out to go to the?
Sirand several other men, there is never a name in the Indictment more.
None of them that are in the Indictment? name them.
I have named them.
Prethee name them.
Mr. Alderman, both the Sheriffs, my Lord, Mr., and old Mr..
Which?
Thatthat stands there.
There is such a noise that I did not very well hear that word.
, not thatthat looks upon me, but he that stands behind.
He falls behind now, but he ran up and down then, and Aldermanwas there too.
You witness, you have named all these men, what diddo, or what did he say?
When he came upon the, he made proclamation himself, because one or two refused it, he did it himself; and after a while he adjourned the Court upon the; this was onday.
What did he say?
As the Common Cryer usually sayes at such times.
You say you saw Mr., and you saw my Lord, upon your Oath, can you say they did any thing, or was any thing done in abuse to my Lord Mayor?
They did not tell me, my Lord, what they did.
I ask you what did they do?
Mighty busie they were.
How long was it after my Lord Mayor adjourned the Court?
About two hours.
So much the worse.
You must understand it was some time before Mr. Sheriff had made his adjournment, they were busie till that time.
My Lord, if your Lordship pleases, I do agree with Mr., that the Jury should remember that this was two hours after my Lord Mayor had adjourned the Court.
I desire, my Lord, I may ask him some Questions. You say you saw me go to the Council Chamber, at what time, and who went with me?
A little before Candle-light.
You say all the Company went out with the Sheriffs, and went away.
My Lord, I did not say you came out.
My Lord was of the Upper House.
Yes, and may be there again.
I hope I shall be there, Mr..
It had better you had been so then, my Lord.
It will be the worse for you, I shan't lie Perdue for you.
If you threaten me, my Lord, I shall take notice of it. My Lord, I have done you a kindness, but if you come under my hands again, I shall not do it.
They would not have it said,, and my Lord you were with some of those that abused him.
After it was over, my Lord.
You were not within your duty here.
My Lord, it was after the Poll was closed.
My Lord, I desire if you please, what is usual in all causes, that we might go on without any interruption. Let us go on for the King, and then make all the defence you can. Don't think either to hiss us or threaten us out of our cause. Mr., give my Lord and the Jury an account of what you saw or heard.
My Lord, I attended with several of our Company by my Lord Mayor's Coach to, and was in the Council Chamber, and he sent for the Sheriff, after that he went away; and whenwas said, said they,.
I desire to know Mr.this, what they said?
They cryed,.
is making a Speech to us, I don't know what he hath said.
I don't think Mr.thinks you worth a Speech. Mr., I desire you to ask you a Question, I ask you this Question upon your Oath, after the adjournment of the Court, and after this very insolent behaviour of some of the Rabble that were there, for I can call them no better, who did you see there?
After I went home, I went to see my Lord safe home, and came back again, I saw onethat they call the, calling,.
Pray who else did you see?
I saw Mr. Aldermancome up towards the Sheriffs. Gentlemen, said he, you are doing right.
Did you hear Mr. Aldermansay so? What this Gentleman? Do you know him?
Says he to Sheriff, You shall have all right done to you.
Who else did you see there?
I saw Mr..
Did you see Mr., did you see Mr.?
I did not see Mr., I saw.
Did you see Mr.?
Yes.
Which of them do you mean?
The Elder man.
There isthe Elder, Gentlemen, andthe Younger.
I was disputing with a Fellow that his Toes came out of his Shooes, and had a green Apron, said,?, said he., said I,. Saies Mr.. That was about half an hour after my Lord Mayor went home.
What time was the Adjournment?
About 5. or 6. I was speaking something,., saies Mr.to me; I can never meet you but you are railing against the King's Evidence.
The Kings Evidence, what was that?
What was done by Mr.?
He was talking among the People.
He did encourage among the rest.
You are in a Passion now.
No Sir, I am not.
He seconded Mr.when he said,.
Who did so?
, my Lord, that they call the.
A very pretty word indeed.
Ay so it is, he is so called, you will give us leave to hear what the Witnesses speak.
Another Epithet would do a great deal better.
, what was done upon the spot, was there any hurt?
Do you say, upon your Oath, that Gentleman was there?
I have seen him in the Balcony.
He saies he uses to be there upon publick daies in the Coffee-house. --, I would desire to know of you, whether you are able to give an account after my Lord Mayor's Adjournment, who was there; name as many persons as you can.
Mr., and I saw Mr.go through the little Gate into the Yard.
Who else?
That is all, Sir. Sheriffdelivered two Poll-Books into my hand.
Mr., will you tell my Lord and the Jury what you saw?
It happened thus, Mr.had taken a man upon Execution, who was Bail for a Client of mine who had paid the moneys long before; upon that I came to know who imployed him, and coming here, I found Mr.in that place, and the crowd was so great, said he,. Whilst I staid there, I asked him what was the meaning; Saies he,; and whilst I staid, there came in Mr.to and fro from them, and before they would admit any, they would know their names; there was Mr., my Lord, and Sir.
What afterwards?
Yes, Mr.was there, he and Sheriffcame out together, and they went upon those Stairs under the Clock.
Who came out with Sheriff?
What?
Alderman.
Very mannerly.
His name wasbefore he was Alderman.
And Sherifftold the People,. Upon that, Mr.went through the Company, and when they came to the, Mr.ordered Proclamation to be made, and told them,LondonMiddlesex,Tuesday. Upon that an Antient Gentleman desired they might proclaim the Election. Then saies, that. Had it not been for Mr., I had been, I believe, trod under foot sufficiently.
Mr., who did you see?
I saw Sirand Mr..
Where did you see them pray?
In the Yard. I went home with my Lord Mayor, and then I saw them. I had a kind of a glance, but I can't swear positively to Mr..
Sirand Mr., what did you see them do?
Heark you, Friend, where was it you saw them?
In the Yard.
What did you see them do?
Nothing at all.
How many People might be there then? two or three hundred?
Above a Thousand.
What did you hear Sirsay?
Nothing.
How far was he from his own Door?
On t'other side the Hall.
A mighty way indeed, a mighty thing. What said Mr.?
I can't say, Sir, that I heard him speak a word, only in the Tumult.
Friend, I ask you this, I think I heard you say you saw Sirand Mr.in the Yard; but you did not see them do any thing at all?
No.
Pray Mr.will you tell my Lord and the Jury what you saw after my Lord Mayor had adjourned the Court.
I saw there Sheriff,, Sir, Mr.the Scrivener in, Mr.,, onean Upholsterer.
Siryou say in the first place?
Yes, and, my Lord, a Scrivener in.
Who then?
Sheriffand, and Mr., Alderman.
Did you see onethere?
No, Sir.
you saw there?
Ay, Sir, I know him very well.
What isChristian Name?
, he goes by that name, it may be he was not Christ'ned. Wasthere, do you know him?
The Linnen-Draper?
Ay, very well, he goes by the name of. Did you seethere?
I don't know the name, I saw a great many I knew by sight, but not their names.
What did these Gentlemen do?
I'le tell you, Sir, there was Sheriffand Sheriff, I went in where they were taking the Poll; said I,.
You argued thus?
Pray give us leave to go on.
There was Mr., and saies he,, said I,; and they fell about me, and had it not been for Mr.and Mr., I believe they had done me a mischief; for they trod upon my Toes; who did it I can't tell.
But you say Sirandand Aldermanwere amongst them.
Yes, Sir.
That's enough. -- Pray Mr., will you tell my Lord and the Jury what you observed there, and who was there.
I know the names of no persons that were there, all that I can say was this. As soon as my Lord Mayor adjourned the Court upon the, he came down, and going out of the Hall, he had like to have been thrown down, had it not been for Mr.; and going to save my Lord Mayor, I wrenched my back, and I spit blood for seven daies after.
Tell that Mr.over again.
My back was wrenched in saving my Lord Mayor, and I spit Blood 7 days after.
Endeavouring to save my Lord Mayor his back was so wrenched that he spit blood 6 or 7 days after. Heark you Mr.ever since that time, have you found any indisposition?
I have not been my own man since.
He took a Surfeit.
He took a Surfeit of ill Company I am sure.
Mr., give my Lord and the Jury an account of what you know.
My Lord, my Lord Mayor sent to the Sheriffs, and ordered them to forbear Polling and come up to the Chamber, and sent 2 or 3 times; but they denied coming to him, and went on and ordered the Common Cryer to make Proclamation for them to depart; and if they stayed that he would look upon them as Rioters; and there was hissing and a great deal of crowd, and there was Sirin the Court, they hunched him with their Elbows, and as his Lordship came down going down the Steps there was such a croud, that if I had not catched his Lordship in my arms he had fallen upon his forehead, and his hat was off.
Who did you see so misbehave themselves?
My Lord, I can't tell.
I think we have now proved it against every body we design, save only against Mr., for we do not now proceed againstand. Now, my Lord, we will only prove against, and then we shall have done. Mr.will you tell my Lord and the Jury who you saw here. Did you observe any particulars after the Court was adjourned?
I don't remember I observed any one man.
You don't? Had you any discourse with Mr.at any time?
Yes, I had.
What did he tell you?
He did confess he was there about 7 a clock at Night.
He did own he was among them?
Yes, with Alderman.
What say you, Mr.?
I saw him about 7 aclock.
Was he in the crowd?
Yes, amongst the People.
Here is all now, Gentlemen, but, and, and we don't go against them now. After they had done this, and hist at the King, and cried,, what acclamations went these People off with?
When the Court was broke up by the Sheriffs, they cryed,, and in that manner they followed us.
What say you?
They hollowed us home, Sir, as far as fishmonger's Hall.
They began with a hiss, and ended 
with a hollow.