My Lord, All that we say in answer to this Objection, is, That Mr.is not nam'd in that Proclamation.
What say you to that, Sir? He is not named in the Proclamation: And so if he hath Discovered and Apprehended the Prisoner, he has earn'd his Money, whether he be Convicted or not, becauseName is in the Proclamation, tho' his is not.
Then, My Lord, with humble Submission, here is another Proclamation wherein he is nam'd, we desire that may be read.
And when it is read, it will be as little to your Purpose as the other.
Let them read what they please, we need say nothing at all to it.
Certainly upon this Proclamation there's no Objection; for he is intitled to his One thousand Pound already, tho'be never convicted.
But is he not by this Proclamation which mentions his Accomplices, intitled to his Pardon? If so, he swears to secure himself.
By the Apprehending and Discovering, he's intitled to his Pardon.
But not without he be brought to Justice; that is to say, till he be convicted; therefore he cannot be an Evidence to convict him.
That is, as to any that are there named, if any of them Discover and Apprehend one another, it must be so as that they be brought to Justice: But if any Person that is not named there does Apprehend any that is, he is intitled to the One Thousand Pound, barely by the Apprehension.
Then there is another Proclamation where they are both named, as Mr.tells me.
My Lord, We will set this Matter right; we will show the other Proclamation, in which, if I am rightly inform'd, for I have not read it, Mr.is nam'd.
If you have not read it, I would advise you not to trouble the Court with it; for you will find the latter part is restrain'd to Three or Four particular Persons, of which he is none.
I am named in the Proclamation.
Ay, but read the latter part of it, and you will find you are not nam'd in that Clause that they referr'd to: You need not read the former part of the Proclamation, we agree the Prisoner is named there; but only look towards the bottom, which is the Clause that they refer to.
They have not considered the Proclamation, and therefore make an Objection of they don't know what.
We are in your Lordship's Judgment.
For what? See if you can make or state a Case for our Judgment.
Mr.is mention'd in the first Proclamation, andis not, but there are the Word Accomplices: He is likewise mentioned in the last Proclamation, but not in the last Clause of it. I confess, if he had, it had been plain it would have taken off his Testimony; but now we must submit it to you, whether he is not an Interested Person, and consequently no good Witness.
Truly I do not see any colour for the Objection. Is he not as well intituled to his One thousand Pound, tho' Mr.had never been try'd, by the bare Apprehending of Mr., as if he was Convicted?
No, my Lord; because the Words are so as he may be brought to Justice.
That is not so, as to any Person that apprehends one mentioned in the Proclamation, if the Person that apprehends be not mention'd in it, and named himself; if any one that is not mention'd apprehend one that is mention'd, he is intituled, by the Apprehension, to the One thousand Pound. If any one that is mention'd apprehend another, then he is to bring him to Justice; now Mr.is not named in this Proclamation, and so, as to the One thousand Pound, he stands in the same Condition as any other Person that Discovered or Apprehended one of the Persons there nam'd.
But it seems he was one of the Conspirators, because he is himself described in another Proclamation.
If it were so, it would not be material, nor any manner of Objection; but as they have made their Objection upon these Proclamations, we think there is nothing for us to give an Answer to.
Nay, my Lord, if it were so, will Sirsay his Client is not brought to Justice, unless he be Convicted? I am sure the Words, or, are not in the Proclamation.
There is nothing in it; you must swear Mr.,
Will you give an Account to my Lord and the Jury, what you know of this Conspiracy against the King's Life, from thefirst time you were acquainted with it, and what hand the Prisoner at the Bar had in it.
Pray give an Account of the whole thing, your coming over, and who sent you, and upon what Errant, and the whole that you know of this Conspiracy.
Upon the 14th. oflast, the French Stile, New Stile, I was at St., where I was sent for by King, and was ordered to wait his Dinner till it was over, and accordingly I did wait till his Dinner was over, and then I came in, and Col.was with him, and one Mr.who is also mentioned in the Proclamation, was there also: the King told me he was sensible I had served him well, and now he had an Opportunity of doing something for me; he told me he would send me into, where I should be subsisted, and I was to follow the Orders of Sir, and accordingly he ordered me Ten Lewidores to be paid by Mr., who is Secretary to the late Queen, and Col.went along with me, and Mr., to, and told him he came from the King, and we had the Lewidores, and we went to, in order to our coming over hither: but we were told if we were Wind-bound, that the Money we received would not bear our Charges; there was Orders given for our further Subsistance at, to the President there. Accordingly we came to, and the Wind did not serve us for 8 or 9 days; and while I stay'd there, the Money that I spent atwas paid by the President of, Monsieur. Afterwards I Landed in, near, as I was told, and I came to the House of one, and he provided me and my Comrade with a Couple of Horses; and coming from thence, I came in the first place to onean Apothecary in, and next from thence, we came to, to, and from thence in a Coach to, and from thence by Water to: that night we lay inat an Inn, it being night, the Night-Tyde, and something late. The next day I came to a Lodging at an Acquaintance of my Comrades, Mr., at thein, one Mr.. The next night I went to look for Sir, whom the King told me I should certainly find by such a Sign of a White Handkerchief hanging out of his Pocket, onand, in, where his walk was to be in the Evening, because he was not to appear in the day-time openly. It happen'd that uponnight after I came to Town, I went there, and did not find Siraccording to the King's Direction, which I admired at; but there was one Mr., who told my Comrade, a Day or two after, That Sirwould needs speak with me, and accordingly I met with him; and he asked me how the King, Queen, Prince, and Princess did, and I told him they were very well; I told him I was appointed to attend him, and obey his Orders. He told me he had no Money at present, but in two or three Days he would send some; and so he did, by Major. I had Five Shillings a Day for subsistance, and I had no Horse; and when I had a Horse, it was Six Shillings a Day; after which rate I had subsistance for a Month at Five Shillings a Day, Guinea's going then at Thirty Shillings. Majorpay'd me the Money by SirOrder, as he told me, and he afterwards gave me a Guinea, and that was the firstwhen the Assassination was design'd;for that we told him we wanted Money, and it was not reasonable we should take our Horses out of the Stable before we pay'd for them: And I met Sirseveral times at, and he told me it was a suspicious Place, and desired me not to come any more there; but when he had any particular Orders to give me, he wou'd give me notice of it where I shou'd meet him; and accordingly I did meet him several times.
Now Sir, will you tell what you know as to the Prisoner at the Bar.
As to Mr., thethat the Assassination was design'd to be, the first time that I knew of it, I met Mr., at one Mr.Lodging, where he was up, and I saw him in a great Hurry and some Consternation, and in came Mr.; I ask'd him the meaning of it, and what they were going about; and Mr.told me, If I wou'd go down to CaptainI shou'd know; accordingly I went, and to the best of my remembrance, he gave me a little Note to Captain, but that I am not positive in. I went to Captain, and as soon as ever I came, he told us, We must be immediately ready to go to.
Where was that?
At the, that was the Sign -- as near as I remember. Mr.and I were ordered together to come there, and there was Mr., who had been there some time, and when I came in, Sirdid declare Laughing,: And he talk'd something of bringing the Garter, and of attacking the Coach; but he went out of the Room, and afterwards he came in and declared,Orange; butcame in after that, and said,Orange. When he talk'd of attacking the Prince of, I was very much startled, not knowing any thing of it before; and I came the next Morning to Mr., and ask'd him if we were to be the Murderers of the Prince of, says Mr.to me,Germains,; and said I,. After this Mr., and Mr., and I, had a Meeting at, where we did discourse about the Matter. I did often declare against it, That it was so barbarous a thing, that no Man of Honour almost wou'd be guilty of it, but Majoranswered, That we were to obey Orders, for sure Sirwou'd not undertake a thing of that nature without Orders.
Pray what said Mr..
He own'd it was a barbarous thing; but he was sent over to obey SirOrders, which he had several times declared he was resolved to do; upon that we parted: so afterwards I came to Mr.Lodging; it was theMorning I came to him, and so went to Sir; while he was there, Mr.gave me a Note, naming so many Names, particularly Mr., Mr., Mr., and his own Name at top, not the Name that he is Arraigned by here; but a sham Name that he had, as the rest of us all had sham Names, which at that time we went by.
What was your Name?
My Name was.
Who gave you that Name?
Kingat St., and he gave Mr.the Name of, and Mr.Name was. Kingtold us in his Bed-Chamber, We were to go by those Names.
Pray Sir, what didsay to you when he gave you that List?
He told me, he was to go to, and I was to go along with him, and says he to me smiling,Aid de Camp; and get the rest of the Gentlemen ready, and accordingly I went to look for several of the Persons -- particularly for Mr.: When I came back again, I found him lying on his Bed, and that Sirhad told him the Prince ofdid not go out that Day, and from thence we went to Dinner, where Majordin'd with us, and Mr., and Majorseeing me in a heat, ask'd me, Why I was in such a Sweat, I told him I were getting those Men ready for Mr., who had made me his; says Majorto me, You may very well do it; for you have six Shillings a Day allow'd you, and I have nothing; I bring two Men at my own charge: said I, Major, I wonder you don't apply your self to Sir, and then, I believe you may be subsisted too. He answered me, He did not think it worth the while to trouble him, since he hath never spoke to him of it before, and, and, and, and my self, several times met in, and talk'd of attacking the Prince of.
Who did?
,,, and my self.
Pray Sir, let me ask you one Question. Where was your Horse at first?
At first it was at my LordStables, as they told me, in.
Where were the other Persons Horses?
There was Mr., and Mr.Horses in the same Place, at the same time, as they told me.
How came you by your Horse there?
Majordid deliver my Horse, and committed it to my care, and I carry'd it thence to another place.
Did you observe there was any more Horses there?
I believe there was Five or Six, as near as I can guess.
Do you know wherewas to have his Horse?
He had a Horse; but whence he had it I don't know.
Had you any Arms delivered you?
Yes, I had, by Capt..
Were you at no other Place together thatNight, the 22d. of, because you say you din'd together?
Yes, we were at theTavern.
What Discourse pass'd between you there?
They were talking about the Assassination; but what any particular Person said, I cannot tell.
Pray who were there?
There was Mr., Capt., and Mr.; andwent out and came in again, anddeclared, we must have a great deal of care of our selves, or we shou'd be taken up; and he whisper'd it first, and afterwards I ask'd him what it was, and he told me, and said,: Says Mr., staring this way with his Eyes,; and so we parted.
When was this?
This was the Night ofthe 22d. when it was discovered; for some of them were taken up the next Day.
Wasthere at that time at the?
I cannot possibly say whether he was or not.
What Discourse had you there?
We talk'd of Assassinating the King; but what it was in particular, I cannot tell.
Wasthere?
Yes, I believe he was; but I cannot positively say.
You say it was the lastthat the King was to go abroad, that you apprehended you were discovered?
Yes, we apprehended we were discovered before that; for Mr.told me, That Three or Four Days before, in that Week, that his Name, and one, were given into the Council, and another, and another, Two or Three of them, as he told me; I think, Three or Four; and upon that Account Majorwent from his Lodging, and did not lie at his Lodging the Night before; and I came to Major, and he told me the same thing at theTavern.
Can you Remember what Discourse you had thatNight?
You say that onthe 22d. Mr.gave you the List.
I do not say it was the 22d. for I cannot swear to the Day of the Month; but it was the Secondthat we were to have gone about this Business.
You say he gave you a List of Names: Pray, when he gave you that List, what Discourse happened in the Room, just before, or after the giving of the List?
Sir, I think I told the Court that before.
Sir, I desire you would repeat it.
My Lord, I humbly desire to know whether I am to answer that Gentlemanthat Question?
Yes, you are to answer, being upon your Oath, and to tell the whole Truth.
I ask him the Question so fairly, what Discourse introduced the giving of the List, and what followed upon it, that I perceive this Gentleman does not know which side I am off.
Mr.said we were to go to; and he told me, that I was to be one of his Party, that we were to attack the Prince of.
You say you were to be one of his Party: Pray was it there that he told you, you should be his.
Yes, he did tell me I was to be his?
Whose Hand-writing was that List?
I cannot tell, I had it from that Gentleman.
But whose Writing was it?
Indeed I know not his Hand-writing, and therefore cannot tell whose it was: He is for his Life, but I believe he cannot deny any thing that I have said, I suppose not: I shou'd be very sorry to accuse Mr.of any thing that was not true.
Pray whose Names were in that List?
I have mention'd Mr., Mr., Mr., my self; and you, Mr., had your own Name at top.
What is that?
He is aMan.
It's a very strange thing I should give you a List with a Man's Name that I don't know; I declare it, I know no such Person.
Mr., I believe you are very sensible I do not accuse you of any thing that is not true.
When did you see that List last?
He gave it into my Hands, and had it from me again, or I threw it away afterwards.
But you that were to be an Evidence, ought to have kept it to justifie your Evidence.
Truly I did not intend to have been an Evidence at that time.
If they will ask him any Questions let them.
No indeed, I will ask him no Questions.
Then, my Lord, we have another piece of Evidence which we wou'd offer to your Lordship, which is not direct Evidence against the Prisoner, but only to prove a Circumstance or two of what has already been sworn: We do acknowledge, my Lord, it does not affect Mr., but only to strengthen and confirm what they have sworn.
With submission we hope it will not be Evidence fit to be given as to the Prisoner at all; for because a Man may swear true in the particular Circumstance of a thing, that therefore he swears true what he swears against the Prisoner, I think is no Consequence in the World.
It is a thing distinct, and foreign to the Matter, as to Mr..
My Lord, we do not say it directly affects Mr.; but when your Lordship has heard it, we shall submit it to you, how far it confirms even the Evidence given against him.
My Lord, we say the Prisoner was to have his Horse from; and that there were Horses plac'd there for that purpose we are going to prove.
My Lord, It is one entire Conspiracy, in which every one had his part; one was to have his Horses and his Party in one place, and another in another: Now that there were at such time such Horses at, and those Horses were delivered out from, is certainly a Confirmation of the Truth of what the Witnesses have said.
It is so. If that be it you offer, it is very material.
We shall prove, That upon the Disappointment on the first, the 15th. of, they were to be ready against the 22d. and you will hear how the Horses were disposed of in the mean time. Call,, and.
Call any one of them, I believe it is enough.
Pray will you give my Lord, and the Jury an Account what you know of any Horses that were brought toaboutlast, and how long they stay'd there?
There was Six Horses.
Who brought them in.
They were sent in by some Persons in Mr.Name.
Had you any Direction to take care of them?
Mr.sent in a Note to take care of them for a Night or two.
Who carried them away?
I cannot tell: Some People came to see 'em that I never saw before, and they took care of them; I know not who they were, and I never saw them since.
What time was it that they came for them?
It was about the middle of the Day.
What Month was it in?
I think it was much about the latter end of, to the best of my Remembrance.
How long was it before the Plot was discovered?
It was about a Week, or a small matter, before the Plot was discovered, to the best of my knowledge.
How long stay'd the Horses there at?
Three of them staid a Night or two; but the other Three about a matter of a Week or Ten Days.
Who own'd those Horses?
They were sent in, in Mr.Name; but who own'd them I cannot tell indeed.
Then swear.
Pray tell my Lords, and the Jury, what you know concerning any Horses about the time of the Breaking-out of the Plot.
We mean inStable.
There were Seven Horses came in.
Who brought them?
There was Six in the first place; one came in afterwards, in the Evening.
By whose Order were they brought there?
By Mr.Order.
How long did they stay there?
Some of them stay'd there several Days; Three of them went away the next Day, as I think.
Do you remember about what time those Horses were brought thither?
They were brought there I believe about Seven or Eight Days before the Plot broke out.
My Lord, we only call these Witnesses to confirm the Testimony of the others, that there were such Horses there at that time, and for the present we rest it here.
Then, Gentlemen, what say you to it for the Prisoner?
Sir, I know not what Variety of Opinions you mean; there have been some Discourses in Pamphlets I agree, but it was always taken and held for Law, that Consulting and Agreeing was an Overt-Act.
Here is no Evidence of any Agreement.
Pray let us hear what you say to that.
My Lord, we humbly insist there are not two VVitnesses, such as the Law requires, to prove the Charge upon this Indictment against the Prisoner: The two Overt-Acts that touch Mr., are first Consulting and Agreeing how to Kill the King; the other is the finding Arms and Horses for that purpose: but as to this latter, the finding Arms and Horses, there is not one Evidence that comes up to it: and as to the former, the Consultations, whether there be sufficient Evidence that comes up to that, is very much a Question with us: but we say, with Submission, there are not two Witnesses in that case; for Mr.says only what he was told by Sir, that Sirproposed this Matter; but withal he tells you, that when Sirproposed it, and Mr.was inform'd what the Design was, he was so far from Conspiring, Consulting, or Agreeing to do it, that he said it was a barbarous Act, and he recoil'd at it. Then at last says Sir, You must command a Party.
Well, and what saidthen?
says, he then said, There's an End of it. Now, my Lord, what Evidence is this of a Consultation and Agreement?and this is all thatsays. As to what Mr.says, we are to consider whether the List given to him be an Overt-Act; and there the Point in question is, whether that List can be given in Evidence against Mr., upon this late Act of Parliament, as an Overt-Act, it not being laid in the Indictment? There is indeed an Overt-Act of a List laid in the Indictment, as given to, but none as given to Mr..
Pray take the Evidence right: First, What will you make an Overt-Act? What do you think when there is a Debate among divers Persons about killing the King?
With Submission that will be no Overt-Act if there be a Debate of such a matter, tho he be present.
Aye; but when there is a Consult, and upon Debate a Resolution is formed, and tho he does at first dislike it, yet when he is told he must command a Party, he says he is content, or there's an end of it; What do you make of that?
He said he did not like it, it was a barbarous desperate Design.
It's true, but when Sirsaid he shou'd command a Party, he acquiesced, and said there was an end of it: there was a Discourse about cutting off the King, and that was agreed upon in the Company at that time; and tho at first he did not like it, yet he might afterwards agree to it.
My Lord, that is it which we deny; we say there is no proof of his Agreement to it.
Capt.says, he did declare that he said he look'd upon it as a desperate Design, and was averse from being engag'd in it, but afterwards did agree to it; Whether that is not such an Overt-Act as is laid in the Indictment?
My Lord, We must beg leave for the Prisoner in a Case of this Nature, that it may be recollected what the Evidence did say. Mr.did not take upon him to affirm that Mr.consented to it, but only said there was an end of it: Now we must leave that to the Jury, what they can make of such a Doubtful Expression.
Call Mr.in again.
My Lord, the first Meeting Mr.speaks of, where the Prisoner Mr.was, is at the, where this Discourse was; the next Meeting that he speaks of, was on the Friday Night, before the first Saturday when the Businesswas to be done, and afterwards he met atLodgings, on Saturday Morning, in.
Hark ye Mr., the first time that this Matter was proposed, when Mr.was present, you say was at the.
Yes, my Lord, it was.
And you say he dislik'd it, and did not care to be concern'd in it.
Yes, my Lord, he did so.
Well, What said Sir.
Sirsaid he ought to obey his Orders, for he had such a Commission for such a thing, and he drew out a Scheme how it was to be done; and when Sirtold Mr.he shou'd Command his Party, he replyed inthere's an end of it.
This was at the, Was it not?
Yes, my Lord, it was.
Pray then, Capt., let me ask you another Question, Was he afterwards with you at any other meeting, and when and where?
He was with me upon Saturday the 15th, at my Lodging in, where was Sirand others.
What Discourse happen'd then, I pray?
They did there discourse the whole Matter, and Sirwas not for going at that time, because there was so many People that went with the King; that there wou'd not be a good Opportunity to effect the Design: but I told him they wou'd go off after the Hunting was over, and so it was agreed upon to go on with the Undertaking.
Pray, at that time did Mr.pretend to dislike the Affair, or refuse to be any way at all concern'd in it?
No, my Lord, I can't remember that he spoke one word.
VVas Mr.there?
Yes, there was Mr., Sirand Mr..
And had you discourse at that time about this Business?
Yes, my Lord, there was that Objection made of so many People going with the King, and I made that Answer that I tell you.
Why then, suppose at the, such an Expression had not dropt from the Prisoner, but a Man is present at two Consults that are held about the Death of the King, but says nothing either at the first or second, What wou'd you make of that Case?
My Lord, I confess this is a Case of a very barbarous Nature, of which I hope my Client will acquit himself: but I think we have the Authority of Parliament on our side, that this does not amount to a proof of Treason. It seems they lay a stress upon this, that Mr.came to CaptainLodgings on the Saturday Morning the 15th: but then take the Case as it is; for ought that does appear upon the Proof, he knows not upon what account the Meeting is before-hand. I think that is the Case of my Lord, upon which the Reversal of his Attainder went, that the Evidence came short, and that it was but Misprision; for the Evidence was, that he was present at the supposed Declaration's reading, but said nothing at all to it.
But I speak of two Meetings; there was but one.
My Lord, I do not know whether there were two Meetings or one then: but this is the ground we go upon, there ought to be two Witnesses: and if there be two Meetings upon such a Design, the second may be is accidental, and it does not appear to be a design'd Meeting; and there was no Appointment of Mr.to be there, nor any Negotiation by way of Message or otherwise, to that purpose.Is this, my Lord, an Overt-Act? Suppose a man be present at a Consult about Treasonable Practices, and he uses words that are indifferent; it is true, in the case of a Wager it amounts to an Assent, but it hardly will come to that when People meet by accident, or for they don't know what.
How is this by accident?
It does not appear that it was by Design or Appointment.
They were Acquaintance.
He had no acquaintance with him but in Sircompany.
But besides, there was an express Consent at the, whensaid there's an end of it.
That is as much as to say, I will not do it, I will not go with you --
Sirwas the Person whom they were to obey; andtells you, he told them what they were to do, and six Horses were first plac'd, and three of them afterwards remov'd.
That won't affect him what Sirsaid, any more thanappointing of the Horses.
Then there is another thing, Why did he give a List to Mr.? the List that was given had Mr.Name at top, as he was to command the Party, and there wasName andName as of his Party; that is, their feign'd Names; Mr.feign'd Name wasthat was at top, and they were to go to, andtold, he shou'd be his.
My Lord, for that I think we have a point of Law, that we apprehend will turn off all that Evidence, and sure we may take that Exception now: The words of the Act are, That no Evidence shall be given of any Overt-Act that is not expresly laid in the Indictment. Now cannot I shew upon this Indictment, that there is no Overt-Act in such a positive direct manner as they now urge about this List. Will not that satisfie your Lordship's Judgment to set aside all this Evidence? To make the Indictment good for Treason, there ought to be a Compassing of the Death of the King laid, and an Overt-Act laid declaring that Compassing; but no Evidence is to be given of any Overt-Act that is not laid in the Indictment.
You are not to take Exceptions to the Indictment now, but only to the Evidence.
I have this one Exception more; there is never anor a.
There does not need; but that is a Fault, if any, in the Indictment, and is not to be stirr'd now.
If there be not a Presentment by the Jury, then there is no Overt-Act alledg'd: and if there be no Overt-Act alledged, or no such Overt-Act, then we are within the Words of the Act, that no Evidence shall be given of any such Overt-Act but what is alledg'd; and it is, if not expresly alledged, as if it were not alledged at all: now here it is very loose,, and so it goes on with the rest, did so and so. There is a Presentment at first, that they did Compass and Imagine the Death of the King; and then the Indictment comes farther, and says, that 40 men shou'd do this Business, and of those 40 these 4 shou'd be some; and then thebought Horses and Arms, and so it must go to the last Antecedent, and then there is no expressalledging of any Overt-Act, and then it is as if no Overt-Act at all was alledg'd.
This Exception is not to the Evidence, but to the Indictment: it begins,; Does not that relate to all?
No, my Lord; and I can tell you a Reason why not: if it be not so well alledged as it shou'd be, it is in an Indictment as if it were never alledged at all: and so within the Words of the Act of Parliament this is not an Overt-Act alledg'd, and therefore they cannot give Evidence upon it.
Truly, my Lord, I can't imagine what they are doing, they are moving in Arrest of Judgment before a Verdict given: they say the Overt-Act is not expresly laid; Is that an Exception to the Evidence or to the Indictment?
If my Lord will please to give us the Liberty, we wou'd shew there can be no Verdict given upon this Indictment.
Certainly this is an irregular Proceeding; this is not a time of Exception to the Judgment.
Then, my Lord, we are in your Judgment, as to the Proof that has been given: If a man be present at a meeting of several Persons, and there is a Treasonable Debate about Killing the King, and this man is only present, but neither assents, nor makes the Proposal how it shall be done, whether the bare being silent, and saying nothing, is such an Overt-Act as shall Convict a man of Treason?
I tell you, Consenting to a Traiterous Design is an Overt-Act of High-Treason, if that Consent be made to appear by good Proof: Now the Question is, What is a good Proof and Evidence of this Consent? a man is two or three times at a Treasonable Consult for Killing the King, and tho perhaps at the first he did not, yet at the second he did know that the Meeting was for such a Design, (suppose for the purpose there was but two Meetings) and at the second it is determined to go on with the Design; Is not that an Overt-Act, tho it cannot be proved that the Prisoner said any thing?
If the first Meeting is not a Consent, or an Overt-Act, neither will a second or third be if there was no more done than at the first, but they are like so many Cyphers without a Figure.
The first Meeting possibly might be accidental, he might not know what it was for, tho that will go a great way if he does not dissent or discover; but then he meets again with the same Company knowing what they had in Design, Does not that prove a Consent? That was the Case of Sirin the Powder-Plot.
But where it may be uncertain, my Lord, whether it were with a good Design or a bad Design that he met with that Company, it ought to be taken most favourably for the Prisoner: this man might be present in order to a Discovery.
But besides, that is not this Case: you are mooting upon Points that are not in the Case. When Mr.came to Mr., and finding them in some Disorder, and being inquisitive what was the Occasion, he was sent to; and when he discovered what they were to go about, he afterwards meeting Mr., says to him, Are we sent over to murder the Prince of? says, If I had known of this Design before I came from, I wou'd have begg'd the King's, that is, King, Pardon, and desired to have been excused. Hereby he expresses his Knowledge of the Design, and what he was to do; and tho he disliked, yet wou'd obey Orders.
There is no doubt, my Lord, but he knew of it; but whether your Lordship will construe his Silence as a Consent, in Treason, is the Question.
A man is at frequent Consults about Killing the King, and does not reveal it, it is a great Evidence of his Consent.
But it is not prov'd that he did actually Consent to it.
My Lord, we must submit it to your Lordship, whether this is not totally improper and irregular at this time; they are arguing how far the Evidence is to be believ'd, before the time proper for such an Argument comes.
If they will call their Witnesses, let them; or if they say they have none, then they may make their Observations upon the Evidence; but else we desire we may be kept to the usual method of Proceedings.
With Submission, we thought it fit to know the Opinion of the Court first, if there be two Witnesses against the Prisoners; for if there be not two Witnesses, as the Law requites, we need not trouble the Court with our Evidence.
Then, my Lord, we must desire that the Record may be read of CaptainConviction of Manslaughter: a Man that has been guilty of doing such an Act, feloniously, maliciously, and voluntarily, as that is sure, is not a competent Witness.
It has been read already.
I thought we had been over that Objection before.
We think it is proper for us to move it now again; for tho' it is no Objection to his being a Legal Witness, yet we hope it will influence his Reputation as to his Credit; for he that has been guilty of killing a man in such a manner as the Indictment lays it, will find but little Credit, we hope, with a Jury of Countrymen. But since it has been read, and your Lordship and the Jury have taken notice of it, we will call some other Witnesses as to Mr.Reputation and Behaviour, we think they will prove things as bad as an Attainder. I shall not open them to your Lordship, but beg leave to call our Witnesses, who will acquaint you what they have to say,
Certainly, my Lord, you will not think fit to let them do so. I desire they wou'd not usher in any thing of Evidence without acquainting the Court what they call them for: for that were the way to let them in to call Witnesses to things that are not proper.
Nay, without doubt, it is not regular to produce any Evidence, without opening it.
For if it be for any Crime that a man may be presented for, and there is no Conviction, I think that ought not to be given in Evidence to take away a Witness's Credit; if it be only to his general Reputation and Behaviour, so far they may go, and we can't oppose it. Therefore I desire Sirwill open to the Court of what nature his Evidence is.
Well, I will tell you then what I call them to.
You must tell us what you call them to.
Why then, my Lord, if Robbing upon the Highway, if Clipping, if Conversing with Clippers, if Fornication, if Buggery, if any of these Irregularities, will take off the Credit of a man, I have Instructions in my Brief of Evidence, of Crimes of this nature, and to this purpose, against Mr.; and we hope that by Law, a Prisonerstanding for his Life is at liberty to give an Account of the Actions and Behaviour of the Witnesses against him. I know the Objection that Mr.makes, a Witness does not come prepared to vindicate and give an account of every Action of his Life, and it is not commonly allowed to give Evidence of particular Actions; but if those Actions be repeated, and a man lives in the Practice of them, and this Practice is continued for several Years, and this be made out by Evidence; we hope no Jury that have any Conscience, will upon their Oaths give any Credit to the Evidence of a Person against whom such a Testimony is given.
We are speaking only, my Lord, to the Credit of Mr., and if we can shew by Evidence that he is so Ill a Man as to be guiltyof those Crimes that we have open'd, according to the Instructions in our Brief; we hope the Jury will not think him fit to be a good Evidence against us in this Matter.
What say you to this, Mr. Attorney.
My Lord, they themselves know that this sort of Evidence never was admitted in any Case, nor can be, for it must tend to the Overthrow of all Justice and Legal Proceedings; for instead of trying the Prisoner at the Bar, they wou'd try Mr.. It has been always deny'd where it comes to a particular Crime that a Man may be prosecuted for, and this it seems is not one Crime or two, but so many and so long continued as they say, and so often practised that here are the whole Actions of a man's Life to be ript up, which they can never shew any President when it was permitted, because a man has no Opportunity to defend himself; any man in the World may by this means be wounded in his Reputation, and Crimes laid to his Charge that he never thought of, and he can have no Opportunity of giving an Answer to it, because he never imagined there wou'd be any such Objection: It is killing a man in his good Name by a Side-wound, against which he has no Protection or Defence. My Lord, this must tend to the preventing all manner of Justice; it is against all common Sense or Reason; and it never was offered at by any Lawyer before, as I believe, at leastwise never so openly, and therefore I wonder that these Gentlemen shou'd do it, who acknowledge, at least one of them did, that as often as it has been offered it has been over-ruled; and I know not for what end it is now offered, but to make a noise in the Court: they know that it is irregular as much as any thing that cou'd be offered.
Indeed, my Lord, if the Prisoner at the Bar had offered this matter it had been excusable; but that Gentlemen of the Long Robe, and who are so well acquainted with the Practice of the Courts of Law, shou'd pretend to do such a thing, is unaccountable. There was somewhat like this that was offered at, but that was by the Prisoner, to prove that onewho was a Witness had two Wives, and they brought a Copy of an Indictment upon which there was no Process; after that they endeavoured to prove him guilty of several Robberies: but all that sort of Evidence was refus'd. I only give them this Instance to shew, that where the Prisoner has attempted it, it has been always rejected: and I am sure they cannot shew me that ever it was allow'd even to the Prisoner himself to give any thing of this kind in Evidence; and this I must say, they can never shew me any one particular Instance when Counsel ever endeavoured to do it before this time.
My Lord, I mentioned the particular Crimes, the Faults which I had in my Instructions to object against the Credit of the Testimony of Captainin Answer to Mr. Attorney's desire, that I would open the particulars of the Evidence, that I would call my Witnesses to the truth of it; I was loth to repeat the words, I think the things themselves so abominable, but we conceive with submission, we may be admitted in this case to offer what we have offered. Suppose a man be a common Lewd disorderly fellow, one that frequently Swears to falshood for his life: We know it is a common Rule in point of Evidence, that against a Witness you shall only give an account of his Character at large, of his general Conversation; but that general Conversation arises from particular Actions, and if the Witnesses give you an account of such disorderly Actions repeated, we hope that will go to his Discredit, which is that we now are labouring for, and submit it to your Lordships opinion whether we may not do it.
Look ye, you may bring Witnesses to give an account of the General Tenour of his Conversation, but you don't think sure that we will try now at this time, whether he be guilty of Robbery or Buggery.
My Lord, we will give you an account that he us'd to have a private Lodging, and come in with his Horse tir'd and several other such things, as that he us'd to go out in Disguises, and the like.
My Lord, I cannot imagine why a man that has been Guilty of any such Crimes and is not taken should be of greater Credit then a man that has been taken and punish'd.
What is that you say, Mr.?
My Lord, I say 'tis the Crime that renders a Man infamous, and I do not know why a man that has had the good fortune not to be taken and punish'd for great Crimes by him committed, should be in a better Condition as to the Credit of his Testimony, then one that is taken and undergoes the punishment of the Law.
Mr.urg'd that as far as it wou'd go, but we are oblig'd it seems, to hear things that have been Over-ruled over and over; but I desire to know of them, whether they can show he has been Guilty of a greater Crime than he has confest himself Guilty of in Court. I mean of the intended Assassination.
No we agree we can't, but pray let us prove him Guilty of as many Crimes as we can.
But, my Lord, I hope you'l keep them to the general Question of the Common ordinary Tenour of his Conversation.
Call Mr., Mr., Mr.,.
Lay your hand on the Book. The Evidence that you shall give on behalf of the Prisoner at the Bar, shall be the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth, So help you God.
Pray will you give my Lord and the Jury an account whether you know Capt.and how long you have known him.
I have known him about 4 year.
What Reputation is he off?
I never knew any hurt by him in my life.
Pray what is your name?
Frederick Milford.
But the name in my Brief is, that is my man.
But you see this man knows him.
Call.
Do you know Capt..
Yes I do.
How long have you known him?
I believe about twenty Years.
Pray will you give my Lord and the Jury an account of his Life and Conversation.
I can say nothing, he was always Civil in my Company, but he was Lewd in his Discourse.
What do you mean by being Lewd in his Discourse?
Why he wou'd be talking very extravagantly.
What do you mean in talking, was it of what he had done himself, Sir?
No otherwise then that he had Whor'd and those kind of things.
What other things beside Whoring?
I Know no other part of it.
Where is?
Call.
Where isand?
There is not a man of them here, Sir.
, Do you know where they are for the Court stays for them.
Indeed I do not, they were summon'd to be hear.
Where is Black?
Black.
Ask him if he be a Christian.
I have ask'd him, and he says he's a Christian. Sworn.
Well what do you ask him.
, Pray give an account of your Master, and of his Life and Conversation.
You are sworn to tell the Truth, Sweet-heart.
I serv'd him almost 8 Years, and he has been a very good Master to me, my Lord.
But what do you know him to be guilty of.
Nothing at all.
I believe they have put in these Men to confirm his Reputation.
Indeed, I think the King's Councel should have called these Witnesses if there had been occasion.
We submit it to your Direction, how far this Evidence will affect him there is nothing said, as we apprehend that will amount to Treason: If the Prisoner has a mind to say any thing himself, we hope your Lordship will please to hear him.
Ay, if he will, let him.
My Lord, Mr.does not say, that I consented to Command any Party.
Is that all you have to say? Then, Gentlemen, will you sum up.
My Lord, we are agreed, we submit to the 
Court on both
sides.