Pray call Mr..
I pray one word, my Lord, before Mr.be sworn, I have heard, my Lord, Mr.hath confessed many Treasons, and I desire to know whether he is pardoned, or no.
I don't know that.
My Lord, how can he be a Witness then?
Swear him: for I know no Legal Objection against him. He was a good Witness in my LordTryal.
My Lord, if another did not except against him, 'tis nothing to me.
Pray give an account to the Court of what you know of a general Insurrection intended in.
What he knows concerning me.
We will take care of that, that no Evidence be given but what ought to be.
Is it ordinary that he should say any thing, unless it be to me and my Indictment?
Mr., you remember in all the Tryals about the late Popish Plot, how there was first a general account given of the Plot inTryal, and so in, and others: I don't doubt but you remember it. And Sir, against whose Judgment, I believe, you won't object, was Attorney at that time.
Mr., What do you know of the general Insurrection lately designed?
My Lord, I have had the honor to know Collonelseveral years; but I don't remember that I ever saw him from the time I came acquainted with any part of the Conspiracy, till the Discovery that was at the Council.
Pray give an account of what you know of the Plot in general.
My Lord, inlast Captaincame to me, and told me that my Lordhad designed an Insurrection in; I used some Arguments to disswade him from it. But a little afterwards he came and told me the thing was wholly disappointed, and then it went off, and my Lordwent for. Collonelafterwards about Christmass said there were some Lords and Gentlemen intended to make an Insurrection, the persons were the Duke of, my Lord of, my Lord, my Lord, the Prisoner at the Bar, and Mr.. After some time he told me they had altered their measures, and were resolved not to venture upon an Insurrection in, till they had a concurrency in. Afterwards I was not privy to any thing else, but what I had the Report of from Mr.and Mr.. Mr.told me the Prisoner had said --
My Lord, I am very unwilling to interrupt the Gentleman --
You must not interrupt the Witness. Go on, Sir.
Mr.told me, the Prisoner at the Bar had sentinto, and given him a sum of mony to bear his Charges, and sent Letters to some Scotch Gentlemen to invite them to Town. The Letter bore a Cant of settling some business in; but the business was coming up about the Insurrection. After this Mr.returned, and some Scotch Gentlemen with him; and soon after Mr.gave an account of that Affair, and said, the Scotch proposed, if they might have thirty thousand pounds in ready money, they would undertake to make an Insurrection inwithout the concurrence of. He said this Proposal was agreed to, and money would be soon ready; and he said, thatwould return the money. That the Arms were ready bought, and my Lord ofwould go into, and head the Scots. He told mewhen things were thus settled, some difference arose about raising the money; and at last he told me, my Lorddid offer to raise ten thousand pounds out of his own Estate, if the rest would pay their proportion. Then the Scots came down to less, but that would not be complyed with. The places for the Rising were. That there had been some Debates whether they should begin at, or the other places; and at last it was resolved, they should begin atwith the rest of the places. My Lord, this was the Account I had of the matter in general of Mr.; but he said they were disappointed. Afterwards he told me the Prisoner at the Bar and Majorwere very instrumental in working of it off, because they could not agree upon the Declaration to be made upon the Insurrection. The English were for a Common-wealth; but the Scotch Gentlemen answered, Fairly it might come to it in time, but the Noblemen there would not agree to it at present. As to the Prisoner in particular I know nothing, and did never speak with him till since the Discovery.
Collonel.
Pray Sir, will you give the Court an account of what you know of any Insurrection intended, and how they designed to carry it on.
My Lord, the latter end of, or beginning of, I was desired by my Lordto go to Mr.to know of the Gentlemen that were met there, what was done about the Rising intended at; and I had their answer, that Mr.had fail'd them, and that it must cease for that time. That was all at that time.
What else do you know of any Insurrection afterwards?
After that we had several meetings at Mr.Chamber, where we had divided the City into twenty parts, and seven parts Mr.had brought an account of; the other thirteen he said nothing of; for he had not spoke with those that were to tell him how many men they would afford. There was there Captain, Mr., the two, Mr., Mr., and my self.
What was the Result of those Debates?
To see what number of men they could produce in the City for the Insurrection.
Was there a Rising designed?
Yes.
And did these people meet?
There was no time set.
When was the meeting?
There were several meetings in, and, and.
After the meeting at?
Yes, a great while. It ceased, I think, six weeks or three months?
Who did you meet with at Mr.?
There was the Duke of, my Lord, my Lord, Sir, Mr., and Mr..
Who did you expect should head this Army?
That was never said any thing of.
Who were to manage the Rising?
We that met there.
Had you no expectation of great men?
Mr.told me, and Mr., that there was a Council, which were the Duke of, my Lord, my Lord, Collonel, Mr., and my Lord, there was Six.
What did he tell you of them six?
He told me they were managing a Business with.
A Business, pray speak plain, tell all you know.
For the Insurrection.
Say so then, we know nothing of the Business you were about.
My Lord, Mr.had that Discourse with my LordI never had; he is more fit to speak to that than me.
Speak your own knowledge, and no more.
After the death of my Lord, who were the Managers, and were to carry it on?
I told you Mr.and Mr.did tell me the Duke of, my Lord--
He told you so before. Do you know there was an Insurrection then intended?
Yes, because we met towards the management of it, the company that met at Mr.Chamber, and other places.
What discourse had you with Mr.about it?
Not about those Gentlemen.
The next thing we shall shew, shall be that the Scotch men came to Town.
My Lord, I must ever put you in mind, whether it be ordinary to examine men upon Indictments of Treason concerning me that I never saw, nor heard of in my life.
I tell you, all this Evidence does not affect you, and I tell the Jury so.
But it prepossesses the Jury.
I ask you in general, what you know of the Rising to have been last Spring?
My Lord, It was some time last Summer Mr.came to me, and brought mePapers numbred on the back-side; I asked him to what end he delivered them me? he told me, One was for my self, and I was to deliver the other Two to whom I could Trust in the two Divisions. I asked him, What was the Design? he said, To Raise Men; sayes I, Do you design a general Insurrection? He said, if he did not, if the King was taken off this would do well; for then People would know how to have recourse to a formidable Body. And I have heard him say, That Collonel, whom I don't know, had a considerable part in the management of that Affair.
We Charge him with Conspiring, and there must be Confederates in the Case. Now then we come to the Prisoner, We will call my Lord, that was one of the Persons that did Consult.
Pray acquaint my Lord and the Jury of your knowledge of what Transactions there have been with the Prisoner about this Affair of the general Rising.
What was he to do?
There was no particular Deed for him, more than to carry a Letter. The Duke ofundertook to bring my Lordhither, because he had a particular dependance upon him, and I think some Relation to his Lady: But to Sirthere was a Letter to be sent under the disguise of carrying on some business of the Plantation in. This Letter I suppose was Writ by my Lord(though I know it not) for he was personally known to my Lord, and I don't know that he was known to any of us. About three Weeks after this, then he was dispatched I suppose.
To what purpose were these Gentlemen to come up?
These were to acquaint us how they foundtempered, and what Opportunites or Advantages there was or might be of putting them into a Commotion, and how Men might be Raised, and how they would fall under, and also to keep Time and Place with us. After this, I was with, when he was going into, and he did take out several, I can't tell how much 'twas, I suppose they might be about, and put them into his pocket (and set me down at my Lodging) which he said were to give; whether he gave it or no, I don't know; and after that he was sent.
Who told you so?
Col., For I was inquiring of him; and he said, he had not heard of him in three Weeks, or but once when he was about. After this, I had occasions that called me into the Country, and there I was. Some time after that, I went to the: And this is all the Account I can give.
Do you know thatdid go?
I know nothing but by hear-say. Col.told me, he was gone, and was upon the Road, and he heard from him about.
Did you understand by the discourse after he was gone, that he went in pursuance of that Debate?
Yes my Lord, That was the whole end of his going.
I think you say, that Gentleman
undertook to send him?
Yes, he did.
Will you ask him any Questions?
I have no Questions to ask him.
Silence -- You know the Proverb. The next step is to shew you my Lord, that these persons came up immediately afterwent down thither; and according to that which was said to be the Shadow and Pretence of their coming hither, they pretended they came aboutbusiness. Sirand Mr..
Pray Sir, give an account whatGentlemen came up lately.
My Lord, About the end of the Spring, or beginning of Summer, as I remember, these Gentlemen Sir, and Commissary, and the twoFather and Son, came up hither. I did not see the Father at all, but I sawthe Son the day of the LordTryal; but the other two, I think I saw a little before the Discovery of the Plot.
What did they pretend they came about?
They pretended they came to make a Purchase in, and I saw their Commission from the Persons said to be concern'd in that Design.
Who do you speak of?
and Commissary.
As soon as the Rumour came of the, What became of those Gentlemen?
absconded, but Commissarynever absconded, and theI heard were seized, changing their Lodging from place to place.
, Will you give myand thean Account what you know of these, their absconding and lying hid.
My, Upon the latter end of, or the beginning of; the beginning ofit was, I was sent for intoupon a discovery of someGentlemen that lay about; and when I came down there, there was the Commonand some others, had been before me, and found them making an escape into a.
Who were they?
, and Sir, and one that was committed to theby the Counsel as soon as brought thither.
We shall end here, my Lord: How long had they been in Town?
They had been in Town some little time.
We have done with this piece of our Evidence. Now to shew that while this Emissary was in, at the same time the(which will be another Overt Act of the Treason) was VVriting a Treasonable. I will call you the VVitnesses. It is all of his own writings.
, Pray will you look upon those Papers, and give my Lord and the Jury an account where you found them.
I had a Warrant my Lord, from theby the King and Council, to seize Mr.Papers; and pursuant to it, I did go to his House, and such as I found there I put up. I found a great many upon the Table, amongst which were these, I suppose it is where he usually writes, I put them in aI borrowed in the House, and that in a; I desired Coll.would put his Seal upon them, that there should be no mistake; he refused, so I took my Seal, and Sealed up the, and it was carried before me to Mr. SecretaryOffice. VVhen thesate, I was commanded to undo the, and I didso, and found my own Seal upon it. And I took the Papers out of theI put them into before.
Waspresent when you seized these Papers?
Yes.
Are these some of those Papers?
Yes, I verily believe it.
In the next place, I think we have some Papers of his particular Affairs which will prove his hand. Call Mr., Mr.and Mr..
Sir, When were they Seized?
Towards the latter end ofmy Lord.
Which?
Last.
Pray will you look upon those Writings
Are you acquainted withhand?
Yes, My Lord.
Is that his hand Writing?
Yes Sir I believe so. I believe all these Sheets to be his hand.
How come you to be acquainted with his hand?
I have seen him write the indorsement upon several Bills of Exchange.
My Lord, I desire you would please to consider this, That Similitude of hands can be no evidence.
Reserve your self till anon, and make all the advantagious Remarks you can.
Have you had any dealing with him?
I never saw him write to my knowledge more than once in my life, but I have seen his Indorsement upon Bills, and 'tis very like that.
Do you believe it is his hand as far as you can guess?
My Lord, It is like what came to me for his Hand-writing.
And you believe it to be his Hand?
Yes.
What say you Mr.?
My Lord, I did never seeWrite, but I have seen several Notes that have come to me with Indorsement of his Name, and we have paid them, and 'tis like to this.
And you were never called to account for mispayment?
No, my Lord.
I pray it may be read. We will read as much as is necessary to prove the Inditement.
I pray it may be all read.
Mr.must have what part he desires read,and you shall have what part you will have read afterwards.
I desire all may be read.
Begin there., There was no Absurdity in this, because it was their own Case.
The latter end, the last sheet of all,35.
The argument runs through the book, fixing the power in the people.
The general revolt of a Nation from its own Magistrates, can never be called rebellion.
37.
The power of calling and dissolving Parliaments is not in the King.
So much we shall make use of; if the Colonel please to have any other part read to explain it, he may.
I do not know what to make of it, I can read it.
Ay, no doubt of it, better than any man here. Fix on any part you have a mind to have read.
I do not know what to say to it, to read it in pieces thus.
I perceive you have disposed them under certain heads: To what heads will you have read?
My Lord, let him give an account of it that did it.
My Lord, we will not delay Colonelfrom entring on his defence, only we have this piece of Evidence to give further. One of his Complices was my Lord, we will give in Evidence his Conviction. We will only ask my Lord, Was your Lordship sworn as a Witness at the Tryal of my Lord?
Yes.
Whether or no, when you met, were there in those debates any reflections upon the King, that he had broken his duty?
Not that I remember.
Why would you rise?
If you mean upon the misgovernment, not personally upon the King?
Ay.
Yes, and principally and chiefly that, which we thought was the general disgust of the Nation, the imposing upon the City at that time.
That was complained of at that time?
Yes, my Lord, We took it all along to be the chief grievance.
Have you any more Witnesses?
Only the Record.
I know there is no time mispent to make things clear. If the Jury have a mind to have the words read again --
If they have a mind, let it.
What will you go to next,?
We have done, unless the Jury desire to have the words of the Libel read again.
My Lord, I desire to know upon what Statute I am Indicted.
My Lord, I will give as plain an Answer, You are Indicted upon the old Statute of 253.
Then I desire to know upon what branch of that Statute?
Why, I will acquaint you, 'Tis upon the first branch of that Statute, for Conspiring and Compassing the Death of the King.
Then I conceive, what does not come within that, does not touch me.
Make what Inferences you please Colonel, we will answer you.
I desire to know what the Witnesses have sworn against me upon that point?
Go on, You have heard the Witnesses as well as we.
He says, You are Indicted upon the Statute of 253. which Statute makes it High Treason to Conspire the Death of the King, and the Overt-Act is sufficiently set forth in the Indictment; now the Question is, whether 'tis proved?
They have proved a Paper found in my Study ofand, that is Compassing the Death of the King, is it?
That I shall tell the Jury. The point in Law you are to take from the Court, Gentlemen: Whether there be Fact sufficient, that is your duty to consider.
That is a point of Fact, Whether there be two Witnesses? I tell you beforehand, one Witness is not sufficient.
Why then there is my Lord, and never another.
Nay, do not make those inferences; I will tell the Jury, if there be not two Witnesses as the Law requires in this Case, they ought to acquit you.
You confound me, I cannot stir. You talk of a Conspiracy; What is a Conspiracy to kill the King? Is there any more Witnesses than one for Levying of War?
'Pray do not deceive your self; You must not think the Court and you intend to enter into a Dialogue. Answer to the Fact; if there be not sufficient Fact, the Jury will acquit you. Make what Answer you can to it.
Then I say, There being but one Witness, I am not to Answer to it at all.
If you rely upon that, we will direct the Jury presently.
Then for Levying War, what does any one say? My Lord, let him if he please, reconcile what he hath said now, with what he said at my LordTrial. There he said, he said all he could; and now he has got I do not know how many things that were never spoken of there. I appeal to the Court whether he did then speak one word of that, that he now says of Mr.. He sets forth his Evidence very Rhetorically, but it does not become a Witness, for he is only to tell what is done and said; but he does not tell what was done and said. He says they took upon them to consider, but does not say what one man said, or what one man resolved, much less what I did. My Lord, If these things are not to be distinguished, but shall be jumbled all up together, I confess I do not know what to say.
Take what liberty you please. If you will make no Defence, then we will direct the Jury presently. We will direct them in the Law, and recollect matter of Fact as well as we can.
Why then my Lord, I desire the Law may be reserved to me, I desire I may have Council to that point of there being but one Witness.
That is point of Fact. If you can give any testimony to disparage the Witness, do it.
I have a great deal to that.
Go on to it then.
Then, my Lord, was there a War Levyed? Or was it prevented? Why then, if it be prevented, 'tis not Levyed; if it be not Levyed, 'tis not within the Statute; so this is nothing to me.
The Court will have patience to hear you; but at the same time I think 'tis my duty to advertise you, That this is but mispending of your time. If you can Answer the Fact, or if you have any mind to put any disparagement upon the Witnesses, that they are not Persons to be believed, do it, but do not ask us Questions this way or t'other.
I don't know what the Book was in answer to. We are not to speak of any Book that Sirwrote, but you are to make your Defence, touching a Book that was found in your Study, and spend not your time, and the Courts time, in that which serves to no other Purpose, than to gratify a luxuriant way of Talking that you have. We have nothing to do with his Book, you had as good tell me again, That there was a parcel of people rambling about, pretending to my L.Ghost, and so we may answer all the Comedies in. Answer to the matter you are indicted for. Do you owne that Paper?
No, my Lord.
Go on then, it does not become us to be impatient to hear you, but we ought to advertise you, that you spend not your time to no purpose, and do your self an Injury.
I say first, 'Tis not proved upon me: and secondly, 'Tis not a Crime if it be proved --
You began very materially in one thing: it is material for you to apply your self to take off the Credibility of myLordthat is a Witness; call your Witnesses to that purpose, or if you have any other point to take away the Credibility of any other Witness.
My Lord, I have seven or eight points of Law.
I hear not one yet.
Why, my Lord, Conspiring to levy war is not Treason, anddesire to have Counsel upon that.
'Tis not a Question. You had as good ask me, whether the first Chapter inbe Law?
My Lord,have neither made war, nor conspir'd to levy war.
You are still in a mistake, you shall not think that we intend to dialogue with you, to let you know how far the proof hath been given or not given, but when we come to direct the Jury, then we shall observe how far the Law requires there should be two witnesses. But whether there be such a proof, that must be left to the Jury.
If you agree the Conspiracy, I will tell you my mind of it; I cannot give you my Opinion in Law, till the Fact be stated.
The Law alwayes arises upon a point of Fact; there can be no doubt in point of Law, till there be a settlement in point of Fact.
My Lord has put you in a right way: The Conspiracy is proved but by one Witness, if you have any thing to take off his Credibility 'tis to the purpose.
Truly, my Lord, I do as little intend to mis-spend my own Spirit, and your Time, as ever any man that came before you. Now, my Lord, if you will make a Concatenation of one thing, a Supposition upon Supposition, I would take all this asunder, and shew, if none of these things are any thing in themselves, there can be nothing joyned together.
Take your own Method, Mr.; but I say, if you are a man of low Spirits and weak Body, 'tis a Duty incumbent upon the Court, to exhort you not to spend your time upon things that are not material.
My Lord, I think 'tis very material that a whimsical imagination of a Conspiracy, should not pass for a real Conspiracy of the Death of the King; besides, if these Papers were found in my House, 'tis a Crime created since my Imprisonment, and that cannot come in, for they were found since. My Lord, if these Papers are right, it mentions 200. and odd Sheets, and these show neither Beginning nor Ending, and will you my Lord, indict a man for Treason for scraps of Paper, found in his House relating to an ancient Paper, intended as innocently as any thing in the world, and piece and patch this to my LordDiscourse, to make this a Contrivance to kill the King: Then my Lord, I think 'tis a Right of Mankind, and 'tis exercised by allstudious men, that they write in their own Closets what they please for their own Memory, and no man can be answerable for it, unless they publish it.
Pray don't go away with that right of mankind, that it is lawful for me to write what I will in my own Closet, unless I publish it; I have been told, Curse not the King, not in thy thoughts, not in thy Bed-Chamber, the Birds of the air will carry it. I took it to be the duty of mankind, to observe that.
I have lived under the Inquisition --
God be thanked; we are governed by Law.
I have lived under the Inquisition, and there is no man incan be tryed for Heresie --
Draw no Presidents from the Inquisition, here, I beseech you Sir.
We must not endure men to talk, that by the right of nature, every man may contrive mischief in his own Chamber, and he is not to be punished, till he thinks fit to be called to it.
My Lord, if you will take Scripture by pieces, you will make all the Penmen of the Scripture blasphemous; you may accuse, of saying, There is no God; and accuse the Evangelists, of saying, Christ was a Blasphemer and a Seducer; and the Apostles, That they were drunk.
Look you, Mr., if there be any part of it, that explains the sense of it, you shall have it read; indeed we are trifled with a little. 'Tis true, in Scripture 'tis said, there is no God, and you must not take that alone, but you must say, the fool hath said in his heart, there is no God. Now here is a thing imputed to you in the Libel; if you can say, there is any part that is in excuse of it, call for it. As for the purpose, whosoever does publish, that the King may be put in chains or deposed, is a Traytor; but whosoever says, that none but Traytors would put the King in Chains or depose him, is an honest man; therefore apply, but don't let us make Excursions.
If they will produce the whole, my Lord, then I can see whether one part contradicts another.
Well, if you have any Witnesses call them.
The Earl of.
Ay, in God's Name, stay till to morrow in things that are pertinent.
I desire to know of my Lord, what my Lordsaid to him concerning the Plot that was broken out.
Concerning this Plot you are now questioned for?
The Plot for which my Lordand I was in Prison.
The Question I am asked, is, what my Lordsaid before the Tryal of my Lord, concerning the Plot; I suppose, this goes as a branch of that he was accused for. I was then in the Country, when the Business was on foot, andused to come to Town a day or two in the Week, living near in, and I understanding the Affliction my Lord ofwas in, I went to give my Lord a Visit, we having been acquaintance of above fifty years standing, and bred together inin. When I came to my Lord of, and had administred that comfort that was fit for one Christian to give another in that distress, I was ready to leave him, and my Lordcame in. It was upon the Friday before my Lordwas taken, he was taken (as I take it) upon Sunday or Munday, my Lordfell into the same Christian Office that I had been just discharging, to compassionate my Lords affliction, to use Arguments to comfort and support him under it, and told him, he was not to be troubled, for he had a discreet, a wife and a vertuous Son, and he could not be in any such Plot, (I think that was the word he used at first, though he gave another name to it afterward) and his Lordship might therefore well expect a good Issue of that business, and he might believe his Son secure, for he believed he was neither guilty, nor so much as to be suspected. My Lord proceeded further, and did say, that he knew of no such barbarous Design (think he called it so in the second place) and could not charge my Lordwith it, nor any body else. This was the effect of what my Lordsaid at that time, andhave nothing to say of my own knowledge more than this; but to observe thatwas present when the Jury did put my Lordparticularly to it: what have you to say to what my Lordtestifies against you? My Lord,think did in three several places, give a short account of himself, and said it was very true, and gave them some further account why he said it, and said, he should be very glad it might have been advantagious to my Lord.
My Lord of,desire to know of my Lord of, what my Lordsaid concerning this Plot and me.
My Lord, a little after Colonelwas taken, speaking of the Times, he said, that if ever he was questioned again, he would never plead, the quickest dispatch was the best, he was sure they would have his Life, though he was never so innocent, and discoursing of the late Primate ofProphesie; for my part, says he,think the Persecution is begun, andbelieve it will be very sharp, buthope it will be short, andsaid,hoped so too.
What answer did your Lordship give to it?
have told you whatknow, my Lord is too full of discourse for me to answer all he says; but for Colonel, he did with great asseverations assert, that he was as innocent as any man breathing, and used great Encomiums in his praise, and then he seemed to bemone his misfortune, whichthought real, for never was any man more ingaged to another, than he was to Colonel,believe. Thentold, they talked ofPapers that were found,am sure, says he, they can make nothing of any Papers of his.
VVhen was this?
This was at my house the beginning of.
How long before my Lordwas taken?
About a week before.
would ask you, my Lord, upon your honour, would not any man have said as much, that had been in the Plot?
can't tell,know of no Plot.
Mr..
VVhat do you ask him.
VVhat you heard my Lordsay concerning this pretended Plot, or my being in it?
My Lord, when the Plot first brake out,used to meet my Lordvery often at my Brothers house, and coming one day from, he asked me, what News? I told him, my Lord, says, there are abundance of people that have confessed the horrid Design of murthering the King, and the Duke. How, says he, is such a thing possible? says, 'tis so; they have all confessed it. Says he, do you know any of their names? yes, says I, I have heard their Names. What are their Names? says he, why, says I, Colonel, and Mr., and oneand others, that are in the Proclamation (I can't tell whetherwas in hold) says he, 'tis impossible such a thing can be; says he, there are in all Countreys, people that wish ill to the Government, and says he, I believe there are some here; but says he, for any man of Honour, Interest or Estate, to go about it, is wholly impossible. Says I, my Lord, so it is, and I believe it. Says I, my Lord, do you know any of these people? No, says he, none of them; only one day, says he, passing through the, a man saluted me, with a Blemish upon his Eye, and he embraced me, and wished me all happiness; says he, I could not call to mind who this man was: but afterwards, I recollected my self, that I met him at my Lord, and heard afterwards, and concluded his name to be -- his at whose house the King was to be assassinated --
.
Ay,. My Lord, Mayask, if my Lordbe here?
He is there behind you.
Then he will hear me. My Lord says, what does your Lordship think of this business? says he,am in a maze; says, if you will be ruled by me, you have a good opportunity to Address to the King, and all the discontented Lords, as they are called; and to shew your Detestation and Abhorrence of this thing; for, says, this will be a good means to reconcile all things. Says he, you have put one of the best Notions in my Head that ever was put. Says, You are a very good Pen man, draw up the firstAddress (andbelieve,was the first that mentioned an Address, you have had many an one since, God send them good success) says he,am sorry my Lord ofis out of Town, he should present it. But says, Here is my Lord, my Lord of, my Lord of, all of you that are disaffected, and so accompted, go about this business, and make the Nation happy, and King happy. Says he, will you stay tillcome back? Ay, says, if you will come in any time; but he never came back whilewas there. The next day,think, my Lordwas taken, andcame and found him at my Brother's House again (for there he was day and night) says he, Cozen, what News? Says, my Lordis sent to the. We are all undone then, says he. Pray, says he, go to my Lord Privy-Seal, and see if you can findam to be taken up, says he,doubt 'tis a Sham-Plot, if it was a true Plot,should fear nothing; says, what do you put me to go to my Lord Privy-Seal for? He is one of the King's Cabinet Counsel, do you think he will tell me?won't go; but says, if you are not Guilty, why would you have me go to inquire? why, says he, becausefear 'tis not a true Plot, but a Plot made upon us, and therefore, says he, there is no man free. My Lord,can say no more as to that time, (and there is no man that sits here, that wishes the King better thando.) The next thingcome to, is this,came the third day, and he was mighty sad and melancholy, that was when Col.was taken: says I, why are you melancholy, because Col.is taken? Says, Col.was a man talked of before, why, you were not troubled for my Lord, that is of your Blood, says he,have that particular Obligation from Col., that no one man had from another.have one thing to say farther,praymay be rightly understood in whathave said.
What, you would have us undertake for all the people that hear you?think you have spoken very materially, andwill observe it by and by to the Jury.
Pray call Doctor.
What do you ask Doctor?
have only to ask Dr., whether after the News of this pretended Plot, my Lordcame to him? And what he said to him?
My Lord, the day after this Plot brake out my Lordcame to see me, and upon some discourse of the Plot, with Hands and Eyes lifted up to Heaven, he protested he knew nothing of any Plot, and believed nothing of it, and said, that he looked upon it as a ridiculous thing.
My Lord,desiremay be called,
desire to know, whether he was not in my House when my Lordcame thither, a little afterwas made a Prisoner, and what he said upon it?
Yes, my Lord, my Lordcame the day after the Colonelwas taken, and he asked me, Where was the Col.? and I said, he was taken by an Order of the King; and he said, oh Lord! what is that for? I said, they have taken Papers; he said, Is some Papers left? yes, Have they taken something more? No, well you must take all the things out of the house, and carry them to some you can trust: I dare trust no body, says he; I will lend my Coach and Coach-man I said, if the Col.will save his Goods; he save them, if not, 'tis no matter. A little after the Lordcame in the House of Col., about eleven a Clock at Night. When he was in,told him, what is this? They talk of a Plot to Kill the King and the Duke, and I told him, they spake of one general Insurrection: andtold him more, thatunderstood that Col.was sent into: when my Lordunderstood that, he said, God knows,know nothing of this, andam sure if the Col.was concerned in the matter, he would tell me something, butknow nothing. VVell my Lord,told him,believe you are not safe in this house, there is more danger here than in another place. Says he,have been a Prisoner, andhad rather do any thing in the World than be a Prisoner again.
Pray my Lord be pleased to tell the Court, if my Lordhas said any thing to you concerning this late pretended Plot, or my being any party in it.
My Lord,wasto come hither, and did not know upon what accompt.am obliged to say, my Lordwas with me presently after the breaking out of this Plot, and before his appearing in that part which he now Acts, he came to me; andtold him, Thatwas glad to see him abroad, and that he was not concerned in this disorder. He said, he had Joy from several concerning it, and he took it as an injury to him, for that it looked as if he were Guilty. He said, he knew nothing of himself nor any body else. And though he was free in discourse, and free to go into any Company indifferently; yet he said, he had not seen any body that could say any thing of him, or give him occasion to say any thing of any body else.
Mr..
Mr., what have you to say to me?
My Lord, I desire you would ask Mr.the same thing, what Discourse he had with my Lordabout this Plot?
Mr., Mr.desires you to tell what Discourse you had with my Lordabout this Plot.
My Lord, I have been for some time very intimate with my Lord, not only upon the account of our Alliance, but upon a strict intimacy and correspondenceof friendship, and I think, I was as much his as he could expect from that Alliance. I did move him during this time, to serve the King upon the most honourable account I could, but that proved ineffectual: I pass that, and come to the business here. Assoon as the Plot brake out, my Lord having a great intimacy with me, expressed a great detestation, and surprizing in himself to hear of it, wherein my Lordassured me under very great Asseverations, that he could neither accuse himself, nor no man living. He told me moreover, That there were certain persons of quality whom he was very much concerned for, that they should be so much reflected upon or troubled, and he condoled very much their condition both before and after they were taken. My Lord, I believe in my Conscience, he did this without any Mental Reservation, or Equivocation, for he had no reason to do it with me. I add moreover, if I have any sense of my Lords Disposition, I think if he had known any such thing, he would not have stood his being taken, or made his Application to the King in this manner, I am afraid not so suitable to his quality.
No reflections upon any body.
My Lord, I reflect upon no body, I understand where I am, and have a respect for the place; but since your Lordship has given me this occasion, I must needs say, That that Reproof that was accidentally given me at the Tryal of my Lord, by reason of a weak Memory, made me omit some particulars I will speak now, which are these, and I think they are material: My Lord upon the discourse of this Plot did further assure me, that it was certainly a Sham, even to his knowledge; how, my Lord, says I, do you mean a Sham? Why, says he, such an one, Cozen, as is too black for any Minister of publick Employment to have devised, but, says he, it was forged by People in the dark, such as Jesuites and Papists, and, sayes he, this is my Conscience; says I, my Lord, if you are sure of this thing, then pray, my Lord, do that honourable thing that becomes your quality, that is, give the King satisfaction as becomes you; pray make an Address under your hand to the King, whereby you express your Detestation and Abhorrence of this thing: says he, I thank you for your Counsel, to what Minister, says he, shall I apply my self? I pitched upon my Lord, and I told him of my Lords desire, and I remember my Lordnamed the Duke of, my Lord of, the Earl of, and he said he was sure they would do it; that he was sure of their Innocence, and would be glad of the occasion: and I went to my L., and told him that my Lord was willing to set it under his hand, his detestation of this Plot, and that there was no such thing to his knowledge. My Lordvery worthily received me, says he, I willintroduce it; but my Lordbeing taken, this was laid aside, and my Lord gave this reason. For, says he, there will be so many People taken, they will be hindred. I must needs add from my Conscience, and from my Heart before God and Man, that if my Lord had spoken before the King, sitting upon his Throne, abateing for the solemnity of the presence I could not have more believed him, from that assurance he had in me. And I am sure from what I have said, if I had the Honour to be of this Gentleman's Jury I would not believe him.
That must not be suffered.
You ought to be bound to your good behaviour for that.
The Jury are bound by their Oaths to go according to their Evidence, they are not to go by men's conjectures.
May I go my Lord?
My Lorddesires he may stay, we shall make use of him.
My Lord, I spake of a Mortgage that I had of my Lord, I don't know whether it is needful to be proved; but it is so.
I confess it.
Then my Lord here is the other point, He is under the fear, that he dare not but say what he thinks will conduce towards the gaining his Pardon; and that he hath expressed, that he could not have his Pardon, but he must first do this drudgery of swearing. I need not say, that his Son should say, That he was sorry his Father could not get his Pardon unless he did swear against some others.
Call Mr.
My Lord, I desire he may be asked, whether my Lorddid not tell him that he could not get his Pardon yet, and he could ascribe it to nothing, but that the drudgery of swearing must be over first.
My Lord, I am very sorry I should be called to give a publick account of a private Conversation, how it comes about I don't know. My Lord sent for me about six Weeks ago, to come and see him. I went and we talked of News, I told him I heard no body had their Pardon; but he that first discovered the Plot, he told me no; but he had his Warrant for it. And, says he, I have their Word and Honour for it; but says he I will do nothing in it till I have further order, and says he, I hear nothing of it, and I can ascribe it to no other reason; but I must not have my pardon till the drudgery of swearing is over. These words my Lord said, I believe my Lord won't deny it.
'Tis a hard case they don't appear, One of them was to prove that my Lordsaid he could not have his Pardon till he had done some other Jobs.
I can't help it, If you had come for assistance from the Court I would willingly have done what I could.
Calland
I ask you only, what my Lordsaid to you at my House concerning the Plot, and my being in it?
Sir he said, that he knew nothing of a Plot he protested, and he was sureknew nothing of it. And he said If you knew any thing of it, he must needs know of it, for he, knew as much of your concerns as any one in the World.
Did he take God to Witness upon it?
yes.
Did he desire my Plate at my House?
I can't tell that, he said the Goods might be sent to his House.
What did my Lordsay in your hearing concerning the pretended Plot, or my Plate carrying away?
When he came he asked for your Honour; and they said your Honour was taken away by a man to the Tower for the Plot, and then he took God to Witness he knew nothing of it, and believed your Honour did not neither. He said he was in the Tower two years ago, and your Honour, he believed, saved his Life.
Did he desire the Plate?
Yes, And said it should be sent to his House to
be secured. He said it was only Malice.