Do you know Mrs.?
Give an Account of her.
She is the Daughter ofDeceased, who left his Estate to Dr.and my self, to be sold for payment of his Debts and Legacies, and left the surplusage to his Daughter, which is about 2000
What Lands has she?
She has 20a Year.
What Age is she of?
She is near Eighteen.
Was she ever Married, or no?
She was unmarried.
My Lord, I beg the favour that only one Witness be heard at a time.
Mrs., Do you know Mrs., and Mrs.?
Yes, I do.
Have they lodged at your House?
Yes.
How long?
Above three Years.
Have you any knowledge of Mrs.?
Yes.
How came you acquainted with her?
One Mrs.came to me to know whether I took Boarders? I said, I had taken some, but would take no more, unless it were the same Ladies again.
Who was it came to you?
One Mrs..
Mrs.speak out that my Lord may hear you.
Did Mrs.lodge with you?
Yes my Lord, we were very intimate before, and since it pleased God to take away her Husband, I was pleased with her, and very willing to take her into my House.
Acquaint his Lordship how Mrs.came to you.
Yes, my Lord, as near as I can. She came to me and ask'd me, If I took Boarders? I told her No, I would take none except it were those Ladies I had before, She told me she had an Acquaintance that was a Widow Lady that came out of, about a Suit of Law, and would be in a very sober Family near a Church; but however I deny'd her Lodgings, and did expect to hear no more of her; but about three Weeks or a Month after she came to me again, and asked me whether I had altered my Resolution?
Go on.
My Lord, Mrs.said, that the Lady was come to Town on theNight before, very much Indisposed in her Journey. I asked her whether she knew thisor no. Mrs.said Yes, she was very Intimate in the Family, and she said a great deal more of her, which I cannot remember. She said also, that she would have Boarded her her self, and would have been glad of her Company if she had had Conveniences for her. Then she asked me, whether she should come her self and give her own Character? We thought no harm, she being a Woman, and not a Man. She further said, that Mrs.had been a Maid whom I knew, and she believed she would take her. I enquired of another who lived in the, if he knew Mrs., he said Yes, and that she came of a good Family. At length she came and made a very modest Appearance in her Behaviour and Garb. She said to me, that I was very curious in taking Boarders, and for that she liked me the better. I consented she should come. She asked me what I would have a Week? I told her twelve Shillings for her self and ten Shillings for her Maid. She concluded to come on thefollowing, which she did with her Maid, a modest Girl and a Neighbour, which gave me the more Encouragement. She carried her self very well tillat Night, when we heard of her New Brother; she seem'd Elevated at the News, and fell into Convulsion Fits, which I believed were real Fits. She said she had a dear Brother, a good Christian, and he would come on the Morrow; when he came he brought two Gentlewomen with him, very Modest, which I never saw before, nor since. Mrs.made a Pot of Coffee, and sent for a Bottle of Wine, and she told her Brother before me, what good Lodgings she had, and said she wished he would come andLodge near them, for she knew he had but a puney Stomach, and believed he would like her Victuals; he said it was not convenient for him because his Business called him every Day to the Change; she said also there was a Bowling Green near them, where he might divert himself, but all would not do. She asked me what I would have a Meal if her Brother should come at any time. I said, when I had other Ladies, if any of their Friends came I had twelve Pence a Meal of them. Onhe came. I went to Church, and left them together at Cribbage, as I found them at my return.
What Day of the Week was this?
Thebefore the Sacrament: Mrs.said to Mr., before Mrs., you have an extraordinary hand at making Punch, so they agreed to make a Bowl thefollowing; but Mrs.hardly drank any, she not liking any strong Liquors. After this, she told me, her Brother was very ill of his Journey, being lately come out of the Country, tho' I don't understand he was in't. ThebeforeDay we were at Dinner with two more than our Family, when Mrs.said, she had an Interest in aShip, and invited us all Aboard; but he,Mr., did not come to our House till four Days after; but onwe concluded to go on; there were Eight of us in Company in all, Mrs., Mrs., I and my Daughter. and Mr.another Lodger, belonging to the Exchequer; we went, and had much Discourse; after having drank a Glass of Wine the Cloth was laid, and the Master offered a Bowl of Punch; says Mr.,.
Is this Person Mrs.Brother?
This is he that went for her Brother.
Whereabouts is your House?
Near.
This Mrs.came to you under the Character of a Country Lady on a Law Suit; do you understand that she was so?
My Lord, she said she came from the.
You misapprehend the Question, Do you understand that her pretence was true or not?
I enquired of several Persons who acquainted me that thelived in; but it was not long before we began to suspect her, for there seemed to be an extraordinary Love between her and, more than is usual between Brother and Sister. I said, Madam, I wonder you don't marry your Brother. She said, she thought that 'twas not lawful. I said there was such a thing done in, of a Mans marrying two Sisters.
Pray call to mind what time it was that you first gave notice to her that she should not continue in your Lodgings.
When I first mistrusted her, I gave notice of it in my Family; but we being all Women, and fearful of her, thought not fit to give her warning till her Month was up; but before that, she came to me, and told me, and said, Mrs., I have received a Letter from my Sisterin the Country, which informs me, that the Trustees will agree, and so I design to return when my Month is up, for this Town is very chargeable. Very well said I, for I expect some Ladies very shortly. I went down to my Family and exprest my Joy to them, and said, I was very glad Mrs.had prevented me, for if she had not given me warning, I would have given her Warning, for I resolved she should not stay.
Mrs., it seems you had notice of Mrs.ill Carriages; Did you take any notice of it to her self?
No, I did not, but I gave the Maid notice as soon as I suspected any thing.
Do you know whether the Maid had told any thing to her or not?
The Maid said to her, Madam, Don't you see a strangeness in the Family? Yes, said she, I can see and bear a great deal, but when I am rouzed I'll be like a Lion.
How long was this before Mrs.was taken away?
I can't prefix the time, but it was before she gave me warning.
Was she gone from your House before this thing happen'd.
No, my Lord, she told me onthat her time was out; but said, there is a Fellow in Town that I fear will cheat me, and I am taking out a Statute of Bankrupcy against him, which I think will cause me to stay in Town a Week longer; she also told me, she had taken a place in the Coach to go on, but must lose her Earnest, for this Business would detain her a Week longer.
Did you ever observe they were together in private?
No, my Lord, we never had any suspition of Mr., but of the Woman; for she could put on all manner of Disguises.
Mrs., pray do you know Mrs.?
Yes, I do.
How came you first acquainted with her?
My Brotherwas one of her Guardians, and put her under the Care of my Husband, while he was living, which was four Years ago this. She came to us by the consent of her Guardian.
At what place did you Lodg?
We lived in, but since my Husband died, which is three Years last, I left House-keeping, and then we went and lodg'd at Mrs..
How long have you continued at Mrs.?
We have continued there ever since.
Do you know Mrs.?
Yes, I do, she lodg'd at Mrs..
Was there any body who used to come to her there?
None except aWoman.
Do you know any thing of Mr.?
Sir, The first of his coming to Mrs.was the Day afterDay. Mrs.said, that she had a Brother that was to come to Town, which he did the Day after, with two Gentlewomen, which I never saw, either before or since; but Mr.after this came several times to her as her Brother, her Sisters Husband, and she desired that he might Dine with her sometimes; for which she agreed with Mrs.at 12Meal.
Was this Mrsat any time in private with?
Never that I know of in all my Life, we were always in Company together when he Dined there, and the times that he Dined there, we computed to be 9 or 10, he was there sometimes when we were not at home.
How did Mrsbehave her self when she was at Mrs?
We thought very well of her, till at last we discerned too much freedom between Mr.and her self, we suspected her Vertue, and thought she would Drink, and were informed she would Swear, she said she must stay in Town about a month or 6 weeks about a Suit of Law, her Maid told her of the strangeness of the Family, she said they had best be Civil, or else she would stay and plague them. She toldat length the Town was chargeable, and her Business done, and that she would return into the Country.
What do you know concerningbeing taken away?
Mrsknowing it was our custom to go to, everymorning, she came and told us she had occasion to go to, and that being in the way, she invited us to go with her in the Coach, and she would set us down at or near the Chappel. When we came to, somebody bid the Coach man stop, I expected she should set us down as she promised, on that side where I sat there were old Buildings and as I was looking out, I heard Mrscry out to the Coach man drive on, and all of a sudden I saw a man in the Coach, which wasthe Bayliff, Mrsand I were in a very great fright knowing nothing: I said for God's sake let's come out, we are not concerned,said we were the persons that he came for, I begg'd of him to let us come out,had his Arms about Mrsside, and said, 'tis this Lady and you that I am concerned about. I ask'd him what it was, said he, let you and I have two or three words together, and all will be well enough. I said, you don't think I will say any thing to you, unless I have my Friends by me, Mrsin the Coach, said no Madam be sureyou don't. I could not tell what he would do with us, at length he carried us all to the Star and Garter Tavern in, I press'd him to let us go to, for I had Friends there.was very angry, and would hear nothing of it, when we came to, Mrswou'd have had us put on our Masks. I said I had done nothing amiss, and I wou'd not; when we were in the Room at the Tavern, Mrshastn'd out of the Room as fast as she cou'd pretending to go for my Friends, Mrsand I were in a great consternation, wondring what they would do with us, I took hold of her Arm and told her I would live and dye with her. The Bayliffs came in and said she was their Prisoner, and took her by violence from me, they told me she must go with them, for they said she was Arrested by a Writ out of one Court, and I by one out of another, when she was going I put my Head out of the Window, and cry'd Murder, Murder several times, when I pull'd in my Head again,said what have you got by your Bawling, and said they were better known there then I, they brought a Man to me who said he had Orders to keep me, and that he had only a Crown for his pains, but he would not suffer me to send for any body. The Gentlewoman of the House came up, and said I had done a diskindness to her House by crying out Murder, she said to me look and see whether your Name be spelt right, for it may be a false Arrest,that went away with Mrscame back again, and said the young Woman was well, and that he left her eating Fowl and Bacon, I said I wish she was well. The Gentlewoman of the House bid the Bayliff shew me the Writ, he said he cou'd not read well, but there was the name ofat the Suit of one, but when he heard my complaints a considerable while, he said he would go to my Friends, and would go as cheap as a Porter and as soon. I sent him to Mrand Mr, he pretended to go but return'd no more till night.
You said you cry'd out Murther, how did Mrsbehave her self then?
It was her great fright and crying that made me endeavour her rescue, when we said we wou'd dye together, then it was when they forc'd her from me, the surprize was so great that made me cry out after that manner that I did, upon which some Neighbours came in, but they told them it was an Arrest, and therefore they wou'd not meddle in it.
Mrs, they kept you till night you say, did they take or require Bail for you before you was discharged.
I'll tell you Sir, if you please, I did not know what I was Arrested for, it might be Murder or Treason for ought I knew, there was a little Boy by, said Madam I know Mr, your Friend in, and I'll go for him, he went, but when he return'd again, he said he was not at home, which I thought was a lye, there was a poor man a Labourer working in the Chimney, he gave me a whink, and said Madam I'll go for him; but I said to him pray don't leave me, I began to be affraid, for I did not know how my life might be concern'd. Said the little, Boy I'll go any where for you, I sent him for two Gentlemen who came, the Bayliffs said they had an Action of 200against me, the Gentlemen told the Bayliffs they were come to bail me. The Bayliffs were very impudent, but shuffl'd about, a while and left me and took no further notice.
Did they take any Bail for you.
No they left me with these Gentlemen
When you went out in the Morning, did you design to go any where else but to Chappel.
No where else.
Was it your invitation to Mrs, or her invitation to you to go in the Coach.
It was Mrs.invitation to me, I had not a very good opinion of Mrsfor we suspected her Virtue in the Family, by reason of her too familiar carriage to her Brother, but being to go shortly away, I apprehended no harm.
Did Mrsgo with you.
She did.
Mrs, do you know the Prisoner, is this the Man that came to MrsHouse.
Yes Sir.
How long was it from the time that you were parted after Arresting, that you saw Mrsagain.
The first time after was on, when they were before the Recorder.
When did you find her.
Onin the Afternoon.
Was you at the finding?
No my Lord.
What time was it
About Noon I believe.
When you saw her put into the Coach, did you hear her cry out?
No Sir, it was I that cry'd out.
Did Mr.make any entertainments or no?
But one as I know of.
have you done,
I think so.
If you have, I'll ask you a question, did you know of any Love between Mrsand me.
Did you know any thing of Love between Mrsand the Prisoner or no?
No my Lord.
Pray did you know?
Yes.
Was you her Servant?
Yes, Sir.
Who recommended you to her?
Mrs.
Do you know one Mr?Yes, my Lord, there he is,
Did you ever see him before you were hired to your Mistress.
no my Lord, I never saw him before.
Did you see him, when you was with your Mrs.
Yes my Lord.
Do you know whether there was any Relation between them?
Yes, my Lord, they went for Brother and Sister.
How long was you with her.
About a Month.
How did she behave her self?
Till the last of her time, very well, but the Family had a mistrust of her long before she went away.
Do you know the Reason why they mistrusted her?
I do not know my Lord.
Do you know what was the cause the Family mistrusted her?
They thought her a loose sort of a Woman and therefore they mistrusted her.
Did they discern any Familiarity betwixt them?
No more than as Brother and Sister.
After this Suspicion, do you know whether the Family exprest any Resentment?
No, my Lord.
Did you live with her when Mrswas taken away?
Yes my Lord, but I went away the next day.
Mrs, pray was you present when the Prisoner was taken up, and do you know whether he and Mrswere Brother and Sister.
I went to Mrhimself, and said is this wicked Woman your Sister? Says he, I cannot say she is, but I have made her my Tool, and she has done my business, and I would get rid of her to morrow, but that beingI will not, but onI'll give her a reward for what she has done, and then I'll discharge her, and never see her more.
Relate what discourse you had with him to the Gent. of the Jury.
I asked Mrwhether Mrswas his Sister, he said no, she is not my Sister, but I have gained my end in making her a Tool to my Dear Wife, I'll gratify her for what she has done and put her away onand never see her more.
I think you lodged in the House with her?
No, but I was a Neighbour, and was very frequently there.
Did you see any thing to cause you to mistrust that there was any thing more then ordinary betwixt them.
No cause at all that I know of.
Mrpray do you know Mrs?
Yes, Sir.
How long have you known her?
About 12 years.
Pray is she a Country Lady that has got a good Joynture.
I know nothing but that she works for her Living.
Hath she any Estate in the Country?
None as I know of.
Do you know the Prisoner at the Bar?
Yes, Sir, where did he lodge at any time?
He lodged at my house.
How long?
About 6 or 7 months.
Where is your House?
In.
What other Lodgers had you at the same time?
I had a Parliament man Lodged with me at the same time.
VVhere didlodge.
In the opposite Room against the Gentleman.
How long time?
About 7 months.
How long wasgone from your House before this matter happened?
About 5 or 6 weeks.
How long before?
I cannot certainly tell, but much about that time.
VVhen they were in your House, what did you see betwixt them.
Nothing of any harm, as I know of.
Mr.did you never see any harm by Mrs.
Not as I know of.
Do you know whether she lay in at your House?
I know not, for ought I know she might, I know nothing of VVomens lying in.
VVere you one of the Bayliffs that Arrestedand.
I was the Man that Executed the Marshals Court VVrit and Arrested them.
VVho employed you?
.
VVere you atHouse?
My Lord I'l tell you the truth of the matter, onbefore they were Arrested,, was at my House to see for me, but being not at home, but in the Country, I came home about a 11 at Night, My Daughter said to me there was a VVrit left byfor me to be served and it must be done to morrow morning, on the morning he came to me and saidwill you Execute a Writ, he carried me to the Mitre Tavern and called for a Pot of Ale and a Bottle of VVhite VVine, and we had a Toast and some Cheese, while I was there onecame in, a man that I had never saw in all my life, and said the business cannot be done this day.
VVhat day of the week was this?
, heappointed me to call upon him at 9 next morn. He said if I came first we shou'd get what we had before, he came in before we had done, and the man of the House was dressing himself in the Kitchin; we eat a Tost, and drank the VVine, and after that we had another.call'dout, and said it cannot be done, by and by he said it might be done, I don't know what it was, but they took me tostreet,andwas with me, I was asham'd to stand in the street, so I went into an Alehouse, and drank a single pot of drink.
Had you seenbefore that morning?
No, I never saw him before in all my life; At that, if't please your Honour,andwent before, and bid me follow the Coach, I did so as near as I cou'd, but cou'd not keep pase with the Coach, being lame, but atGroundstopp'd the Horses, and then I came up to the Coach, andI suppose gave the word of Arrest, and into the Coach he went, but I did not go in because there was no room, but rid behind it; the Coach was order'd to go to the Star and Garter Tavern in, when we came there we went into a back room, and the Gentlewoman that had a Band-box said toI will go to some of your Friends.
VVhat did they do inGrounds?
They were Arrested there, the Gentlewoman was carry'd byto his House, and I follow'd them, but meeting with a Gentlewoman of my acquaintance, she stopp'd me, when I came toHouse, where is she said I, they told me she was below Stairs, I said I had a little business elsewhere that will detain me about an hour, he gave me leave to go; VVhen I went outcall'd me over the way, and ask'd me ifwas at home, I said yes, and is the young Gentlewoman there to? I likewise said yes. He led me to the 5 Bells instreet; into a room where there were three boxes, and carry'd me to the middlemost box, and there was a Gentleman.
VVas it the Prisoner at the Bar?
Yes, I think so, at thatfill'd me a full Glass, which I drank off, and I told him I was going to do some business in, and when I had done that I went toHouse again, I enquir'd for the Gentlewoman,said her Husband was gone along with the Gentlewoman toto make an end of the matter. I askt her whereabout, she said at the Vine Tavern, I went thither and ask'd for, there was he andand a Tallow Chandler going to eat Stakes, they invited me to eat some with them, which I did,came into the room two or three times, then Mrtold me I was discharg'd of my Prisoner, so away I went.
You were eating Stakes you say at the Vine Tavern, was she there then?
There is a Court against the Tavern, and I saw the Gentlewoman looking out of the Vine Tavern, where there were new Sash windows, as I came over the way thro the Court this Gentlewoman look'd out of the Window.
VVhat, before you went in?
Yes my Lord, but I went in and saw him alone, but knew not whom he was.
Did you seethere?
No not at the Tavern.
VVhentook away this Gentlewoman, did she go away quietly, or didand she make any outcry?
She was a little frighted.
VVhere was it you first saw?
At the 5 Bell Tavern.
When was it you saw him there?
about 12 a Clock.
Where was it he gave you the pot of Drink?
at the 5 Bells, but it wasthat gave it me.
How many were there in Company there?
Onlyand.
What was the occasion ofyour going?
call'd me.
When was it you saw him out of the Window?
about an hour and qr after.
What answer did you give when they ask'd you where the Gentlewoman was?
I said she was at.
You said you serv'd a Writ on, had you no Process against?
No, none at all.
On what account did you keep?
I did not keep her, but onewas employed to do it.
You came back todid not you say that you had been with the young Gentlewoman, who was eating Fowls and Bacon?
ask'd me to eat some.
Did not you shewa Writ and read it to her?
I cou'd never read a King's Bench Writ.
Can you read a Marshals Court Writ?
Yes but not the Latin of it.
When you went toat the Vine Tavern did you ask for.
Yes, Yes, I ask'd where she was They told me they were making an end of it. My Lord I had like to have forgot, I asked where was the Prisoner andtold me they had just made an end of the business.
Give an account to his Lordship after what manner you were Arrested and carried from Tavern to Tavern.
My Lord I was Arrested with Madamand carried to the Star and Garter Tavern in.
How were you carried thither?
I was in a Coach going to, when 3 Bayliffs were about the Coach.
Where did they carry you?
They carried us to the Star and Garter in.
Who did they carry with you?There was,and I, andthe Bayliff, when we came to the Star and Garter they forced me up Stairsinto a Back Room, but we got into a forward room, but we had not been there long till they partedand I;was gone, for our Friends as she pretended. I was in a very great Fright, butsaying we will dyetogether they took me by force from her;swore a great Oath and thrust me down Stairs and forced me out of a Back-door into an Alley, when he went to put me intoa Coach I cry'd out Murder, then he threatn'd to put me into, he carry'd me to his House, and no body came to help me a great while, butsaid that as she was going by the Door she heard my Name, and came in, in a mighty Fright; she said to me Madam I pity you, will no body Bail you? she told me I will send to my Brother who shall be Bail for you, she sent for him, he came into the Room, and he said what is the matter with you, I said enough is the matter when I am Arrested for 200and owe no man a penny. Said he in a Jacose way what makes you affrighted at that, I have a good mind to Arrest you my self. Then they took me thence to the Vine Tavern in, where I was an hour or two before I heard any thing of Marrying or any such thing.
What did they do with you all that time?
They got a Dinner ready, and after we had Dined, she begged of me to have her Brother, and said that if I did not marry him, I should be ruined, I told her I would do nothing without the advice of my Friends. I desired my Friends to be sent for, but they would not admit it. She looked on my Ring on my Finger, and said let me see your Ring from your Finger. I said no, you shall not. She said I will force it off. I said I'll try that, but she forced it from me.
Remember you are upon your Oath.
I know I am. When she took my Ring away, I askt her what she would do with it, she said she should go and get a Wedding Ring made by it. I told her I would not marry without the advice of my Friends. Away she went and bought a Ring, and came up again and said to her Brother, she had a Ring; well said I give me my Ring and do what you will with the other; she said if I did not marry her Brother I should be ruined for ever. There was a Minister in the House, whom they said had been there about a quarter of an hour but I supposed longer, they brought him with the Clerk up Stairs; the Parson saying I hear there is a couple to be married, he asked no Questions, but told me if I did not marry this Gentleman, I should be sent toand ruined for ever.
Give an account of what was after buying the Ring.
When they brought the Ring, they said to me will you be marryed or no? I answered I will not, there are none of my Friends here, and I will not marry without the consent of my Friends they said if I did not I should be ruined for ever, so with many Threats and Perswasions, they at last prevail'd with me to marry. I was forced to marry him out of Fear, not of going to, but of being murdered.
Where did they carry you?
ToHouse in,.
What time of the day was it?
I cannot give an exact account; but I think it was Candle-light.
It was about 12 a Clock at noon.
What time was it that you were marry'd?
My Lord it was about 3 a Clock.
When you went tohouse, who was with you there?
None but Mr, Mrsand I.
Was there any Force or Threats us'd when you were atHouse?
Yes, there was my Lord.
Give an account of it.
They thrust me up Stairs, and order'd to have a Bed sheeted. Mrssaid to me undress and go to Bed. I said I wou'd not. She said she wou'd pluck my Cloaths off my back. I said she shou'd not. She told me she wou'd pluck off my Cloaths and make me go to Bed.
What did she do with you?
She put me to Bed.
Did she use any violence with you?
Such violence that made me go to Bed.
How came you to be released?
It wasmorning before I was releas'd, there was some of my Friends came to the place where I was.
Then you were with him all night?
Yes, my Lord.
Mrwill you ask her any Questions?
She must be my chiefest Evidence my Lord, when the Witnesses come she must be the chiefest of them.
You will not ask her any Questions now, but when the Witnesses are call'd
My Lord I presume she does not go out of the Court.
We have done with our Evidences at present.
MrWhat do you answer to the Evidence.
My Lord I am very much unprepar'dfor a Tryal at present.
Why so?
Because I had but little time for preparation, and I am not prepar'd, I desire that I may be allow'd Council.
No, no, it cannot be allow'd you, and as for the time of your Tryal you were told, if you would shew good cause to have it put off yet, the Court would have done it.
Then I hope if I speak any thing that may be prejudicial to my Cause, that the Court will not take advantage from it. The first time I was at Mrs, I was desired by Mrsand Mrsto make a Bowl of Punch, which I did, and we were very Merry over it, then I invited them to go on Board a Ship, which they all did, and we in a short time came very well acquainted. My Lord, I desire my Wife might stand by her self, and none of them near her.
There is none near her that will hurt her.
My Lord I beg she may stand by her self, that I may have a fair Tryal, I pray your Lordship to grant me this favour. My Lord will you please to grant it?
Must I grant it only for your humour?
'Tis not a humour, my Lord, but of a great consequence to me, will your Lordship grant me it? I beg it, my Lord, for 'tis the most material thing I have to ask, I beg all those people may be removed from her, 'tis the greatest and most material thing I have to say.
I'm sorry for it?
It is so, good my Lord grant me that.
There's no body near her, that concerns you at all.
There are those by her that will do me no kindness.
My Lord her standing there is enough to disorder her.
My Lord she is very well.
Remove her a little further.
My Lord he does on purpose to fright her.
We went (as I was telling your Lordship) aboard a Ship, and they invited me to come the Week following to partake of a Treat, accordingly I went, and there was one Mr., and he and I made a Bowl of Punch. Mr.at that time Courted Mrs., and that little time I was acquainted with her I discerned she had a Kindness for me, as I had for her; I told her I could not be easie while she suffred Mr.to Kiss her; she desired me to be easie and it should be remedied.
Mrs.. Do you remember any such thing?
My Lord, I do not remember any such thing, or that any such Words ever came out of my Mouth.
Did not you say this Mrs., Mrs.I should say, did not you say, If I would not sit by you you would not eat a bit or a crumb; when I sat by you and proffered my place to another, can you say you were not offended?
No, I was not.
Are not you upon your Oath, did not you give me some Encouragement?
I do not know how I could shew it you, I know not of any such thing.
You ought to speak the truth because his Life depends upon it. Did you in the first place ever admit of his Courtship in order to Marry you?
No, my Lord, I don't remember any such thing.
Did you ever shew any kindness to him upon any such account?
No, I don't know I shew'd him any more kindness than all the rest of the Family shewed him.
Was you ever in his Company alone.
No, my Lord.
To give me more Ease and Satisfaction after Dinner we had our Bowl and Walnuts, Mrs.pilled the Kernels and gave them to me; she gave them faster than I could eat; she heaped my Plate with them, every one at the Table took notice of it, and she jogged me with her Knee, that I should take them, and gave some to Mrs., and bid her take them and give to me.
Mrs., Were you there?
Yes, my Lord.
Did you see any thing of this kind?
No, my Lord.
Will your Lordshipplease to ask her your self?
Mrs., did you e'er give pilled Walnuts to him, or send them to him in particuler?
No, my Lord, I do not know that I was more kind to him than the rest of the Company.
Every Body took notice of it, and Mrin particular.
What do you say Mr.?
My Lord, Mrif he were here would say the same as I do. He was afraid I should get away his Lady.
Where is he?
He is in the Court.
You may have him for a Witness if you will
More than this, before he went away she told him she did not care for him; this she spoke to make me more easie still: This I believe Mr.can Witness, in as much as Madamcomplain'd to her about it, at Mr.the Picture Drawers, who is one of my Evidences, I desire he may be called.
Well, let him be called.
Hear ye, he calls you to be a Witness, you are not to be upon your Oath, but are under the highest Obligation to tell the Truth.
While I was drawing a Gentlewomans Picture, Mrs., there was a Fire, it began to be Cold, they fell into Discourse about Mr.and Mrs.; Mrs.was there at the same time, they fell into Discourse about Mr.and the young Lady.
Was she there?
Yes.
Where was it?
At my Lodgings, there were Mrs., the young Lady, and Mrs..
Whose Picture were you drawing?
Mrs., They fell into Discourse relating to a matter of Love, between Mr.and the young Lady. She said the young Lady had a Love for Mr., more than the other.
You heard her say so?
No, but I can say Mrs.said so.
But tell us what you heard.
She should have said so, I did not hear her my self, but afterwards upon a Discourse she said afterwards, what she had said she would stand to.
What did she say?
I do not know that she said so or not.
My Lord, may I speak it as well as I can, he cannot speakright, I'll speak it to him, my Lord.
No, no. Did you hear Mrs.say any thing? What did she say?
In way of Discourse she said so.
What, in way of Discourse, did she say nothing?
I heard the Lady only say that Word, that all she had said she would stand to.
What did you hear them talk about?
They were playing at Cards, and she took up the Tricks of Mr., which discovered Love.
The Question is, whether you did hear them speak any thing of Love, or not?
My Lord, he would speak better with an Interpreter.
Let an Interpreter be called for.
What Country-man are you?
My Lord, he is a.
he's none of my Country, he is a, I don't understand him.
He speakswell enough.
Very well, but he knows not where he begins, he would say what Mrsand Mrs.were speaking, but knows not how to utter himself.
He cannot say any thing for you.
I heard but a few Words, and cannot say much of it.
You must have a better Witness, or you are in a dangerous Condition.
My Lord, Mrcomplained to Madam, that she slighted him very much.
What, for Love of you?
Yes, my Lord, I could tell you of divers things that pass between Lovers, that would be impertinent for me to relate to wise Men.
Let us hear some of them.
When we were by our selves, she kissed me, and squeezed me by the Hand, when we walked privately in the Garden.
Did she kiss you?
Yes, My Lord and squeez'd me often.
Did you not think her very coming?
Yes, I did, and when we talk'd of Marriage, she seemed to be very well pleased.
Mrs., you hear what he says. Did you Squeeze him by the Hand, and Kiss him? Is it true?
No, my Lord, I did no such trick, not I, and as for walking in the Garden, I did not walk in the Garden alone with him.
I could mention a great many of these little things, but if she denies them I cannot help it. My Lord, the last time I was at the House we had a Barrel of Oysters. I stood with my Hands behind me, and as she passed by at any time, she gave me Squeezesby the Hand.
What say you to this Mrs.?
My Lord, I did not do so upon my Oath.
She says she did not do it upon her Oath.
Now for the Matter of Fact; as for the Arrest I never knew any thing of it directly or indirectly, till I saw her at the Bayliffs House.
If she did know any thing of, or was consenting to the Arrest, why did you force her to the Tavern, and Marry her with a Parson you had provided for that purpose?
She Married me with as much Freedom as could be in a Woman.
What say you to that Mrs.?
Will your Lordship please to ask her whether I offered any Violence to her either by Word or Deed.
Mrs., give an Account how you were carried from the Bayliffs House.
My Lord, when I was atthe Bayliffs House, Mrs.pretended to come accidentally by, and that she heard my Voice, and came in, and said,Rawlins? You know how I do, said I. She pretended to help me, and proposed to go to her Brother to Bail me, and he came, and I was carried from thence in a Coach to theTavern. --
Yes, he did.
Did you cry out when they put you into the Coach?
No my Lord, I did not cry out then, I made no noise then.
What did he do then?
They carry'd me to thea Prisoner.
She went willingly enough fromHouse to the, because she thought that there she should be bailed.
Mrs. What was the pretence of your being carried fromHouse?
My Lord, They would not tell me before they carry'd me to the place.
Mr., Will you ask any other Questions?
Not yet, my Lord. I desire the Parson may be called that Marry'd us.
Come Dr. You are not upon your Oath; How come you to be concern'd in this Match.
My Lord, It was at thewhere I saw them in.
Was it the, or the?
The, I believe, my Lord,
How came you there?
There was a Gentleman fetch'd Me and the Clerk from the.
What to do?
He said there was a Gentleman there to speak with us; When we came there, the Clerk and I went up one Pair of Stairs and Drank a Pint of Wine. Then we were led into another Room, I asked him what I was to do. He told me for to Marry him to that Young Gentlewoman.
Was there a License?
Yes; When I saw the License I read it, and saw it a true License; Then I asked the Gentlewoman her Name, to know whether it was the same that was in the License; and found it was the same.
Was it Written in the License that the Marriage was to be performed at the?
No my Lord, But a Blank was left.
Did you take the Queen's Duty?
No my Lord, But returned their Names to the Supervisor; My Lord, when I asked her Name, I also asked her whether she was willing to be Married. She said she was willing. And another Gentlewoman was with her, that said she was her Sister: I said to her; Madam if you consent, and your Sister is willing, here is a License, for I believe there is no danger to Marry you.
Did you ask her any other way than in your Form,.
I ask'd her whether she was willing to Marry, she said yes, she was willing.
But did you ask her before you did the Office?
Yes my Lord, I did, and she consented to it.
Pray who was the Person that came to theto you, to carry you to the, was it the Gentleman at the Bar?
No 'twas not him.
How long was it before you went to him, after you went into the Tavern?
My Clerk and I went in, and sat the Drinking a Pint of Wine, about a quarter of an Hour, then we went to the Gentleman.
Do you think that they should grant Licenses to Marry in a Tavern, and out of Canonical Hours?
I never did it in all my life before, and never will do it again.
What was the Reason, why you were conducted into another Room, and not where they were.
I know not the Reason.
How long were you in the Room where they were?
I cannot well tell.
Did you Marry them as soon as you came in?
Almost as soon.
Did you ever Marry any at a Tavern before?
No, my Lord.
Will your Lordship be pleased to hear the License read.
It may be read.You may see the Date and the Names. The License is Dated14. 1702. The Namesin the Parish of St.; andin the Parish of St..
Is there any Blank left?
Yes there is a Blank left that the Marriage may be in the Parish Church of St.,a Blank.
Were you Entertained there?
Before the Marriage the Clerk and I drank a Pint of Wine in the first Room.
Had you any Victuals then?
Not before they Married; but after.
Pray Sir, Did you bespeak a Dinner before the Marriage?No Sir, the Gentleman bespoke a Fowl.
My Lord, I desire he may be asked whether he heard any Noise, or whether any violence was offered to the Young Woman?
Did you hear any Noise, or perceive any Violence offered to the Young Woman.
No my Lord.
Ask Mrs.whether any Noise or Violence was offer'd to the Young Lady?
I'le ask her that Question. Was there any Noise, or Violence used to the Young Lady?
No my Lord, there was no Noise, they came in and asked for a Room, and I shew'd them a lower Room, but they would not have that, but went up, soon after Mr.the Vintner came down and went out, and Mr.call'd for a Pint of Wine for the Coachman, but the Drawer Grumbled at it, and said he did not know who'd pay for't, then Mr.the Bayliff told me it was an Arrest, and that the Parson was to be Bail for the Lady, and at that I very much wondred, and afterwards they told me there was a Wedding above, which we admired at, that there should be a Wedding, and Bayliffs; And after all was over, the Gentleman and the Lady went out at the Back-Door, and took Coach.
Did you see Mrs.discontented when she went out. No, my Lord, she seemed not Discontented; what I know I'll speak and no more.
Do you live at the?
Yes my Lord.
What Place?
Cook my Lord.
Was you in the House when that Young Gentlewoman was carried Prisoner there? Where were you then?
In the Bar, my Lord.
Did you keep the Bar?
No, my Lord; but I was washing the Bar at that time.
Did you hear any Noise?
No, my Lord.
Did you hear of a Wedding?
Yes my Lord.
My Lord, Will you be pleas'd to ask her if she was not had before the Recorder, and promis'd a Reward if she would say any thing for their Service?
What do you say to this?
My Lord, only this, That if I knew any thing, and discover'd it, I should be satisfied for my Trouble.
Were you sent up Stairs to the Gentlefolks to receive Directions for the Supper?
Yes.
When you came up into the Room, what Condition was the Young Gentlewoman in?
She sat at one end of the Room and seemed to be very Melancholly.
How did she look when she went away?
Not Melancholly then, when Orders were given about the Supper, I asked her what Sauce she would have, she said she would eat nothing at all.