Mr., did you give Evidence against,and, for the Murder of Sir?
Yes Sir, I did.
Wasa Witness too?
Yes.
Was?
I Don't know, but I think she was.
, were you a Witness for the Murder of Sir?
Yes if it please your Honour, my Lord.
Sir, Sir,Esquire; make room there Officers, go out, make room for the Witnesses to come in.
Sir, were these Papers owned by,, and, look on them.
My Lord, these are the two Papers I indorst with my own hand, and they owned them to be their Writing,writ one of them, andthe other, and they acknowledged thatPrinted them, andlikewise confest the same before the Council.
My. Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, you see thatandowned the Writing of them andthe Printing of them.
Which was it thatdid own.
did own the first read in Council, and the other the second, but I cannot certainly say which, but I markt them.
Do you believe those Notes and Minutes to be true?
Yes I took the Notes my Lord.
Sir, didown the things produced the 29th ofasby him?
Yes.
Read the.
My Lord, Of all this Charg'd there is nothing againstbut the second Letter. My Lord, he owns it as a very rash andunadvised Act, but no malicious Act.nor none of his Family (My Lord) have been Enemies to the, or charged with malicious designs against it, but this Act its Foolish and Inconsiderate, and we cannot Justify it, we submit our selves to your Lordship.
You have promised to prove it, and I will hear whatsoever you can prove, I will hear any kind of proof you can make for it. It is a business of mighty concern, and therefore not slightly to be past over.
We are sorry at what we have done, and we have offered to giveany Satisfaction they desire, or we are Capable of.
Do not say so, for they told me themselves that they would make out what they had said by five hundred Witnesses.
andare notas they are reputed to be, but are Protestants, for they have received the.
Pray call your Witnesses, and make the best on't you can.
--, --, Mr.Witnesses.
You shall be admitted to prove any thing you can, because they did say, that they wouldit by five hundred Witnesses, and make it as plain as the day.
Since their hearing before the Council they Vaunted inIntelligence, that they were ready with threescore Witnesses to prove all they had said.
CallWitnesses.
,,.
.
And will you come again?
I am Council here for Mr., who by the Direction of Mr., and, Printed these Papers upon their promise to make them good, and they have both confest that they were Written by them, and Printed by him, although now they design to cast theupon his Shoulders; My Lord, as its a great mercy (the Murder being Committed) that Persons concerned therein, have been Detected and Punished, so it is a great mercy that the Authors of these Letters are Discovered, and so also of the two Intelligences, they were as much the Authors of the one as the other; My Lord,Intelligence is well known to beto all that will come and put any thing into it, and he is paid for his pains.
He will be paid.
,, Mr.,and his Wife, Witnesses for.
, begin, what say you Sir?
My Lord, It was early in the Morning about six a Clock, and happened the same day after Sirwas found, Mr.desired me to walk with him, and coming towards the White House we understood Sirwas found, I had known him full twenty Years before, and therefore knew him at first sight, his Shoeswere clean Bottom and Top, withsticking to them, as if he had been in a Hay-mow.
Where was he?
Upon a Table when I saw him, Then Mr.desired me to go to the place where he had lain in the Ditch, and Mr.conducted me to the place, where I saw several Gobbits of Blood by the Ditch side.
, --
Mr.and I walked into the Fields in the Morning.
Did you invite Mr.to go thither?
No, he desired to walk.
Did he carry you to thebefore he went to the place where his Body lay?
No.
Didbring you to the place where the Body lay, when it was carried to the?
Yes Sir,shewed me the, and then conducted me to the House.
How came you to go to this place?
The News was brought by a Fellow who was not believed, and by consentwas sent out to inquire the Truth, when thereturned, he said the Body of Sirwas found, and carried to the, wethither and were there quickly, and there was not above six there beside our selves.
Didwhen he carried you to the Ditch, say that was the place?
Yes.
Didshew you the place beside.
I had no acquaintance with any but him.
Did any shew you the place, but, I say?
No Sir.
Did he go directly?
We went directly, we went the straitest way to the place, and past over some Ditches.
Was any there beside Mr.and you, at the time you went over Ditches, Did any direct you?
No.
My Lord, That Morning the Murder was discovered I went with two or three of my Neighbours to see as others did, and when we came to theI saw Sirlie on the Table, his face looked swarthy, and he seemed as though he had been, thence I walked to the Ditch, where they said his Body had lain,methere, but whetheror no, I cannot Swear.
Was it athen?
I do not know whether it was a Frost or no, it is so long since, it to me looked likethat was, rather then any thing else.
My Lord, I was Carpenter to my Lord -- and I was sent for to the, and as I went to take Orders, I heard the Report that Sirwas found, I went on to my designed place, and when I came there, I saw Sirlie dead on the Table, I turned his Coat up, I saw two wounds within an Inch and half of one another, the one went no further then the bone, and the other through his back, and they brought to me thewhich they said, they had pull'd out of his Body. There was an Order to get him stript, I pull'd off his Shoes, his Shoes were, I pull'd off three pair of Stockings, and a pair of Socks, I pull'd off his black Breeches and Drawers, We set him on his breech upon the Table, with his Leggs hanging down, unbuttoned his Coat and Wastcoat pull'd them off, but we could not bend his Arms when we came to his Shirt, so we tore it open. Upon his Back, there was some Blood, but upon histhere was none. I have one thing more to say, There was a place Black round about his Throat, which looked as if he had been, and his Neck was weak and loose, and had no strength at all in it, by which.
Theis one of the Arguments which induced me to do what I have done: For as to theabout the Throat it is no more then sometimes attend Persons in an Ordinary way, I was not present in the Court at the Tryal of theMurderers, when it was strongly pretended there was nothere, whereas I'le Swear there was near a(My Lord) and I will tell. Calland his Wife.
and his Wife --
This man was the man that helped the Body out of the Ditch, and carried it to the House, let him speak to it.
I was the Person who upon the first Discovery of the Body, pull'd him out of the Ditch, when I had so done, pull'd the Sword out, which was run through him, and then removed him to the House, There was, or likeandcame from him, and carrying him into the House, while going in at the door his Back did swing against the side of the door, and there was someandleft there, and likewise upon the Table where he was laid, and the Floor, and some in the Cellar.
Did therun from the Body on the, from thence to the, and then into the.
Therein all these places, but I cannot say how it came there, unless it came from the Body.
Upon your Oath do you know that was?
I will not Swear whether it was clearor no.
Silence.
My Lord, I desire the same Question may be askedWife; Whether the Blood did not run from the Body on the Table on the Floor, and down into the Cellar.
As SirBody laid along on the Table, the Blood and Water ran from the Table on the Floor.
And did it run into the Cellar too?
I am sure the Bottles were wet with Blood there.
My Lord, now to the next Point, it is the difference between Mr.and Mr.Evidence, I have theof the House of Lords, and I will undertake to prove it. Call.
, Come into the Court.
What is it you would have of him?
I would have him prove the Copy of theof the House of Lords.
What use do you then make of it?
I say there is a great difference between the Evidence ofand him, and I will produce the Journal to prove that whereassaid he waswith a Handkerchief,in his Depositions before the House of Lords asserted he was.
Can you prove thatgave that Evidence?
Yes my Lord, by Mr.,, and others. Call them.
Mr., Mr., Mr., Mr., Mr., --
I ask Mr.but this Question, Who it washis Collar?
That day, after the Body was found, I went in company to the Field, and then to the place where they said the said Body had been; I look'd into the Ditch, and could see no sign of Blood there; but on the side of the Ditch, four or five yards distant, was some,; which they said had followed the Sword when it was pull'd out of the Body. Then I went where the Body lay, and view'd it. I saw two wounds under the left Pap, his Throat wasand blew upon opening the Collar near the breadth of an Hand, and his Face was very much swelled: I believe he was, for I cannot believe all those Injuries could otherwise attend him after he was dead.
Mr.--
I desire that Mr.may be ask'd, If he did not propose to Mr.that his Brothers Body might be opened, whereby he might certainly know whether he was murdered or no.
My Lord, I did believe he was.
Mr., Did you desire his Body might be opened? And did you say, It might be very well, if Mr.would send for a Doctor and Surgeon from the Court, to have him opened, that all might be fully satisfied that he was murdered?
My Lord, I was satisfied in my self that he was, and had those wounds from others; I did not advise it for my particular Information, but that of others.
Pray whatwas his Face?
He wasand, and the white of his Eyes and the Blood Vessels were as full as those that are troubled with Sore Eyes.
I desire to know if he had Fly-blows in his Eyes?
Had he Fly-blows in his Eyes?
No my Lord.
I walked to see this Body which I heard was found, I found a greatupon the left Muscle. I troubled my self no more at that time. I was desired after this by Doctorto go with him, and coming there to review the Body, I observed a Swelling under the left Ear, together with several other Contusions, which were very surprising, for (my Lord) I never found any soin all my life. My Lord, When we had heard the Matter of Evidence and the Persons charg'd with the Crime, Mr.one day called me aside, and told me what proof he could make in this Business against the Evidence. Then said I, Mr.you are my Friend, I would advise you for your good; I believe nothing can be made appear against it. I saw not Mr.for a considerable time after: Afterwards on theofI met Mr., and it was thus; I had been drinking a Glass of Wine with some Friends, Mr.came in and asked for one; so they knowing him, called for another Bottle. Said I, Because Mr.is come, I will drink another Glass with him, although I was taking my leave. We fell into some Discourse, and talking of this Subject, he told me, That Six Months before I had given him, if he could have taken it.
Mr.the Cook, Mr., Mr., --
Mr., What would you have from these Witnesses?
My Lord, I would have you to ask, Whether SirEyes were not Fly-blown?
Mr., It's proposed to you by Mr., Whether the Eyes of Sirwere Fly-blown?
No my Lord, not that I saw.
Was there any specks that were like Fly-blows?
My Lord, I'll call two Witnesses more, and will prove it.
No my Lord, I saw nolike Fly-blows. Mr.was with me, and told me his Eyes were Fly-blown, and would fain have me said such things, if I would have said them.
My Lord the Kings Justice commands all Persons to keep silence upon pain of Imprisonment.
He came another time, and told me, that I was wrong in my, as though he knew it better than my self.
Where was this?
He was at my House.
Was Mr.with him?
My Lord, I did not know Mr., and therefore cannot say whether he was there or no.
Do you know Mr., was he with him?
I know not, therefore cannot say that he was.
What do you ask Mr.?
The same Question about the, and whether he did not carry some of it away in his Handkerchief?
Pray tell Mr.Whether you took up any of SirBlood, and carried it home in your Handkerchief?
My Lord, When I went that way SirBody was removed, before I got thither; I viewed theplace where they said he laid: and indeed I was ask'd, Whether I saw any Blood there?
Did you not take any of SirBlood in your Handkerchief?
No not I, my Lord.
Calland his Wife. My Lord, I will prove by these Witnesses that his Eyes were.
, Mr.enquires of you, If you saw any thing like Fly-blows in SirEyes?
Yes, my Lord.
Did you observe the Flies busie at that time of the year?
I did see something like Fly-blows.
CallWife.
Wife, come into the Court.
I must fetch her then.
Make Room there forand his Wife.
They will not come.
Make Room for them if they will come.Wife,Wife, come into the Court.
Here.
Make room there, stand clear there, make room.
Woman, Mr.desires to know if there werein the Eyes of Sir.
My Lord, people said they were.
He asks too what you say to the Corners of his Mouth and Nostrils.
I did not take much notice of them; but they did say they were.
I have seen many a one who have dyed a natural death, in whom I have seen as much alteration as in him, and my Lord, I can prove, that the Discolouring of the Face, and the Circle about the Neck, might have another cause then they make the World believe.
Call -- the Kings Surgeon. --
says, That many persons dying a Natural Death may look as he did.
My Lord he was certainly, and sometimes persons may beand yet look pale: If that whichstrangled him had been taken away while his Body was warm, the Vessels would have been less, and his Face would have been very Pale: Therefore it's evident that that whichhim, was not removed till his Body was cold, which was the occasion of that blackness; for the Knot remaining, the Blood could not run away: He had as high a Colour as if in a Scarlet Feavor; and the Blood that was seen by me four yards from the Ditch, I put my finger into it, and it smelt like Blood a fortnight or three Weeks from any Body. My Lord, I presume it was Blood came off the Womb,His Neck was very much swell'd and black, on one side of his Mouth he was discoloured; where-ever any Man is bruised while he has life, or while warm, the parts so bruised when dead will soonest corrupt; as is a common thing. Mr.the Apothecary unbuttening his Collar found two great Creases about his Neck, and desired me to come and see it; and the mark was like that of a strait Ring upon a Finger, and while we with-drew to drink two or three Glasses of Beer, there remained only this Crease above.
Do you believe he killed himself now Mr.?
Were his Eyesand Shut?
There was something in the Corners of his Eyes that looked like matter; but I can't say it was. His Eyes were open and Blood-shotten, like a Man that has had an extraordinary violence used towards that part; or like a Man that hath had an extraordinary Cold.
Were not hisclosed?
Were hisclosed?
No my Lord, his Eyes were open.
When I saw him his Eyes were shut I am sure.
I am sensible, my Lord, that aof Hail and Rain had faln the, and that his Cloths were asas mine, and as whole as mine.
I will tell your Lordship the reason of that, he was removed by the Constable at Seven a Clock the Night before, and they made a great, and so dried his Clothes.
Mr., Will you call any more Witnesses?
I will call no more, my Lord, I am look'd upon with an; they'll censure me as a
You are Guilty of a worse Crime, Sir.
I submit my self to the Law.
It matters not whatyou are of, since ye are guilty of such Crimes.
Here is a high Offence against the Government and Justice of the Nation, against the Reputation of a Person of Worth and Integrity, after they had murdered his, to endevour the murdering of his. These persons have undertaken to manage it; all the Witnesses Mr.has brought, have contradicted him in all he have said. No, no, but Stranglings, Stabs, and Bruises; and for a Man that should stab himself, how could he bruise himself too in that manner? Yet they have asserted they would prove it by 500 Witnesses, but could he produce but one substantial one, it were well for him. But what have he or they to do with a matter of this nature? The Justice of the Kingdom has past upon,, andfor the said Murder upon; but suppose something might have been said, it became them not to arraign the Government and the Justice of the Kingdom in its Administrations. Sirwas certainly murdered, and we know by whom. I'll produce two or three Witnesses that shall produce; and if there were no more, there would be Evidence enough. My Lord, I desire that Mr.may tell us the manner of his Murder and the Circumstances.
Mr.has told us, and he leaves the World to make Inferences from them, and has brought Witnesses to prove some pretended Contradictions, and therefore Sirmurdered himself; this Fellow is guilty of thein the World, he has told you all these things which appear false, and from those falsities they would have inferred another, that.
Brother, I have given him leave to bring what Evidence he would, not that I think it; and if he could have proved never so much, hishad been never the less; but we see that his own Evidence runs counter to him. What had he to do in that Case? to what purpose should he writeabout the Government, to traduce the Justice of it? This ought not to be done under whatsoever pretences. It has been sufficiently proved that Sir, but there are other Witnesses yet can speak to it. -- Call them.
,.
Make room for the Witnesses there.
.
Gentlemen, It's beyond contradiction that Sirwas, and therefore shall not need furtherto prove it; we shall leave it to you, and shall not trouble our selves or you any further about it.
They did design, and would, no doubt of it, have been very much satisfied, if they could have made somethat he kill'd himself: But I was desirous to hear what they could say for themselves. All the Evidence they call, go as much against them as can be; the Evidence is as plain as the day that the Man was killed, and. Besides, Sirs, a private person must not undertake to controul the Justice of the Nation: To say he was a just person that suffered, and I will justifie it; this is not to be indured: but I was willing to hear all that could be said, and whether a doubt could be made; and you see his very Evidence conclude him kill'd, and kill'd by Strangers. They are all Three in this Mischief, there is a Combination of them to affront the Publick Justice of the Nation, but the end of this Design is to make you believe here was no; thelies under the, if they could have vomited it, and made a tolerable Proof, That Sirhad not been. But it's very plain if that could have been brought to be, then presently you would have had a full Cry,, a thing raised against the Papists; and then the Plot and all such things had been nothing. I leave it to you, Whether upon this Evidence you do not believe themof Traducing the Government and the Justice of the Nation.