Mr., good-morrow, you are early at the Rehearsal this Morning.
Why, faith,, our Beer and Beer sat but ill on my Stomach, so I got up to try if I could not walk it off.
I wish I had any thing in my Stomach to walk off; if Matters do not go better with us shortly, my Teeth will forget their Office.
These are poor Times, indeed, not like the Days of.
Oh! name 'em not! those were glorious Days indeed, the Days of Beef and Punch; my Friends, when come there such again?
-- Who knows what this new Author, may produce? Faith I like my Part very well.
Nay, if Variety will please the Town, I am sure there is enough of it, but I could wish, methinks, the Satire had been a little stronger, a little plainer.
Now I think it is plain enough.
Hum! Ay, it is intelligible; but I wou'd have it downright; 'gad, I fancy I cou'd write a thing to succeed, my self.
Ay, prithee, what Subject wou'dst thou write on?
Why, no Subject at all, Sir, but I would have a humming deal of Satyr, and I would repeat in every Page, that Courtiers are Cheats and don't pay their Debts, that Lawyers are Rogues, Physicians Blockheads, Soldiers Cowards, and Ministers --
What, what, Sir?
Nay, I'll only name 'em, that's enough to set the Audience a hooting.
Zounds, Sir, here is Wit enough for a whole Play in one Speech.
For one Play, why, Sir, it's all I have extracted out of above a Dozen.
Who have we here?
Some Gentlemen, I suppose, come to hear the Rehearsal.
Pray, Gentlemen, don't you rehearse thethis Morning?
Sir, we expect the Author every Minute.
What is this, is it a Tragedy, or a Comedy?
Upon my Word, Sir, I can't tell.
Then I suppose you have no Part in it.
Yes, Sir, I have several, but -- Oh, here is the Author himself, I suppose he can tell, Sir.
Faith, Sir, that's more than I suppose.
My Lord, your most obedient Servant; this is a very great, and unexpected Favour indeed, my Lord. Mr., I kiss your Hands; I am very glad to see you here.
That's more than you may be by-and-by, perhaps.
We are come to attend your Rehearsal, Sir; Pray when will it begin?
This very Instant, my Lord: Gentlemen, I beg you would be all ready, and let the Prompter bring me some Copies for these Gentlemen.
Mr., you know I am a plain Speaker, so you will excuse any Liberties I take.
Dear Sir, you can't oblige me more.
Then I must tell you, Sir, I am a little stagger'd at the Name of your Piece; doubtless, Sir, you know the Rules of Writing, and I can't guess how you can bring the Actions of a whole Year into the Circumference of four and twenty Hours.
Sir, I have several Answers to make to your Objection; in the first Place, my Piece is not of a Nature confin'd to any Rules, as being avowedly irregular, but if it was otherwise I think I could quote you Precedents of Plays that neglect them; besides, Sir, if I comprise the whole Actions of the Year in half an Hour, will you blame me, or those who have done so little in that time? My Register is not to be fill'd like those of vulgar News-Writers with Trash for want of News, and therefore if I say little or nothing, you may thank those who have done little or nothing.
Oh! here are my Books.
In Print already, Mr.?
Yes, Sir, it is the safest way, for if a Manstays till he is damn'd, it is possible he never may get into print at all; the Town is capricious, for which Reason always print as fast as you write, that if they damn your Play, they may not damn your Copy too.
Well, Sir, and pray what is your Design, your Plot?
Why, Sir, I have several Plots, some pretty deep, and some but shallow.
I hope, Sir, they all conduce to the main Design.
Yes, Sir, they do.
Pray, Sir, what is that?
To divert the Town, and bring full Houses.
Pshaw! you misunderstand me, I mean what is your Moral, your, your, your --
Oh! Sir, I comprehend you -- Why, Sir, my Design is to ridicule the vicious and foolish Customs of the Age, and that in a fair manner, without Fear, Favour, or Ill-nature, and without Scurrility, ill Manners, or common Place; I hope to expose the reigning Follies in such a manner, that Men shall laugh themselves out of them before they feel that they are touch'd.
But what Thread or Connexion can you have in this History? For instance, how is your Political connected with you Theatrical?
O very easily -- When my Politicks come to a Farce, they very naturally lead me to the Play-House, where, let me tell you, there are some Politicians too, where there is Lying, Flattering, Dissembling, Promising, Deceiving, and Undermining, as well as in any Court in Christendom.
Won't you begin your Rehearsal, Sir?
Ay, ay, with all my Heart, is the Musick ready for the Prologue?
Musick for the Prologue!
Ay, Sir, I intend to have every thing new, I had rather be the Author of my own Dulness than the Publisher of other Mens Wit, and really, Mr., the Subjects for Prologues are utterly exhausted: I think the general Method has been either to frighten the Audience with the Author's Reputation, or to flatter them to give their Applause, or to beseech them to it, and that in a manner that will serve for every Play alike: Now, Sir, my Prologue will serve for no Play but my own, and to that I think nothing can be better adapted, for as mine is the History of the Year, what can be a properer Prologue than an Ode to the New Year?
An Ode to the New Year?
Yes, Sir, an Ode to the New Year -- Come, begin, begin.
Sir, the Prologue is ready.
Dear, let me hear you read it, possibly it may be sung so fine I may not understand a Word of it.
Sir, you can't oblige me more.Ay, ay, come on, and sing it away.
There, Sir, there's the very Quintessence and Cream of all the Odes I have seen for several Years last past.
Ay, Sir, I thought you wou'd not be the Publisher of another Man's Wit?
No more I an't, Sir, for the Devil of any Wit did I ever see in any of them.
Oh! your most humble Servant, Sir.
Yours, Sir, yours; now for my Play,, are the Politicians all ready at the Table?
I'll go and see, Sir.
My first Scene, Mr., lies in the Island of, being at present the chief Scene of Politicks of all.
Sir, they are ready.
Then draw the Scene, and discover them.
Here's a Mistake in the Print, Mr., I observe the second Politician is the first Person who speaks.
Sir, my first and greatest Politician never speaks at all, he's a very deep Man, by which, youwill observe I convey this Moral, that the chief Art of a Politician is to keep a Secret.
To keep his Politicks a Secret, I suppose you mean.
Come, Sir, begin.
Is Kingreturn'd yet?
No.
When will he return?
I cannot tell.
This Politician seems to me to know very little of the matter.
Zounds, Sir, would you have him a Prophet as well as a Politician? You see, Sir, he knows what's past, and that's all he ought to know; 'Sblood, Sir, would it be in the Character of a Politician to make him a Conjurer? Go on, Gentlemen: Pray, Sir, don't interrupt their Debates, for they are of great Consequence.
These mighty Preparations of theare certainly design'd against some Place or other; now, the Question is, What Place they are design'd against? And that is a Question which I cannot answer.
But it behoves us to be upon our Guard.
It does, and the Reason is, because we know nothing of the matter.
You say right, it is easy for a Man to guard against Dangers which he knows of, but to guard against Dangers which no Body knows of, requires a very great.
Now, Sir, I suppose you think that no Body knows any thing.
Faith, Sir, it appears so.
Ay, Sir, but there is one who knows, that little Gentleman, yonder in the Chair, who says nothing, knows it all.
But how do you intend to convey this Knowledge to the Audience?
Sir, they can read it in his Looks; 'Sblood, Sir, must not a Politician be thought a wise Man without his giving Instances of his Wisdom?
Hang foreign Affairs, let us apply ourselves to Money.
Ay, ay, ay.
Gentlemen, that over again -- and be sure to snatch hastily at the Money; you're pretty Politicians truly.
Hang foreign Affairs, let us apply ourselves to Money.
Ay, ay, ay.
All we have to consider relating to Money is how we shall get it.
I think we ought first to consider whether there is any to be got, which if there be, I do readily agree that the next Question is how to come at it.
Hum.
Pray, Sir, what are these Gentlemen in?
Why, Sir, they are the ablest Heads in the Kingdom, and consequently the greatest Men, for you may be sure all well-regulated Governments, as I represent this ofto be, will employ in their greatest Posts Men of the greatest Capacity.
I have consider'd the Matter, and I find it must be by a Tax.
I thought of that, and was considering what was not tax'd already.
Learning; suppose we put a Tax upon Learning.
Learning, it is true, is a useless Commodity, but I think we had better lay it on Ignorance, for Learning being the Property but of a very few, and those poor ones too, I am afraid we can get little among them; whereas Ignorance will take in most of the great Fortunes in the Kingdom.
Ay, ay, ay.
Faith, it's very generous in these Gentlemen to tax themselves so readily.
Ay and very wise too to prevent the People's grumbling, and they will have it all among themselves.
But what is become of the Politicians?
They are gone, Sir, they're gone; they have finish'd the Business they met about, which was to agree on a Tax, that being done -- they are gone to raise it; and this, Sir, is the full Account of the whole History of, as far as we know of it, compriz'd in one Scene.
The Devil it is! Why, you have not mention'd one Word of, or, or the Emperor.
No, Sir, I turn those over to the next Year, by which time we may possibly know something what they are about; at present our Advices are so very uncertain, I know not what to depend on; but come, Sir, now you shall have a Council of Ladies.
Does this Scene lie intoo?
No, no, this lies in-- You know, Sir, it would not have been quite so proper to have broughtPoliticians (of the male Kind I mean) on the Stage, because our Politicks are not quite so famous; but in Female Politicians, to the Honour of my Countrywomen I say it, I believe no Country can excel us; come, draw the Scene, and discover the Ladies.
Sir, they are not here; one of them is practising above Stairs with a Dancing-master, and I can't get her down.
I'll fetch 'em, I warrant you.
Well, my Lord, what does your Lordship think of what you have seen?
Faith, Sir, I did not observe it; but it's damn'd Stuff, I am sure.
I think so, and I hope your Lordship will not encourage it. They are such Men as your Lordship, who must reform the Age; if Persons of your exquisite and refin'd Taste will give a Sanction to politer Entertainments, the Town will soon be asham'd of laughing at what they do now.
Really, this is a very bad House.
It is not indeed so large as the others, but I think one hears better in it.
Pox of of hearing, one can't see -- one's self I mean; here are no Looking-glasses, I lovefor that Reason better than any House in Town.
Very true, my Lord, but I wish your Lordship would think it worth your Consideration, as the Morals of a People depend, as has been so often and well prov'd, entirely on their publick Diversions, it would be of great Consequence that those of the sublimest Kind should meet with your Lordship's and the rest of the Nobility's Countenance.
Mr., I am always ready to give my Countenance to any thing of that kind, which might bring the best Company together, for as one does not go to see the Play but the Company, I think that's chiefly to be consider'd, and therefore I am always ready to countenance good Plays.
No one is a better Judge what is so than your Lordship.
Not I, indeed, Mr.-- but as I am one half of the Play in thetalking to the Actresses, and the other half in the Boxes talking to the Women of Quality, I have an Opportunity of seeing something of the Play, and perhaps may be as good a Judge as another.
My Lord, the Ladies cannot begin yet, if your Lordship will honour me in the,where you will find it pleasanter than upon this cold Stage.
With all my Heart -- Come, Mr..
I attend your Lordship.
Thou art a sweet Judge of Plays, indeed, and yet it is in the Power of such Sparks as these to damn an honest Fellow, both in his Profit and Reputation.
Come, draw the Scene, and discover the Ladies in Council; pray, my Lord, sit.
What are these Ladies assembled about?
Affairs of great Importance, as you will see -- Please to begin all of you.
Was you at the Opera, Madam, last Night?
Who can miss an Opera whenstays?
Sure he is the charmingest Creature.
He's every thing in the World one could wish.
Almost every thing one could wish.
They say there's a Lady in the City has a Child by him.
Ha, ha, ha!
Well it must be charming to have a Child by him.
Madam, I met a Lady in a Visit the other Day with three.
All.
All, all in Wax.
Oh Gemini! Who makes them, I'll send and bespeak half a dozen to-morrow Morning.
I'll have as many as I can cram into a Coach with me.
Mr., Sir, is this History? this must be Invention.
Upon my Word, Sir, it's Fact, and I take it to be the most extraordinary Accident that has happen'd in the whole Year, and as well worth recording. Faith, Sir, let me tell you, I take it to be ominous, for if we go on to improve in Luxury, Effeminacy and Debauchery, as we have done lately, the next Age, for ought I know, may be more like the Children of squeakingthan hardy.
Don't interrupt us, dear Sir.
What mighty pretty Company they must be.
Oh, the prettiest Company in the World.
If one could but teach them to sing like their Father.
I am afraid my Husband won't let me keep them, for he hates I shou'd be fond of any thing but himself.
O the unreasonable Creature!
If my Husband was to make any Objection to my having 'em, I'd run away from him, and take the dear Babies with me.
Come, enter Beau.
Fy upon it, Ladies, what are you doing here? Why are not you at the Auction, Mr.has been in the Pulpit this half Hour?
Oh, dear Mr., I ask his Pardon, I never miss him.
What's to be sold to-day?
Oh, I never mind that; there will be all the World there.
You'll find it almost impossible to get in.
Oh! I shall be quite miserable if I don't get in.
Then you must not lose a Moment.
There they are gone.
I am glad on't with all my Heart.
Upon my Word, Mr., that last is an exceeding good Scene, and full of a great deal of Politeness, good Sense, and Philosophy.
It's Nature, my Lord, it's Nature.
Faith, Sir, the Ladies are much oblig'd to you.
Faith, Sir, it's more than I desire such Ladies, as I represent here, shou'd be; as for the nobler Part of the Sex for whom I have the greatest Honour, their Characters can be no better set off, than by ridiculing that light, trifling, giddy-headed Crew, who are a Scandal to their own Sex, and a Curse on ours.
Gentlemen, you must make room, for the Curtain must be let down, to prepare the Auction-Room.
My Lord, I believe you will be best before the Curtain, for we have but little Room behind, and a great deal to do.
Upon my Word, Mr., I must ask you the same Question which one of your Ladies did just now; what do you intend to sell at this Auction, the whole Stock in Trade of some Milliner or Mercer who has left off Business?
Sir, I intend to sell such things as was never sold in any Auction before, nor ever will again; I can assure you, Mr., this Scene, which Ilook on as the best in the whole Performance, will require a very deep Attention; Sir, if you should take one Pinch of Snuff during the whole Scene, you will lose a Joke by it, and yet they lie pretty deep too, and may escape Observation from a moderate Understanding, unless very closely attended to.
I hope, however, they don't lie as deep as the dumb Gentleman's Politicks did in the first Act; if so, nothing but an inspir'd Understanding can come at 'em.
Sir, this Scene is writ in Allegory, and tho' I have endeavour'd to make it as plain as possible; yet all Allegory will require a strict Attention to be understood, Sir.
Sir, every thing is ready.
Then draw up the Curtain -- Come, enter Mrs., and Mrs..
Dear Mrs..
Dear Madam, you are early to-day?
Oh, if one does not get near the Pulpit, one does nothing, and I intend to buy a great deal to-day; I believe I shall buy the whole Auction, at least if things go cheap; you won't bid against me?
You know I never bid for any thing?
That's true, Mrs., I'll be your Evidence.
Are you come? now I suppose we shall have fine Bidding; I don't expect to buy cheaper than at a Shop.
That's unkind, Mrs., you know I never bid against you; it would be cruel to bid against a Lady who frequents Auctions, only with a Design one Day or other to make one great Auction of her own: No, no, I will not prevent the filling your Warehouse; I assure you, I bid against no Haberdashers of all Wares.
You are a mighty civil Person, truly.
You need not take up the Cudgels, Madam, who are of no more Consequence at an Auction, than a Mayor at a Sessions; you only come here where you have nothing to do, to shew People you have nothing to do any where else.
I don't come to say rude things to all the World as you do.
No, the World may thank Heaven, that did not give you Wit enough to do that.
Let him alone, he will have his Jest?
You don't think I mind him, I hope; but pray, Sir, of what great Use is your Friend, Mr., here?
Oh, he is of very great Use to all Women of Understanding.
Ay! of what Use am I, pray?
To keep 'em at home, that they may not hear the silly things you say to 'em.
I hope, Mr., you will not banish all People from Places where they are of no Consequence; you will allow 'em to go to an Assembly, or a Masquerade, without either Playing, Dancing or Intriguing; you will let People go to an Opera without any Ear, to a Play without any Taste, and to a Church without any Religion?
Oh! dear Mr., I am glad you are come, you are horrible late to-day.
Madam, I am just mounting the Pulpit; I hope you like the Catalogue, Ladies?
There are some good things here, if you are not too dilatory with your Hammer.
Boy, give me a Catalogue?
I dare swear, Gentlemen and Ladies, this Auction will give general Satisfaction; it is the first of its kind which I ever had the Honour to exhibit, and I believe I may challenge the World to produce some of the Curiosities which this choice Cabinet contains: A Catalogue of Curiosities which were collected by the undefatigable Pains of that celebrated Virtuoso,, Esq; which will be sold by Auction, byonthe 21st Day of, beginning at Lot 1. Gentlemen and Ladies, this is Lot 1. A most curious Remnant of Political Honesty. Who puts it up, Gentlemen? It will make you a very good Cloke, you see its both Sides alike, so you may turn it as often as you will -- Come, five Pounds for this curious Remnant; I assure you, several great Men have made their Birth-day Suits out of the same Piece -- It will wear for ever, and never be the worse for wearing -- Five Pounds is bid -- no Body more than five Pounds for this curious Piece of Political Honesty, five Pound, no more --
Lord. Lot 2, a most delicate Piece of Patriotism, Gentlemen, who bids? ten Pounds for this Piece of Patriotism?
I would not wear it for a thousand Pound.
Sir, I assure you, several Gentlemen at Court have worn the same; it's a quite different thing within to what it is without.
Sir, it is prohibited Goods, I sha'nt run the risque of being brought intofor wearing it.
You take it for the old Patriotism, whereas it is indeed like that in nothing but the Cut, but alas! Sir, there is a great Difference in the Stuff: But, Sir, I don't propose this for a Town-Suit, this is only proper for the Country; Consider, Gentlemen, what a Figure this will make at an Election -- Come, five Pound -- One Guinea -- Put Patriotism by.
Ay, put it by, one Day or other it may be in Fashion.
Lot 3. Three Grains of Modesty: Come, Ladies, consider how scarce this valuable Commodity is.
Yes, and out of Fashion too, Mr..
I ask your Pardon, Madam, it is trueI assure you, and never changes Colour on any Account -- Half a Crown for all this Modesty -- Is there not one Lady in the Room who wants any Modesty?
Pray Sir, what is it, for I can't see it at this Distance?
It cannot be seen at any Distance, Madam, but it is a beautiful Powder, which makes a fine Wash for the Complexion.
I thought you said it was true, and wou'd not change the Colour of the Skin?
No, it will not, Madam; but it serves mighty well to blush behind a Fan with, or to wear under a Lady's Mask at a Masquerade -- What, no Body bid -- Well, lay Modesty aside -- Lot 4. One Bottle of Courage, formerly in the Possession of Lieutenant Colonel, Citizen, Alderman and Tallowchandler -- What, is there no Officer of the Train'd-Bands here? Or it will serve an Officer of the Army as well in Time of Peace, nay evenin War, Gentlemen; it will serve all of you who fell out?
Is the Bottle whole? is there no Crack in it?
None, Sir, I assure you; tho' it has been in many Engagements in; nay it has serv'd a Campaign or two in, since the Alderman's Death -- it will never waste while you stay at home, but it evaporates immediately if carried abroad.
Damn me, I don't want it; but a Man can't have too much Courage -- Three Shillings for it.
Three Shillings are bid for this Bottle of Courage.
Four.
What do you bid for Courage for?
Not for my self, but I have a Commission to buy it for a Lady.
Five.
Five Shillings, five Shillings for all this Courage; no Body more than five Shillings?
your Name, Sir?
Lot 5, and Lot 6. All the Wit lately belonging to Mr., Composer of Entertainments for the Play-houses, and Mr., Composer of political Papers in Defence of a Ministry; shall I put up these together?
Ay, it is a pity to part them, where are they?
Sir, in the next Room, where any Gentleman may see them, but they are too heavy to bring in; there are near three hundred Volumes in Folio.
Put them by, who the Devil would bid for them unless he was the Manager of some House or other? The Town has paid enough for their Works already.
Lot 7. A very neat clear Conscience which has been worn by a Judge, and a Bishop.
It is as clean as if it was new.
Yes, no Dirt will stick to it, and pray observe how capacious it is; it has one particular Quality, put as much as you will into it, it is never full: Come, Gentlemen, don't be afraid to bid for this, for whoever has it will never be poor.
One Shilling for it.
O fy, Sir, I am sure you want it, for if you had any Conscience, you would put it up at more than that: Come, fifty Pound for this Conscience.
I'll give fifty Pound to get rid of my Conscience with all my Heart.
Well, Gentlemen, I see you are resolv'd not to bid for it, so I'll lay it by: Come, Lot 8, a very considerable Quantity of Interest at Court; Come, a Hundred Pound for this Interest at Court.
For me, Mr.?
A Hundred Pound is bid in a Hundred Places, Gentlemen.
Two Hundred Pound.
Two Hundred Pound, two Hundred and Fifty, three Hundred Pound, three Hundred and Fifty, four Hundred, five Hundred, six Hundred, a Thousand; a Thousand Pound is bid, Gentlemen, no Body more than a Thousand Pounds for this Interest at Court; no Body more than one Thousand?
Mr..
Damn me, I know a Shop where I can buy it for less.
Egad, you took me in, Mr., I could not help bidding for it.
It is a sure Sign it's Nature, my Lord, and I should not be surpriz'd to see the whole Audience stand up and bid for it too.
All the Cardinal Virtues, Lot 9. Come, Gentlemen, put in these Cardinal Virtues?
Eighteen Pence.
Eighteen Pence is bid for these Cardinal Virtues; no body more than Eighteen Pence? Eighteen Pence for all these Cardinal Virtues, no body more? All these Virtues, Gentlemen, are going for Eighteen Pence; perhaps there is not so much more Virtue in the World, as here is, and all going for Eighteen Pence
Your Name, Sir?
Sir, here's a Mistake; I thought you had said a Cardinal's Virtues, 'Sblood Sir, I thought to have bought a Pennyworth; here's Temperance and Chastity, and a Pack of Stuff that I would not give three Farthings for?
Well, lay 'em by, Lot 10, and Lot 11, A great deal of Wit, and a little common Sense.
Why do you put up these together? they have no Relation to each other.
Well, the Sense by itself; then Lot 10, A little common Sense -- I assure you, Gentlemen, this is a very valuable Commodity; Come, who puts it in?
You observe as valuable as it is, no body bids; I take this, if I may speak in the Stile of a great Writer, to be a most emphatical Silence; you see, Mr., no one speaks against this Lot, and the reason no body bids for it, is because every one thinks he has it.
Lay it by, I'll keep it my self; Lot 12.
Hey-day! What's to be done, now, Mr.?
Now, Sir, the Sport begins.
What's the Matter?
There's a Sight without would kill all Mankind with laughing;is run mad, and thinkshimself a great Man, and he's marching thro' the Streets with a Drum and Fiddles.
Please Heaven, I'll go and see this Sight.
And so will I.
Nay, if every one else goes, I don't know why I shou'd stay behind.
Mr., we'll go too.
If your Lordship will have but a little Patience 'till the Scene be chang'd, you shall see him on the Stage.
Is not this Jest a little over-acted?
I warrant, we don't over-act him half so much as he does his Parts; tho' 'tis not so much his acting Capacity which I intend to exhibit as his ministerial.
His ministerial!
Yes, Sir, you may remember I told you before my Rehearsal, that there was a strict Resemblance between the States Political and Theatrical; there is a Ministry in the latter as well as the former, and I believe as weak a Ministry as any poor Kingdom cou'd ever boast of; Parts are given in the latter to Actors, with much the same Regard to Capacity as Places in the former have sometimes been, in former Ages I mean; and tho' the Publick damn both, yet while they both receive their Pay, they laugh at the Publick behind the Scenes; and if one considers the Plays that come from one Part, and the Writings from the other, one would be apt to think the same Authors were retain'd in both: But, come, change the Scene into the Street, and then enter-- Hitherto, Mr, as we have had only to do with inferior Characters, such as Beaux and Tailors, and so forth, we have dealt in the Prosaick; now we are going to introduce a more considerable Person, our Muse will rise in her Stile:Now, Sir, for a Taste of the sublime; come, enter,.
Associates, Brethren, Countrymen and Friends, Partakers with us in this glorious Enterprize, Which for our Consort we have undertaken; It grieves us much, yes by the Gods it does! That we whose great Ability and Parts Have rais'd us to this Pinacle of Power, Entitling us Prime Minister Theatrical; That we shou'd with an Upstart of the Stage Contend succesless on our Consort's Side; But tho', by just hereditary Right We claim a lawless Power, yet for some Reasons, Which to our self we keep as yet conceal'd: Thus to the Publick, deign we to appeal; Behold how humbly the Greatkneels. Say then, Oh Town, is it your Royal Will, That my great Consort represent the Part ofin the?
Thanks to the Town, that Hiss speaks their Assent; Such was the Hiss that spoke the great Applause, Our mighty Father met with, when he brought Hison the Stage; such was the Hiss, Welcom'd histo theShore; Such was the Hiss, in which Greatshou'd have expir'd: But, wherefore do I try in vain to number Those glorious Hisses, which from Age to Age Our Family has born triumphant from the Stage?
Get thee gone for the prettiest Hero that ever was shown on any Stage.
Short and sweet, faith, what, are we to have no more of him?
Ay, ay, Sir; he's only gone to take a little Breath.
If you please, Sir, in the mean time, we'll go take a little Fire, for 'tis confounded cold upon the Stage.
I wait upon your Lordship: Stop the Rehearsal a few Moments, we'll be back again instantly.
Now, my Lord, for my modern: Come, make all things ready, and draw the Scene as soon as you can.
Modern, why modern? You Common-Place Satirists are always endeavouring to persuade us, that the Age we live in, is worse than any other has been, whereas Mankind have differ'd very little since the World began; for one Age has been as bad as another.
Mr., I do not deny that Men have been always bad enough; Vice and Folly are not the Invention of our Age; but I will maintain, that what I intend to ridicule in the following Scene, is the whole and sole Production and Invention of some People now living; and faith, let me tell you, tho' perhaps the Publick may not be the better for it, it is an Invention exceeding all the Discoveries of every Philosopher or Mathematician, from the Beginning of the World to this Day.
Ay, pray what is it?
Why, Sir, it is a Discovery lately found out, that a Man of great Parts, Learning and Virtue, is fit for no Employment whatever; that an Estate renders a Man unfit to be trusted, that being a Blockhead is a Qualification for Business; that Honesty is the only Sort of Folly for which a Man ought to be utterly neglected and contemn'd. And -- But here is the Inventor himself.
Come, bring him forward, that the Audience may see and hear him: You must know, Sir, this is a Bastard of, begotten on that beautiful Nymph, who sold Oranges toCompany, or rather Cart-load of Comedians; and being a great Favourite of his Father's, the old Gentleman settled upon him the entire Direction of all our Play-houses and poetical Performances whatever.
Prompter.
Sir.
Is there any thing to be done?
Yes, Sir, this Play to be cast.
Give it me. The Life and Death of King, written by: Who can act the King?
, Sir, he loves to act it behind the Scenes.
Here are a parcel ofLords.
Their Parts are but of little Consequence, I will take care to cast them.
Do but be sure you give them to Actors who will mind their Cues ---- What sort of a Character is he?
Sir, he is a Warrior, my Cousin here will do him very well.
I do a Warrior! I never learnt to fence.
No Matter, you will have no Occasion to fight; can you look fierce, and speak well?
Boh!
I would not desire a better Warrior in the House than your self ---- What, is this?
Really, Sir, I don't well know what he is, his chief Desire seems to be for Land, I think; he is no very considerable Character, any body may do him well enough; or if you leave him quite out, the Play will be little the worse for it.
Well, I'll leave it to you --of, a Prophet -- Have you any Body that looks like a Prophet?
I have one that looks like a Fool.
He'll do --of.
I have cast all theParts, except the Ambassador.
Who shall do it? His Part is but short, have you never a good genteel Figure, and one that can dance? for as theare the politest People in, it will be mighty proper that the Ambassador should be able at his Arrival to entertain them with a Jig or two.
Truly, Sir, here are Abundance of Dancing-masters in the House, who do little or nothing for their Money.
Give it to one of them; see that he has a little Drollery tho' in him, forseems to have intended him as a ridiculous Character, and only to make the Audience laugh.
What's that, Sir? Do you affirm thatintended the Ambassadora ridiculous Character?
No, Sir, I don't.
Oh, Sir, your humble Servant, then I misunderstood you; I thought I had heard him say so.
Yes, Sir, but I shall not stand to all he says.
But, Sir, you shou'd not put a wrong Sentiment into the Mouth of the God of Wit.
I tell you, he is the God only of modern Wit, and he has a very just Right to be God of most of the modern Wits that I know; of some who are lik'd for their Wit; of some who are preferr'd for their Wit; of some who live by their Wit; of those ingenious Gentlemen who damn Plays, and those who write them too perhaps. Here comes one of his Votaries; come, enter, enter -- Enter Mr..
What are you doing here?
I am casting the Parts in the Tragedy of King.
Then you are casting the Parts in a Tragedy that won't do.
How, Sir! Was it not written by, and was notone of the greatest Genius's that ever lived?
No, Sir,was a pretty Fellow, and said some things which only want a little of my licking to do well enough; King, as now writ, will not do -- But a Word in your Ear, I will make him do.
How?
By Alteration, Sir, it was a Maxim of mine, when I was at the Head of Theatrical Affairs, that no Play, tho' ever so good, would do without Alteration -- For instance, in the Play before us, the Bastardis a most effeminate Character, for which reason I would cut him out, and put all his Sentiments in the Mouth of, who is so much properer to speak them -- Let me tell you, Mr., Propriety of Character, Dignity ofDiction, and Emphasis of Sentiment are the things I chiefly consider on these Occasions.
I am only afraid asis so popular an Author, and you, asking your Pardon, so unpopular.
Damn me, I'll write to the Town and desire them to be civil, and that in so modest a manner, that an Army ofshall be melted: I'll tell them that no Actors are equal to me, and no Authors ever were superior: And how do you think I can insinuate that in a modest manner?
Nay, faith, I can't tell.
Why, I'll tell them that the former only tread on my Heels, and that the greatest among the latter have been damn'd as well as my self; and after that, what do you think of your Popularity? I can tell you, Mr., I have seen things carried in the House against the Voice of the People before to Day.
Let them hiss, let them hiss, and grumble as much as they please as long as we get their Money.
There, Sir, is the Sentiment of a great Man, and worthy to come from the greathimself.
He's worthy his Sire, indeed, to think of this Gentleman for altering.
Sir, I will maintain this Gentleman as proper as any Man in the Kingdom for the Business.
Indeed!
Ay, Sir, for asis already good enough for the People of Taste, he must be alter'd to the Palates of those who have none; and if you will grant that, who can be properer to alter him for the worse? But if you are so zealous in oldCause, perhaps you may find by-and-by all this come to nothing -- Now for.
Pox on't, the Boy treads close on my Heels in a literal Sense.
Your Pardon, Sir, why will you not obey Your Son's Advice, and give him still his way; For you, and all who will oppose his Force, Must be o'erthrown in his triumphant Course.
I hope, Sir, youris not intended to burlesque.
No, Sir, I have too great an Honour forto think of burlesquing him, and to be sure of not burlesquing him I will never attempt to alter him, for fear of burlesquing him by Accident, as perhaps some others have done.
is the young Captain.
My Lord,is every insignificant Fellow in Town, who fancies himself of great Consequence, and is of none; he is my Lord, Captain, Counsellor, Alderman, Beau, and -- and -- Odso, what was I going to say? Come, go on.
, take care that all things well go on; We will retire, my Friend, and read King.
To what purpose, Sir, was Mr.introduced?
To no purpose at all, Sir; it's all in Character, Sir, and plainly shews of what mighty Consequence he is -- And there ends my Article from the Theatre.
Hey-day! What's become of your two?
Damn'd, Sir, damn'd; they were damn'd at my first Rehearsal, for which Reason I have cut them out; and to tell you the Truth, I think the Town has honour'd 'em enough with talking of 'em for a whole Month; tho', faith, I believe it was owing to their having nothing else to talk of. Well, now formy Patriots -- You will observe, Mr., that I place my Politicians and my Patriots at opposite Ends of my Piece, which I do, Sir, to shew the wide Difference between them; I begin with my Politicians to signify that they will always have the Preference in the World to Patriots, and I end with Patriots to leave a good Relish in the Mouths of my Audience.
Ay? by your Dance of Patriots, one would think you intended to turn Patriotism into a Jest.
So do I -- But don't you observe I conclude the whole with a Dance of Patriots? which plainly intimates that when Patriotism is turn'd into a Jest, there is an End of the whole Play: Come, enter four Patriots -- You observe I have not so many Patriots as Politicians; you will collect from thence that they are not so plenty.
Where does the Scene lie now, Sir?
In, Sir, all in.
These Patriots seem to equal your greatest Politicians in their Silence.
Sir, what they think now cannot well be spoke, but you may conjecture a great deal from their shaking their Heads; they will speak by-and-by -- as soon as they are a little heated with Wine: You cannot, however, expect any great Speaking in this Scene, for tho' I do not make my Patriots Politicians, I don't make them Fools.
But, methinks, your Patriots are a Set of shabby Fellows.
They are the cheaper dress'd; besides, no Man can be too low for a Patriot, tho' perhaps it is possible he may be too high.
Prosperity to.
Liberty and Property.
Success to Trade.
Ay, to Trade -- to Trade -- particularly to my Shop.
Why do you suffer that Actor to stand laughing behind the Scenes, and interrupt your Rehearsal?
O, Sir, he ought to be there, he's a laughing in his Sleeve at the Patriots; he's a very considerable Character -- and has much to do by-and-by.
Methinks the Audience shou'd know that, or perhaps they may mistake him as I did, and hiss him.
If they shou'd, he's a pure impudent Fellow, and can stand the Hisses of them all; I chose him particularly for the Part -- Go on, Patriots.
Gentlemen, I think this our Island ofis an ill State, I do not say we are actually in War, for that we are not; but however we are threaten'd with it daily, and why may not the Apprehension of a War, like other Evils, be worse than the Evil itself; for my part, this I will say, this I will venture to say, That let what will happen I will drink a Health to Peace.
This Gentleman is the Noisy-Patriot, who drinks and roars for his Country, and never does either Good or Harm in it -- The next is the Cautious-Patriot.
Sir, give me your Hand; there's Truth in what you say, and I will pledge you with all my Soul, but remember it is all under the Rose.
Look'ee, Gentlemen, my Shop is my Country, I always measure the Prosperity of the latter by that of the former. My Country is either richer or poorer, in my Opinion, as my Trade rises or falls; therefore, Sir, I cannot agree with you that a Warwou'd be disserviceable: On the contrary I think it the only way to make my Country flourish; for as I am a Sword-Cutler, it would make my Shop flourish, so here's to War.
This is the Self-interested-Patriot, and now you shall hear the fourth and last kind, which is the Indolent-Patriot, one who acts as I have seen a prudent Man in Company fall asleep at the beginning of a Fray, and never wake till the end on't.
Here's to Peace or War, I do not care which.
So this Gentleman being neutral, Peace has it two to one.
Perhaps neither shall have it, perhaps I have found a way to reconcile both Parties: But go on.
Can any one, who is a Friend to, wish for War, in our present Circumstances? -- I desire to ask you all one Question, Are we not a Set of miserable poor Dogs?
Ay, ay.
That we are sure enough, that no body will deny.
Yes, Sir, I deny it.
Nay, Gentlemen, let me not disturb you, I beg you will all sit down, I am come to drink a Glass with you -- Canbe poor while there is this in it?
Nay, be not afraid of it, Gentlemen, it is honest Gold I assure you; you are a set of poor Dogs, you agree, I say you are not, for this is all yours, there,
take it among you.
And what are we to do for it?
Only say you are rich, that's all.
Oh, if that be all!
Well, Sir, what is your Opinion now? tell me freely.
I will, a Man may be in the wrong through Ignorance, but he's a Rascal who speaks with open Eyes against his Conscience -- I own I thought we were poor, but, Sir, you have convinc'd me that we are rich.
We are all convinc'd.
Then you are all honest Fellows, and here is to your Healths, and since the Bottle is out, hang Sorrow, cast away Care, e'en take a Dance, and I will play you a Tune on the Fiddle.
Agreed.
Strike up when you will, we are ready to attend your Motions.
Perhaps there may be something intended by this Dance which you don't take.
Ay, what prithee?
Sir, every one of these Patriots have a Hole in their Pockets, as Mr.the Fiddler there knows, so that he intends to make them dance till all the Money is fall'n through, which he will pick up again, and so not lose one Half-penny by his Generosity; so far from it, that he will get his Wine for nothing, and the poor People, alas! out of their own Pockets, pay the whole Reckoning. This, Sir, I think is a very pretty Pantomime Trick, and an ingenious Burlesque on all the Fourberies which the greathas exhibited in all his Entertainments: And so ends my Play, my Farce, or what you please to call it; may I hope it has your Lordship's Approbation?
Very pretty, indeed, it's very pretty.
Then, my Lord, I hope I shall have your
Encouragement; for things in this Town do not always
succeed according to their Merit; there is a Vogue,my Lord, which if you will bring me into, you will
lay a lasting Obligation on me: And you, Mr., I hope, will serve me among the Criticks, that
I may have no elaborate Treatise writ to prove that
a Farce of three Acts is not a regular Play of Five., to you Gentlemen, whom I have not the
Honour to know, who have pleas'd to grace my
Rehearsal; and you Ladies, whether you beLadies, orandLadies, I hope you
will make Allowances for a Rehearsal;

And kindly all report us to the Town;
No borrow'd, nor no stol'n Goods we've shown,
If witty, or if dull, our Play's our own.