Once more I am got safe to the-- let me reflect a little -- I have set up all Night. I have my Head full of bad Wine, and the Noise of Oaths, Dice, and the damn'd tingling of Tavern Bells; my Spirits jaded, and my Eyes sunk into my Head: and all this for the Conversation of a Company of Fellows I despise. Their Wit lies only in Obscenity, their Mirth in Noise, and their Delight in a Box and Dice. Honest, take my Word for it, thou art a mighty silly Fellow.
Where have you been, Rascal? If I had not had the Key in my Pocket, I must have waited at the Door in this dainty Dress.
I was only below combing out your Honour's Wig.
Well, give me my Cap -- Why, how like a raking Dog do you look, compar'd to that spruce, sober Gentleman -- Go, you batter'd Devil, and be made fit to be seen.
Cod, my Master's very merry this Morning.
And now for the Law.
Honestwas a Man after my own Heart.
Have you been for the Money this Morning, as I order'd you?
No, Sir, you bad me go before you was up -- I did not know your Honour meant before you went to Bed.
None of your Jokes, I pray; but to Business -- Go to the Coffee-house, and enquire if there has been any Letter or Message left for me.
I shall, Sir.
Oh, that I had such a soft, deceitful Fair to lull my Senses to their desir'd Sleep --
Come in.
Oh, Master, is it you? How long have you been in Town?
Just come, Sir, and but for a little time neither; and yet I have as many Messages as if we were to stay the whole Year round. Here they are, all of them.
And among them one for your Honour.
Clarinda'sRanger,. -- Ha! ha! ha! the same merry Girl I ever knew her.
My Lady is never sad, Sir.
Pr'ythee,, open the Door.
Well, Child -- and who are you?
Sir, my Mistress gives her Service to you, and has sent you home the Linnen you bespoke.
Well,, my Service to your Lady, and let her know I will most certainly wait upon her -- I am a little busy,-- and so --
Ah, you're a Wag, Master, you're a Wag -- but Mum for that!
I swear, my Dear, you have the prettiest pair of Eyes -- the loveliest pouting Lips -- I never saw you before.
No, Sir -- I was always in the Shop.
Was you so? Well, and what does your Mistress say? -- The Devil fetch me, Child, you look'd so prettily, that I could not mind one Word you said.
Lard, Sir, you are such another Gentleman! Why, she says she is sorry she could not send them sooner. Shall I lay them down?
No, Child. Give 'em me! Dear little smiling Angel --
I beg, Sir, you would be civil.
Civil? Egad, I think I am very civil.
Sir, Mr..
Damn your Impertinence -- Oh, Mr., your Servant.
What shall I say to my Mistress?
Bid her make half a dozen more; but besure you bring them home yourself.
Pshah! Pox! Mr., how should you like to be serv'd so yourself.
How can you,, for a Minute's Pleasure, give an innocent Girl the Pain of Heart I am confident she felt? -- There was a modest Blush upon her Cheek convinces me she was honest.
May be so. I was resolv'd to try, however.
Fy,, -- will you never think?
Yes, but I can't be always thinking. The Law is a damnable dry Study, Mr., and without something now and then to amuse, and relax, it would be too much for my Brain, I promise ye -- But I am a mighty sober Fellow grown -- Here have I been at it these three Hours -- but the Wenches will never let me alone --
Three Hours! -- Why, do you usually study in such Shoes and Stockings?
Rat your inquisitive Eyes.Egad, you have me! The Truth is, I am but this Moment return'd from the Tavern. What,here too!
My Boy, I am heartily glad to see you., let me embrace you. You are the Person I want. I have been at your Lodgings, and was directed hither.
It is to him then I am oblig'd for this Visit: But with all my Heart -- He is the only Man, to whom I don't care how much I am oblig'd.
Your very humble Servant, Sir.
You know,, I want no Inducement to be with you. But -- You look sadly -- What -- No merciless Jade has -- Has she?
No, no. Sound as a Roach, my Lad. I only got a little too much Liquor last Night, which I have not slept off yet.
Thus,, it is every Day. All the Morning his Head akes, at Noon he begins to clear up, towards Evening he is good Company, and all Night he is carefully providing for the same Course the next Day.
Why, I must own, my ghostly Father, I did relapse a little last Night, just to furnish out a decent Confession for the Day.
And he is now doing Penance for it. Were you his Confessor indeed, you could not well desire more.
, he sets up for a Confessor with the worst Grace in the World. Here has he been reproving me for being but decently civil to my Millener. Plague! because the Coldness of his Constitution makes him insensible of a fine Woman's Charms, every body else must be so too.
I am no less sensible of their Charms than you are; tho' I cannot kiss every Woman I meet, or fall in Love, as you call it, with every Face which has the Bloom of Youth upon it. I would only have you a little more frugal of your Pleasures.
My dear Friend, this is very pretty talking. But let me tell you, it is in the Power of the very first Glance from a fine Woman utterly to disconcert all your Philosophy.
It must be from a fine Woman then: and not such as are generally reputed so -- And it must be a thorough Acquaintance with her too, that will ever make an Impression on my Heart.
Would I could see it once! For when a Man has been all his Life hoarding up a Stock, without allowing himself common Necessaries, it tickles me to the Soul to see him lay it all out upon a wrong Bottom, and become a Bankrupt at last.
Well, I don't care how soon you see it. For the Minute I find a Woman capable of Friendship, Love, and Tenderness, with Good-sense enough to be alwayseasy, and Good-nature enough to like me: I will immediately put it to the Trial, which of us shall have the greatest Share of Happiness from the Sex, You or I.
By marrying her, I suppose! Capable of Friendship, Love, and Tenderness, ha, ha, ha! That a Man of your Sense should talk so. If she be capable of Love 'tis all I require of my Mistress; and as every Woman, who is young, is capable of Love, I am very reasonably in Love with every young Woman I meet. -- My Lord, in a Case I read this very Morning, speaks my very Sense.
My Lord!
Yes,Lord! What he says of one Woman, I say of the whole Sex.
There is no arguing with so great a Lawyer. Suppose therefore we adjourn the Debate to some other time. I have some serious Business with Mr., and you want Sleep I am sure.
Sleep! mere Loss of Time, and Hindrance of Business -- We Men of Spirit, Sir, are above it.
Whither shall we go?
Into the. My Chariot is at the Door.
Then if my Servant calls, you'll send him after us.
I will.
Compliments-- A pox of this Head of mine! Never once to ask where she was to be found. It's plain she is not one of us, or I shou'd not have been so remiss in my Inquiries. -- No matter -- I shall meet her in my Walks.
There is no Letter nor Message, Sir.
Then my Things, to dress.
Good-morrow, my dear.
Good-morrow to you, Madam. I have brought my Work, and intend to sit with you this Morning. I hope you have got the better of your Fatigue. Where is? I should be glad if she wou'd come, and work with us.
She work! she is too fine a Lady to do any thing. She is not stirring yet -- we must let her have her Rest. People of her waste of Spirits require more time to recruit again.
It is pity she should be ever tir'd with what is so agreeable to every body else. I am prodigiously pleas'd with her Company.
And when you are better acquainted, you will be still more pleas'd with her. You must rally her upon her Partner at: for, I fancy, Part of her Rest has been disturb'd on his Account.
Was he really a pretty Fellow?
That I can't tell. I did not dance myself, and so did not much mind him. You must have the whole Story from herself.
Oh, I warrant ye, I get it all out. None are so proper to make Discoveries in Love as those who are in the Secret themselves.
Madam, Mr.is inquiring for you. Here has been Mr.with a Letter from his Master, which has made him very angry.
Mr.said indeed he would try him once more, but I fear it will prove in vain. Tell your MasterI am here.
What signifies Fortune, when it only makes us Slaves to other People?
Do not be uneasy, my. You shall always find a Friend in me: But as for Mr., I know not what ill Temper hangs about him lately. Nothing satisfies him. You saw how he receiv'd us when we came off our Journey; tho'was so good Company. He was barely civil to her, and downright rude to me.
I cannot help saying I did observe it.
I saw you did. Hush! he's here.
Oh, your Servant, Madam! Here, I have receiv'd a Letter from Mr., wherein he desires I would once more hear what he has to say -- You know my Sentiments -- Nay, so does he.
For Heaven's sake consider, Sir. This is no new Affair, no sudden start of Passion -- We have known each other long. My Father valued and lov'd him, and I am sure were he alive, I should have his Consent.
Don't tell me. Your Father would not have you marry against his Will; neither will I, against mine: I am your Father now.
And you take a fatherly Care of me.
I wish I had never had any thing to do with you
You may easily get rid of the Trouble.
By listening, I suppose, to the young Gentleman's Proposals.
Which are very reasonable in my Opinion.
Oh, very modest ones truly; and a very modest Gentleman it is that proposes them! A Fool, to expect a Lady of Thirty Thousand Pounds Fortune should, by the Care and Prudence of her Guardian, be thrown away upon a young Fellow not worth three Hundred a Year. He thinks being in Love is an Excuse for all this; but I am not in Love. What does he think will excuse me?
Well, but Mr., I think the Gentleman should be heard.
Well, well! Seven o'Clock's the time, and if the Man has had the good Fortune, since I saw him last, to persuade somebody, or other, to give him a better Estate, I give him my Consent -- not else. His Servant waits below. You may tell him I shall be at home
But where is your Friend, your other Half, all this while? I thought you could not have breath'd a Minute without your.
Why, the Truth is, I was going to see what makes her keep her Chamber so long.
Look ye, Mrs., you have been asking me for Money this Morning. In plain Terms, not one Shilling shall pass through these Fingers till you have clear'd my House of this.
How can her innocent Gaiety have offended you? She is a Woman of Honour, and has as many good Qualities --
As Women of Honour generally have. I know it, and therefore am uneasy.
But, Sir, --
But, Madam, --, nor e'er a Rake of fashion in, shall live in my Family to debauch it.
Sir, she treated me with so much Civility in the Country, that I thought I could not do less than invite her to spend as much time with me in Town, as her Engagements would permit. I little imagin'd you could have been displeas'd at my having so agreeable a Companion.
There was a Time when I was Company enough for leisure Hours.
There was a Time when every Word of mine was sure of meeting with a Smile: But those happy Days, I know not why, have long been over.
I cannot bear a Rival, even of your own Sex. I hate the very Name of female Friends. No twoof you can ever be an Hour by yourselves, but one or both are the worse for it.
Dear Mr.--
This I know -- and will not suffer.
It grieves me, Sir, to see you so much in earnest: But to convince you how willing I am to make you easy in every thing, it shall be my Request to her to remove immediately.
Do it then -- hark ye? -- Your Request, why yours? It's mine. -- My Command -- Tell her so -- I will be Master in my own Family, and I care not who knows it.
You fright me, Sir. -- But it shall be as you please.
Ha! have I not gone too far? I am not Master of myself -- Mrs.--
Understand me right. I do not mean, by what I have said, that I suspect your Innocence: But by crushing this growing Friendship all at once, I may prevent a Train of Mischief which you do not foresee. I was perhaps too harsh, therefore do it in your own way -- But let me see the House fairly rid of her.
His Earnestness in this Affair amazes me. I am sorry I made this Visit to-- and yet I'll answer for her Honour. -- What can I say to her? Necessity must plead in my Excuse -- For at all Events, Mr.must be obey'd.
Now,, I may unfold the Secret of my Heart to you with greater Freedom; for tho'has Honour, I am not in a Humour to be laugh'd at. I must have one, that will bear with my Impertinence,sooth me into Hope, and, like a Friend indeed, with Tenderness advise me.
I thought you appeared more grave than usual.
Oh!, my Soul is so full of Joy, of Pain, Hope, Despair, and Extasy, that no Word but Love is capable of expressing what I feel.
Is Love the Secretis not fit to hear? In my mind, he wou'd prove the more able Counsellor. And is all the gay Indifference of my Friend at last reduced to Love?
Even so -- Never was Prude more resolute in Chastity and Ill-nature, than I was fix'd in Indifference: But Love has rais'd me from that inactive State above the Being of a Man.
Faith,, I begin to think it has -- But pray, bring this Rapture into order a little, and tell me regularly, how, where, and when.
If I was not most unreasonably in Love, those horrid Questions would stop my Mouth at once. But as I am arm'd against Reason -- I answer -- at-- on, she danced and caught me.
Danced? -- and was that all? But who is she? What is her Name? her Fortune? where does she live?
Hold! hold! not so many hard Questions. Have a little Mercy. I know but little of her, that's certain. But all I do know you shall have. That Evening was the first of her appearing at. The Moment I saw her I resolved to ask the Favour of her Hand. But the easy Freedom with which she gave it, and her unaffected Good-humour during the whole Night, gain'd such a Power over my Heart, as none of her Sex could ever boast before. I waited on her home, and the next Morning, when I went to make the usual Compliments, the Bird was flown. She had set out fortwo Hours before; and in a Chariot and Six -- you Rogue.
But was it her own,?
That I don't know; but it looks better than being drag'd to Town in the Stage. That day and the next I spent in Enquiries. I waited on the Ladies who came with her. They knew nothing of her. So, without learning either her Name or Fortune, I e'en call'd for my Boots, and rode Post after her.
And how do you find yourself after your Journey?
Why, as yet, I own, I am but upon a cold Scent. But a Woman of her Sprightliness and Gentility cannot but frequent all publick Places; and when once she is found, the Pleasure of the Chace will overpay the Pains of rousing her. -- Oh!, there was something peculiarly charming in her, that seem'd to claim my farther Acquaintance: and if in the other more familiar Parts of Life she shine with that superior Lustre; and at last I win her to my Arms, how shall I bless my Resolution in pursuing her!
But if at last she should prove unworthy --
I would endeavour to forget her.
Promise me that,,
and I allow -- But we are interrupted.
Whom have we here? my old Friend? Thou art grown a meer Antique since I saw thee? How hast thou done these five hundred Years?
Even as you see me; well, and at your Service, ever.
Ha! who's that?
A Friend of mine. Mr., this is, Sir, as honest a Fellow as any in Life.
Pho! prithee! Pox!-- Don't be silly -- Sir, I am your humble -- Any one who is a Friend of myI am proud of embracing.
Sir, I shall endeavour to deserve your Civility.
Oh! Sir, -- Well!, what? Dumb? Come, come; you may talk tho' you have nothing to say, as I do -- Let us hear, where have you been?
Why, for this last Week,, I have been at.
! the most ridiculous Place in Life! -- amongst Tradesmens Wives that hate their Husbands, and People of Quality that had rather go to the Devil than stay at home. People of no Taste -- no-- and for. If it were not for the Puppet-show,would be dead amongst them. -- But the News,, -- the Ladies, -- I fear, your Time hung heavy on your Hands, by the small Stay you made there.
Faith, and so it did,. The Ladies are grown such Idiots in Love -- The Cards have so debauch'd their five Senses, that Love, almighty Love himself, is utterly neglected.
It is the strangest thing in Life, but it is just so with us abroad. Faith!To tell you a Secret, which I don't care, if all the World knows. I am almost surfeited with the Services of the Ladies; the modest ones I mean. The vast Variety of Duties they expect -- as dressing up to the Fashion, losing fashionably, keeping fashionable Hours, drinking fashionable Liquors, and fifty other such irregular Niceties so ruin a Man's Pocket and Constitution, that foregad! he must have the Estate of a Duke, and the Strength of a Gondolier, who would lift himself into their Service!
A free Confession truly,, for one of your Coat.
The Ladies are oblig'd to you.
Oh! Lard!I have had the greatest Misfortune in Life, since I saw you -- Poor! that I brought fromwith me, is dead.
Well! well! get you another, and all will be well again.
No! the Rogue broke me so much, and gnaw'dmyLeather Shoes so filthily, that when he was dead, I began not to endure him.
Exactly at Seven! Run back, and assure him I will not fail.
Dead? Pray, who was the Gentleman?
This Gentleman was my Monkey, Sir, -- an odd sort of a Fellow that used to divert me, -- and pleased every body so at, that he always made one in our-- But Mr., I saw a Servant, I hope no Engagement. For you two positively shall dine with me. I have the finestin Life. Oblige me so far.
Sir -- your Servant! what say you,?
Pho! Pox!! you shall go. My Aunts think you begin to neglect them; and old Maids, you know, are the most jealous Creatures in Life.
swears they can't be Maids, they are so good-natur'd! Well! I agree, on Condition I may eat what I please, and go away just when I will.
Ay! ay! you shall do just what you will. But how shall we do? My Post-Chaise won't carry us all.
My Chariot is here: and I will conduct Mr..
Mr.-- I beg pardon, I can't possibly dine out of Town! I have an Engagement early in the Evening. --
Out of Town! No, my Dear; I live just by. I see one of the, I would not miss speaking to for the Universe. And so I expect you at Three.
Ha! ha! ha! and so you thought you had at least fifty Miles to go Post for a Spoonful of.
I suppose then, he is just come out of the Country.
Nor that neither. I would venture a Wager, from his own House hither; or to an Auction or two of old dirty Pictures, is the utmost of his Travels to-day: Or he may have been in Pursuit, perhaps of a new Cargo, ofTooth-picks.
A special Acquaintance I have made to-day.
For all this,, he has a Heart worthy your Friendship. He spends his Estate freely, and you cannot oblige him more, than by shewing him how he can be of Service to you.
Now you say something. It is the Heart,, I value in a Man.
Right! -- and there is a Heart even in a Woman's Breast that is worth the Purchase, or my Judgment has deceiv'd me. Dear, I know your Concern for me. See her first, and then blame me, if you can.
So far from blaming you,, that if my Endeavours can be serviceable, I will beat the Bushes with you.
That I am afraid will not do. For you know less of her than I. But if in your Walks you meet a finer Woman than ordinary, let her not escape till I have seen her. -- Wheresoe'er she is, she cannot long lie hid.
Ay! ay we both stand condemn'd out of our own Mouths.
Why -- I cannot but own -- I never had a thought of any Man that troubled me, but of him.
Then I dare swear, by this time, you heartily repent your leavingso soon.
Indeed you are mistaken. I have not had one Scruple since.
Why, what one Inducement can he have ever to think of you again?
Oh! the greatest of all Inducements, Curiosity. Let me assure you, a Woman's surest Hold over a Man is to keep him in Incertainty. As soon as ever you put him out of Doubt, you put him out of your Power: But when once a Woman has awak'd his Curiosity, she may lead him a Dance of many a troublesome Mile without the least Fear of losing him at last.
Now do I heartily wish he may have Spirit enough to follow, and use you as you deserve. Such a Spirit, with but a little Knowledge of our Sex, might put that Heart of yours into a strange Flutter.
I care not how soon. I long to meet with such a Fellow. Our modern Beaux are such jointed Babies in Love, they have no Feeling. They are entirely insensible either of Pain or Pleasure, but from their own dear Persons: And according as we flatter, or affront their Beauty, they admire or forsake ours. They are not worthy even our Displeasure; and, in short, abusing them is but so much ill-nature merely thrown away. But the Man of Sense, who values himself upon his high Abilities: Or the Man of Wit, who thinks a Woman beneath his Conversation -- To see such the Subjects of our Power, the Slaves of our Frowns and Smiles, is glorious indeed!
No Men of Sense, or Wit either, if they be truly so, ever did, or ever can think a Woman of Merit beneath their Wisdom to converse with.
Nor will such a Woman value herself upon making such a Lover uneasy.
Amazing! Why, every Woman can give Ease? You cannot be in earnest.
I can assure you she is, and has put in practice the Doctrine she has been teaching.
Impossible! Who ever heard the Name of Love mention'd without an Idea of Torment? But pray let us hear.
Nay, there is nothing to hear that I know of.
So I suspected, indeed! The Novel is not likely to be long, when the Lady is so well prepar'd for the.
The Novel, as you call it, is not so short as you may imagine. I and my Spark have been long acquainted. As he was continually with my Father, I soon perceiv'd he lov'd me, and the Manner of his expressing that Love was what pleas'd and won me most.
Well! and how was it? The old Bait? Flattery? Dear Flattery, I warrant ye.
No, indeed, -- I had not the Pleasure of hearing my Person, Wit, and Beauty painted out with forced Praises; but I had a more sensible Delight in perceiving the Drift of his whole Behaviour was to make ev'ry Hour of my Time pass away agreably.
The Rustick! What, did he never say a handsom thing of your Person?
He did, it seems, what pleas'd her better. He flatter'd her good Sense as much as a less cunning Lover would have done her Beauty.
On my Conscience, you are well match'd.
So well, that if my Guardian denies me Happiness, (and this Evening he is to pass his final Sentence) nothing is left but to break my Prison, and fly into my Lover's Arms for Safety.
Hey Day! O' my Conscience thou art a brave Girl. Thou art the very first Prude, that ever had Honesty enough to avow her Passion for a Man.
And thou art the first finish'd Coquet who ever had any Honesty at all.
Come, come! You are both too good for either of those Characters.
And my dear Mrs., here is the first young married Woman of Spirit, who has an ill-natur'd Fellow for a Husband, and never once thinks of using him as he deserves. -- Good Heaven! If I had such a Husband --
You would be just as unhappy as I am.
But come now -- Confess -- Do not you long to be a Widow?
Would I were any thing but what I am!
Then go the nearest Way about it. I'd break that stout Heart of his in less than a Fortnight. I'd make him know --
Pray be silent. You know my Resolution.
I know you have no Resolution.
You are a mad Creature, but I forgive you.
It is all meant kindly, I assure you. But since you won't be persuaded to your Good; I will think of making you easy in your Submission as ever I can, I dare say, I may have the same Lodging I had last Year. I can know immediately -- I see my Chair: And so Ladies both, adieu!
Come, Mrs., we shall but just have time to get home before Mr.comes.
Let us return then to our common Prison. You must forgive my Ill-nature,, if I almost wish Mr.may refuse to join your Hand where your Heart is given.
Lord! Madam, what do you mean?
Self-interest only, Child! Methinks your Company in the Country would soften all my Sorrows, and I could bear them patiently.
Dear Mrs.-- I am so confus'd, and so out of Breath --
Why, what is the Matter?
I protest you fright me.
Oh! I have no time to recover myself, I am so frighten'd and so pleas'd. In short then, the dear Man is here?
Here -- Lord -- Where?
I met him this Instant. I saw him at a Distance, turn'd short; and ran hither directly. Let us go home. I tell you, he follows me.
Why, had you not better stay, and let him speak to you?
Ay! But -- then -- He won't know where I live, without my telling him.
Come, then. Ha! ha! ha!
Ah! Poor! --
Sure that must be she! Her Shape and easy Air cannot be so exactly copied by another. -- Now, you young Rogue,, guide me directly to her, as you would the surest Arrow in your Quiver.
Lord! -- Dear-- for Heaven's sake make haste. He'll overtake us before we get in.
Overtake us? Why, he is not in Sight.
Is not he? Ha! sure I have not dropt my Twee -- I would not have him lose Sight of me neither.
Here he is --
In -- In -- In then.
What, without your Twee?
Pshah! I have lost nothing. -- In -- I'll follow you.
It is impossible I should be deceiv'd: My Eyes, and the quick Pulses at my Heart assure me it is she. Ha!'tis she, by Heaven! and the Door left open too -- A fair Invitation, by all the Rules of Love --
I hope, Madam, you will excuse the Boldness of this Intrusion, since it is owing to your own Behaviour that I am forc'd to it.
To my Behaviour, Sir?
You cannot but remember me at, Madam, where I so lately had the Favour of your Hand --
I do remember, Sir; but I little expected any wrong Interpretation of my Behaviour from one, who had so much Appearance of a Gentleman.
What I saw of your Behaviour was so just, it would admit of no Misinterpretation. I only fear'd, whatever Reason you had to conceal your Name from me at, you might have the same to do it now; and tho' my Happiness was so nearly concern'd, I rather chose to venture thus abruptly after you, than be impertinently inquisitive.
Sir, there seems to be so much Civility in your Rudeness, that I can easily forgive it; tho' I don't see how your Happiness is at all concern'd.
No, Madam! I believe you are the only Lady, who could, with the Qualifications you are Mistress of, be insensible of the Power they give you over the Happiness of our Sex.
How vain should we Women be, if you Gentlemen were but wise! If you did not all of you say the same things to every Woman, we shou'd certainly be foolish enough to believe some of you were in earnest.
Could you have the last Sense of what I feel whilst I am speaking, you would know me to be inearnest, and what I say to be the Dictates of a Heart that admires you. May I not say --
Sir, this is carrying the --
When I danced with you at, I was charm'd with your whole Behaviour, and felt the same tender Admiration: But my Hope of seeing you afterwards kept in my Passion 'till a more proper Time should offer. You cannot therefore blame me now, if, after having lost you once, I do not suffer an inexcusable Modesty to prevent my making use of this second Opportunity.
This Behaviour, Sir, is so different from the Gaiety of your Conversation then, that I am at a loss how to answer you.
There is nothing, Madam, which could take off from the Gaiety with which your Presence inspires every Heart, but the Fear of losing you. How can I be otherwise than as I am, when I know not, but you may leaveas abruptly as you did?
Madam, the Tea is ready, and my Mistress waits for you.
Very well, I come --
You see, Sir, I am call'd away; but I hope you will excuse it, when I leave you with an Assurance, that the Business which brings me to Town will keep me here some time.
How generous it is in you thus to ease the Heart, that knew not how to ask for such a Favour -- I fear to offend -- But this House, I suppose, is yours.
You will hear of me, if not find me here.
I then take my Leave.
I'm undone! -- He has me!
Well! How do you find yourself?
I do find -- that if he goes on, as he has begun, I shall certainly have him without giving him the least Uneasiness.
A very terrible Prospect, indeed!
But I must teize him a little. -- Where is? How will she laugh at me, if I become a Pupil of hers, and learn to give Ease? No! positively I shall never do it.
Poorhas met with what I fear'd, from Mr.Temper -- An utter Denial. I know not why, but he really grows more and more ill-natur'd.
Well! now do I heartily wish my Affairs were in his Power a little, that I might have a few Difficulties to surmount. -- I love Difficulties -- and yet, I don't know, it is as well as it is.
Ha, ha, ha! Come, the Tea waits.
These Doings in my House distract me! I met a fine Gentleman -- when I inquir'd who he was; why, he came to. I met a Footman too, and he came to. I shall not be easy till she is decamp'd. My Wife had the Character of a virtuous Woman -- and they have not been long acquainted. But then they were by themselves at! That hurts -- that hurts. -- They must be watch'd -- they must -- I know them, I know all their Wiles, and the best of them are but Hypocrites. Ha! --
Suppose I bribe the Maid -- She is of their Counsel -- The Manager of their Secrets -- It shall be so -- Money will do it, and I shall know all that passes.
Sir.
Sir. If he should suspect, and search me now, I'm undone.
She is a sly Girl, and may be serviceable.
, you are a good Girl, and have an honest Face. I like it. It looks as if it carried no Deceit in it -- Yet if she should be false, she can do me most harm.
Pray, Sir, speak out.
No! she is a Woman, and it is the highest Imprudence to trust her.
I am not able to understand you.
I am glad of it. I would not have you understand me.
Then what did you call me for? If he should be in Love with my Face, it would be rare Sport.
, ay,is the proper Person --, tellI want him.
Yes, Sir. --
Mighty odd, this! It gives me time however to sendwith this Letter to his Master.
Could I but be once well satisfied that my Wife had really finish'd me, I believe I should be as quiet, as if I were sure of the contrary. -- But whilst I am in doubt, I am miserable.
Does your Honour please to want me?
Ay,. -- I need not fear. The Honesty of his Service and the Goodness of his Look make me secure. I will trust him.
--, I think I have been a tolerable good Master to you.
Yes, Sir, -- very tolerable.
I like his Simplicity well. It promises Honesty -- I have a Secret,, to impart to you -- A thing of the greatest Importance. Look upon me, and don't stand picking your Fingers.
Yes, Sir. -- No, Sir.
But will not his Simplicity expose him the more toCunning? Yes, yes! she will worm the Secret out of him. I had better trust her with it at once. -- So -- I will.
, go, sendhither.
Yes, Sir. -- Here she is.
, my Master wants you.
Get you down,.
Yes, Sir.
If you want me, Sir, I beg you would make haste, for I have a thousand things to do.
Well! well! What I have to say will not take up much time, could I but persuade you to be honest.
Why, Sir, I hope you don't suspect my Honesty?
Well! well! I believe you honest.
What can be at the bottom of all this?
So! We cannot be too private. Come hither, Hussy! nearer yet.
Laud! Sir! You are not going to be rude. I vow, I will call out.
Hold your Tongue. Does the Baggage laugh at me?
She does -- She mocks me, and will reveal it to my Wife; and her Insolence upon it will be more insupportable to me than Cuckoldom itself. I have not Leisure now,-- Some other time -- Hush! Did not the Bell ring? Yes, yes; my Wife wants you. Go, go, go to her.
There is no Hell on Earth like being a Slave to Suspicion.
Nay, nay, I would not put your Family into any Confusion.
None in Life, my Dear, I assure you. I will go and order every thing this Instant for her Reception.
You are too obliging, Sir; but you need not be in this hurry, for I am in no Certainty when I shall trouble you: I only know that myhas taken such a Resolution.
Therefore we should be prepar'd; for when once a Lady has such a Resolution in her Head, she is upon the rack till she executes it, foregad! Mr., this must be a Girl of Fire.
Tol de rol, lol!
Who is this you talk thus rapturously of?
Who should it be, but -- I shall know her Name to Morrow.
What is the matter, ho! Is the Man mad?
Even so, Gentlemen, as mad as Love and Joy can make me.
But inform us whence this Joy proceeds.
Joy! Joy! my Lads! She's found! My! My Charmer!
Egad! her Charms have bewitch'd the Man I think. -- But who is she?
Come, come, tell us, who is this Wonder?
But will you say nothing?
Nothing, as I live.
Nor you?
I'll be as silent as the Grave --
With a Tombstone upon it, to tell every one whose Dust you carry.
I'll be as secret as a debauch'd Prude --
Whose Sanctity every one suspects., 'tis not in thy Nature. Keeping a Secret is worse to thee than keeping thy Accounts. But to leave fooling, listen to me, both, that I may whisper it into your Ears, that Echo may not catch the sinking Sound -- I cannot tell who she is, 'faith -- Tol do rol, lol --
Mad! mad! very mad!
All I know of her is, that she is a charming Woman, and has given me liberty to visit her again --, 'tis she, the lovely she.
So I did suppose.
Poor! For Heaven's sake, Mr., persuade him home to his Chamber -- Whilst I prepare every thing for you at home.
Adieu! -- B'ye! ha, ha, ha!
Oh, Love! thou art a Gift worthy of a God indeed! Dear, nothing now could add to my Pleasure, but to see my Friend as deep in Love as I am.
I shew my Heart is capable of Love, by the Friendship it bears to you.
The Light of Friendship looks but dim before the brighter Flame of Love. Love is the Spring of Chearfulness and Joy. Why, how dull and phlegmatick do you shew to me now? Whilst I am all Life; light as feather'd. -- You dull, and cold as Earth and Water; I light and warm as Air and Fire. -- Those are the only Elements in Love's World! Why,, for Shame! get thee a Mistress, and be sociable.
, I am now going to --
Why that Face now? Your humble Servant, Sir. My Flood of Joy shall not be stopt by your melancholy Fists, I assure you.
Stay,, I beg you stay. What would you say now, if I really were in Love?
Why, faith, thou hast such romantick Notions of Sense and Honour, that I know not what to say.
To confess the Truth then, I am in Love.
And do you confess it as if it were a Sin? Proclaim it loud. -- Glory in it -- Boast of it as your greatest Virtue. -- Swear it with a Lover's Oath, and I will believe you.
Why then, by the bright Eyes of her I love?
Well said!
By all that's tender, amiable, and soft in Woman --
Bravo!
I swear, I am as true anas ever tagg'd a Rhyme.
And art thou then thoroughly in Love? Come to my Arms, thou dear Companion of my Joys --
Why -- Hey! -- Is there never a Wench to be got for Love or Money?
Pshah!here!
Yes,is here, and perhaps does not come so impertinently as you may imagine. Faith! I think I have the knack of finding out Secrets. Nay, never look so queer -- Here is a Letter, Mr., that seems to promise you better Diversion than your hugging one another.
What do you mean?
Do you deal much in these Paper Tokens?
Oh! the dear kind Creature! It is from her herself.
What, is it a Pair of lac'd Shoes she wants? Or have the Boys broke her Windows?
Hold your prophane Tongue!
Nay, prithee, don't keep it to yourself, as if her whole Affections were contain'd in these few Lines.
Prithee, let him alone to his silent Raptures: But it is, as I always said -- Your grave Men ever are the greatest Whore-masters.
I cannot be disoblig'd now, say what you will. But how came this into your Hands?
Your Servantand I chang'd Commissions. He went on my Errand, and I came on his.
S'death! I want him this very Instant.
He will be here presently! But I demand to know what I have brought you?
Ay! ay! Out with it! You know we never blab, and may be of Service.
Twelve o'Clock! oh! the dear Hour.
Why, it is a pretty convenient Time, indeed.
By all that's happy, she promises in this Letter here -- to leave her Guardian this very Night -- and run away with me.
How is this?
Nay, I know not how myself -- she says at the Bottom --Lucetta,, Jacintha.
Carry her to a Bagnio, and there you may lodge with her.
Why, this must be a Girl of Spirit, Faith!
And Beauty equal to her Sprightliness. I love her, and she loves me -- She has thirty Thousand to her Fortune.
The Devil she has!
And never plays at Cards. --
Nor does any one thing like any one other Woman, I suppose.
Not so, I hope, neither.
Oh!,, I never felt such Ease before. The Secret's out, and you don't laugh at me.
Laugh at thee? -- for loving a Woman of thirty thousand Pound? Thou art a most unaccountable Fellow.
How the Devil could he work her up to this? I never could have had the Face to have done it. But -- I know not how. -- There is a Degree of Assurance in you modest Gentlemen, which we impudent Fellows never can come up to --
Oh! your Servant, good Sir; you should not abuse me now,, but do all you can to assist me.
Why, look ye,, I am a damnable unlucky Fellow -- and so will have nothing to do in this Affair. I'll take care to be out of the way, so as to do you no harm. That is all I can answer for, and so Success attend you.
I cannot leave you, quite to yourself neither, for if this should prove a Round-house Affair, as I make no doubt it will, I believe I may have more Interest there than you; and so, Sir, you may hear of me at --
For shame,, the most noted Gaming-house in Town.
Forgive me this once, my Boy. I must go, Faith, to pay a Debt of Honour to some of the greatest Rascals in the Nation.
But where do you design to lodge her?
At Mr.-- He is already gone to prepare for her Reception.
The properest Place in the World. His Aunts will entertain her with Honour.
And the Newness of our Acquaintance will prevent its being suspected. --, give me your Hand. This is a very critical Time --
Pho! none of your musty Reflexions now! When a Man is in Love to the very Brink of Matrimony, what the Devil has he to do withand? Here is your Servant with a Face full of Business -- I'll leave you together -- I shall be at the, where, if you want my Assistance, you may find me.
So -- Buckle -- you seem to have your Hands full.
Not fuller than my Head, Sir, I promise you. You have had your Letter, I hope.
Yes, and in it she refers me to you for my Instructions.
Why, the Affair stands thus -- As Mr.sees the Doors lock'd and barr'd every Night himself, and takes the Keys up with him; it is impossible for us to escape any way but thro' the Window: for which Purpose I have a Ladder of Ropes.
Good --
And because a Hoop, as the Ladies wear them now, is not the most decent Dress to come down a Ladder in -- I have in this other Bundle a Suit of Boys Cloaths, which I believe will fit her. At least, it will serve the Time she will want it -- You will soon be for pulling them off, I suppose.
Why, you are in Spirits, you Rogue.
These I am now to convey to-- Have you any thing to say, Sir?
Nothing, but that I will not fail at the Hour appointed -- Bring me word to Mr.how you go on. Succeed in this, and it shall make your Fortune.
How tediously have the Minutes past these last few Hours! and the envious Rogues will fly, no Lightning quicker, when we would have them stay. -- Hold! let me not mistake. -- This is the House.
By Heaven! it is not yet the Hour -- I hear somebody coming. The Moon's so bright -- I had better not be here, 'till the happy Instant comes.
Wine is no Antidote to Love, but rather feeds the Flame. Now am I such an amorous Puppy, that I cannot walk straight Home, but must come out of my way to take a View of my Queen's Palace by Moon-light. -- Ay, here stands the Temple where my Goddess is adored! the Door opens!
Madam, Madam, hist! Madam -- How shall I make her hear? --
Who is there? -- What's the Matter? --
It is I, Madam. You must not pretend to stir 'till I give the Word -- You'll be discover'd if you do. --
What do I see! a Man. My Heart misgives me! --
My Master is below sitting up for Mrs.. He raves as if he was mad about her being out so late.
Here is some Intrigue, or other. I must see more of this, before I give further way to Love.
One Minute he is in the Street -- the next he is in the Kitchen. Now he will lock her out, and then he'll wait himself, and see what Figure she makes when she vouchsafes to venture home.
I long to have it over. Get me but once out of this House!
Cowardly Rascal! Would I were in his Place.
If I can but fix him any where, I can let you out myself. -- You have the Ladder ready in Case of Necessity.
Yes! yes!
The Ladder! This must lead to some Discovery. I shall watch you, my young Gentleman. I shall.
This Whisk is a most enticing Devil. I am afraid I am too late for Mr.sober Hours.
Ha! I hear a Noise!
No! I see a Light inWindow. You may go home.
I am safe.
Sure it must be he! Mr.-- Sir!
Does not he call to me?
Ha! who's that? I am frighted out of my Wits. -- A Man! --
Is it you?
Yes! yes! 'tis I! 'tis I!
Listen at the Door.
I will, 'tis open -- There is no Noise -- All's quiet.
Sure it is my Spark -- and talking to.
You may come down the Ladder -- quick.
Catch it then; and hold it.
I have it. Now I shall see what sort of Mettle my young Spark is made of.
With a Ladder too! I'll assure you. But I must see the end of it.
Hark! did not somebody speak!
No! no! Be not fearful -- 'Sdeath! we are discover'd.
Hist! hist! are you ready?
Yes, may I venture?
Now is your Time. He is in high Conference with his Privy-Counsellor Mr.. You may come down the Back Stairs, and I'll let you out.
I will, I will, and am heartily glad of it.
May be so -- But you and I shall have a few Words before you get off so cleanly.
How lucky it was I came homeat this Instant. I shall spoil his Sport, I believe. Do you know me, Sir?
I am amaz'd! You here! This was unexpected indeed!
Why, I believe I do come a little unexpectedly; but I shall amaze you more -- I know the whole Course of your Amour; all the Process of your mighty Passion from its first Rise --
What is all this! --
To the very Conclusion, which you vainly hope to effect this Night.
By Heaven, Madam, I know not what you mean. I came hither purely to contemplate on your Beauties.
Any Beauties, Sir, I find will serve your Turn. Did I not hear you talk to her at the Window?
Her!
Blush, blush for Shame; but be assur'd you have seen the last both ofand me.
Hear me, Madam -- She is gone. This must certainly beMistress, and I have fairly ruin'd all his Scheme. This it is to be in Luck.
Ha! A Man under the Window!
No, here she comes, and I may convey her to him.
I have at last got to you: Let's haste away -- Oh!
Be not frighten'd, Lady.
Oh! I am abus'd, betray'd!
Betray'd!
I can scarce believe it, tho' I see it. Draw --
Hear me,-- Lady.
Stay -- do not fight.
I am innocent; it is all a Mistake.
For my Sake, be quiet -- We shall be discover'd. The Family is alarm'd.
You are obey'd -- Mr., there is but one Way --
I understand you. Any time but now. You will certainly be discover'd. To-morrow -- at your Chambers. --
'Till then, farewel.
Then, when he is cool, I may be heard; and the real, tho' suspicious Account of this Matter may be believ'd. Yet amidst all this Perplexity, it pleases me to find my fairis jealous of my Love.
Where's? Search every Place.
Hark! the Cry is up -- I must be gone.
She's gone! She's lost! I am cheated! pursue her!Seek her!
Sir, all her Cloaths are in her Chamber.
Sir, Mrs.said she was in Boys Cloaths.
Ay, ay! I know it --has her -- Come along -- Pursue her.
Well! I am in great Hopes she will escape.
Never fear, Madam. The Lovers have the start of him, and I warrant, they keep it
Were Mr.ever to suspect my being privy to her Flight, I know not what might be the Consequence.
Then you had better be undressing -- He may return immediately.--
Young and beautiful.--
I have watch'd him pretty narrowly of late, and never once suspected till this Morning --
And who gave you Authority to watch his Actions, or pry into his Secrets?
I hope, Madam, you are not angry. I thought it might have been of Service to you to know my Master was jealous.
And her Husband jealous! If she does but send away the Maid, I am happy.
Leave me!
This is to meddle with other Peoples Affairs.
What a lucky Dog I am! I never made a Gentleman a Cuckold before. Now, Impudence, assist me.
Provoking! I am sure I never have deserv'd it of him.
Oh! Cuckold him by all means, Madam, I am your Man!
Oh, fy, Madam! If you squawl so cursedly, you will be discover'd.
Discover'd! What mean you, Sir? Do you come to abuse me?
I'll do my Endeavours, Madam: You can have no more.
Whence came you? How got you here?
Dear Madam, so long as I am here, what signifies how I got here, or whence I came? But that I may satisfy your Curiosity. First, as to your whence came you? I answer, out of the Street: And to your How got you here? I say, in at the Window. It stood so invitingly open, it was irresistible. But, Madam -- You was going to undress. I beg I may not incommode you.
This is the most consummate Piece of Impudence! --
For Heaven's sake, have one Drop of Pity for a poor young Fellow, who long has lov'd you.
What would the Fellow have?
Your Husband's Usage will excuse you to the World.
I cannot bear this Insolence! Help! help!
Oh! hold that clamorous Tongue! Madam, speak one Word more, and I am gone, positively gone?
Gone! So I would have you.
Lord! Madam, you are so hasty.
Shall I not speak, when a Thief, a Robber breaks into my House at Midnight? Help! help!
Ha! no one hears. Now,, assist me! Look ye, Madam, I never could make fine Speeches, and cringe, and bow, and fawn, and flatter, and lye. I havesaid more to you already, than I ever said to a Woman in such Circumstances in all my Life. But since I find you will yield to no Persuasion to your Good -- I will gently force you to be grateful.
Come, come! unbend that Brow, and look more kindly on me!
For Shame, Sir -- Thus on my Knees, let me beg for Mercy.
And thus, on mine, let me beg the same.
Take away her Sword! She'll hurt herself!
Oh! Heavens! that is my Husband's Voice!
The Devil it is!
Take away her Sword, I say; and then I can close with her.
He is upon the Stairs, now coming up. I am undone, if he sees you.
Pox on him! I must decamp then. Which Way?
Thro' this Passage into the next Chamber.
And so into the Street. With all my Heart. You may be perfectly easy, Madam. Mum's the Word. I never blab. --
I shall never leave off so, but wait till the last Moment.
So, he is gone? What could I have said, if he had been discover'd!
Once more, my pretty masculine Madam, you are welcome home. And I hope to keep you somewhat closer than I have done: for to-morrow Morning, eight o'Clock, is the latest Hour you shall stay in this lewd Town.
Oh, Sir! when once a Girl is equip'd with a hearty Resolution, it is not your Worship's Sagacity, northe great Chain at your Gate can hinder her from doing what she has a Mind.
Oh, Lord! Lord! How this Love improves a young Lady's Modesty!
Am I to blame to seek for Happiness any where, when you are resolv'd to make me miserable here!
I have this Night prevented your making yourself so; and will endeavour to do it for the future. I have you safe now, and the Devil shall not get you out of my Clutches again. I have lock'd the Doors and barr'd them, I warrant you. So, here --
Troop to your Chamber, and to Bed, whilst you are well. Go --
What's here? a Hat! A Man's Hat in my Wife's Dressing-Room!
What shall I do?
Ha! By Hell! I see 'tis true.
My Fears confound me. I dare not tell the Truth, and know not how to frame a Lye!
Mrs.! Mrs.! How came this Hat into your Chamber!
Are you that way dispos'd, my fine Lady, and will not trust me?
Speak, Wretch, speak. --
I could not have suspected this.
Why dost thou not speak?
Sir --
Guilt -- 'tis Guilt that ties your Tongue!
I must bring her off, however. -- No Chambermaid can help it. --
My Fears are just, and I am miserable -- Thou worst of Women!
I know my Innocence, and can bear this no longer.
I know you are false, -- and 'tis I who will bear my Injuries no longer.
Is not the Hat yours? Own it, Madam.
What Ground? what Cause have you for Jealousy, when you yourself can witness, your leaving me was accidental; your Return uncertain; and expected even sooner than it happen'd? The Abuse is gross and palpable.
Why, this is true!
Indeed,, I am innocent.
And yet this Hat must belong to somebody.
Dear Mrs., be not concern'd when he has diverted himself a little longer with it --
Ha! --
I suppose he will give me my Hat again?
Your Hat?
Yes, my Hat. You brush'd it from my Side yourself, and then trod upon it; whether on purpose to abuse this Lady, or no, you best know yourself.
It cannot be -- It's all a Lye.
Believe so still -- with all my Heart -- But the Hat is mine.
Why did she look so?
Your Violence of Temper is too much for her. You use her Ill, and then suspect her for that Confusion which you yourself occasion.
Why, did not you set me right at first?
Your hard Usage of me, Sir, is a sufficient Reason why I should not be much concern'd to undeceive you at all. 'Tis for your Lady's sake, I do it now; who deserves much better of you than to be thus expos'd for every slight Suspicion. See where she sits -- Go to her.
Indeed, Mr., I have a Soul as much above --
Whew! now you have both found your Tongues, and I must bear their eternal Rattle!
For Shame! Sir, Go to her, and --
Well! well! what shall I say? I forgive -- all is over. I, I, I forgive!
Forgive? What do you mean?
Forgive her? is that all? Consider, Sir --
Hold -- hold your confounded Tongues, and I'll do any thing. I'll ask Pardon -- or forgive -- or any thing. Good now, be quiet -- I ask your Pardon -- there --
For you, Madam -- I am infinitely oblig'd to you, and I could find in my Heart to make you a Return in kind, by marrying you to a Beggar, -- but I have more Conscience. Come, come; to your Chamber. -- Here, take this Candle -
Sir, if you please, I will light my young Lady to Bed.
No! no! no such thing, good Madam. She shall have nothing but her Pillow to consult this Night, I assure you. -- So, in, in.
Good Night, kind Madam.
Pox of the jealous Fool! We might both have escap'd out of the Window purely.
Go, get you down; and, do you hear? order the Coach to be ready in the Morning at Eight exactly.
So she is safe till to-morrow, and then for the Country; and when she is there, I can manage as I think fit.
Dear Mr.--
I am not in a Humour, Mrs., fit to talk with you. -- Go to Bed, I will endeavour to get the better of my Temper, if I can -- I'll follow you!
How despicable have I made myself!