Mercy on us! why does not this Mr.come?
Oh shameful! Here's a whole Morning has been thrown away, without so much as taking one single Medicine. -- These Apothecaries are bewitch'd sure! 'Tis a horrible thing a poor Creature must be left to die for want of a Bolus. -- Oh here. -- No, 'tis my Wife. -- I thought, my Love, you had been gone into the City.
I was prevented, my Life, by an Accident, I thought it my Duty to inform you of before I went. As I pass'd byChamber, just now, I saw a young Fellow in earnest Conference with her.
How! a young Fellow with my Daughter!
Yes. The Regard I have for you and your Family, my Dear, made me endeavour to learn what they were talking of, but I could hear nothing to the purpose -- only a few luscious Expressions, and a Contrivance how to cheat the old Gentleman, as they call'd him.
LusciousExpressions, d'ye say? -- The old Gentleman! What old Gentleman? -- Who?
I can't guess, Child: Not you, to be sure, my Dear -- one should think not. But yourlittle Daughter,, was with 'em, and can tell you all.
Send her to me here, my Love; send her to me here.
I will. -- Good by t'ye, my Love, for a little while; I'll see thee again as soon as possible.
Goodby to thee, my Life.
Ah, that impudent Minx,I don't wonder now at her Obstinacy.
What would you have, Papa? My Mama told me that you wanted to speak with me.
Yes, come here -- nearer -- turn this way -- look up -- look upon me.
Well, Papa.
So!
What so, Papa?
Have you nothing to tell me?
Yes. I'll tell you the story of the, or the Fable of the.
That's not what I ask you.
What then?
Ah! you cunning Gipsy -- you know well enough what I mean.
Indeed, Papa, but I don't.
Is this the way of doing what you was bid? Did not I order you to come and tell me immediately every thing that you saw?
Yes, Papa.
And have you done so, pray?
Yes, I am come to tell you every thing I have seen.
Very well; and what have you seen to-day then?
Nothing, Papa.
Nothing!
Nothing at all.
O! I shall make you see something presently.
O dear, Papa!
You little Counterfeit, you did not tell me you saw a Man in your Sister's Chamber.
Why, my Sister forbad me, Papa; but I'll tell you every thing.
Take care you tell me the Truth then; for here's my little Finger that knows all, will tell me if you lye.
But, pray, Papa, don't let my Sister know that I told you.
No, no.
Why then, Papa, there came a Man into my Sister's Chamber as I was there; I ask'd him what he wanted; and he told me that he was her Musick-Master.
Oho! the Matter's out now. This is the Opera-monger, with his Shepherd and Shepherdess! -- Well, and what then?
My Sister came in after, and cry'd, Be gone, be gone; for Heaven's sake, be gone; I'm in Pain for you; and we shall certainly be catch'd.
What then?
Why, he would not be gone.
What did he say to her?
He said I don't know how many things to her.
Ay, but what?
He said This, and That, and T'other; that he lov'd her mightily; and that she was the prettiest Creature in the World.
And then?
Why, and then he fell upon his Knees to her.
And then?
Why, and then he kiss'd her Hands.
And then?
Why, and then he swore to be true to her, and she swore to be true to him.
And then?
Why, and then they quarrell'd a little.
Quarrell'd, did you say?
Yes, Papa.
Very well, I like that. And what then?
Why then they grew more loving than ever.
How! and what then, Hussy? and what then?
Why, and then -- they parted.
And this is all?
Yes, indeed, and indeed, Papa.
Ay, but my little Finger mutters as if there was something else. -- Hold, ay, ay, so, so; ay, my little Finger tells me that you've seen something you've not yet told me of.
Ah, Papa, your little Finger is a Storyteller.
Have a care what you say.
Pray don't believe it, Papa, for it tells Fibs, upon my Word.
Very well, very well, we shall find that. -- Get you gone, and be sure you take notice of every thing you see.
Yes, yes, Papa, I'll be sure to mind what you say.
Lack-a-day! how do these Businesses distract me! I have not so much as Leisure to mind my Indisposition. In truth, this is insupportable.
Brother, how is it? How d'ye do?
Very ill, Brother, very ill.
Very ill!
Yes, I'm so very faint, you'd hardly think it; I have not Strength so much as to speak.
Good lack! that's hard indeed. -- I am come hither, Brother, to propose a Match for my Niece.
Brother, don't speak to me of that Baggage; she's a base impertinent, saucy Quean, and I'll make her know that I am her Father.
So, so, this is mighty well; I'm glad to find your Strength return a little, and that my Visit has done you so much good. But now, Brother, I desire you'd inform me, for what Reason you would force your Daughter upon this Match, which she's so averse to?
For what Reason, Brother, am I Master of my own Family, but to do what I please in't?
My Lady, I suppose, does not fail advising you to get rid of your Children at any rate.
Ah, there's the Thing. -- My Lady, poor Woman, is sure to be brought on the Stage; 'tis she that does all the Mischief, for certain; and all the World will have it so, I suppose.
No, no, Brother, we'll leave her out of the Question then. She's a good Woman, that has the best Intentions in the World for your Family; is free from all manner of Self-Interest; has a marvellous Tenderness for you; and shews an inconceivable Affection to your Children, that's certain. -- We'll say no more therefore of her, but return to your Daughter. With what View would you marry her to this Nephew of Dr.?
With a View of having so skilful a Physician as Dr., related to me.
Is it possible you should always be so bewitch'd with your Doctors and Apothecaries, and resolve to be sick, in spite of the World, and Nature it self?
What d'ye mean by that, Brother? I have been under the Doctor's Hands here, and taking Physick, for these Twenty Years, and yet I'm not sick, I warrant.
I mean, Brother, that 'tis a plain Sign you have a strong Constitution, when, with all thePhysick you have taken, you've not been able to destroy it.
But do you know, Brother, 'tis that keeps me alive? Dr.has assur'd me that I should absolutely go off, if I were but three Days from under his Hands; but this Dr.knows nothing, I suppose, in your Opinion.
Oh! yes, he can talk good; call all Distempers by their Names, in; knows how to define 'em and distinguish 'em. -- But how to cure 'em, is what he doesn't know.
But, Sir, with Submission; there are People as wise and clear-sighted as your Worship, that in case of Sickness have Recourse to him for Cure.
There are a great many Trades, you know, that take Advantage of the Frailty of Mankind, and get their Bread from the lucky Prepossession of Error. And as the greatest Weakness Men have, is the Fear of Death, upon That the Quack builds his Fortune and Reputation.
Yes, Sir, but Dr.no Quack; he's a regular Physician, and one that has not the least Artifice or Craft, but deals sincerely and conscientiously by his Patients.
Right; so far from meaning ill in what he prescribes, that he dispatches you out of pure Principle; and does no more in killing you, than what he has done by his Wife and Children, and what upon occasion he would do by himself.
Hold, Brother, say no more against Dr., I intreat you, for it raises my Choler, and will bring my Distemper upon me.
I've done, Brother; and to change the Discourse, I must tell you; that you ought not to take such a barbarous Resolution with regard to your Daughter.
Hold, Brother, a little, with your Leave.
What are you going to do?
To take this Bolus and Draught from Mr., I shall have done it presently.
You jest, sure! Can't you be one Moment without swallowing some Drug or other? Put it off till another time, and let Nature have a little Respite now.
Well then, to-night, Mr., or tomorrow Morning.
What Business have you, Sir, to oppose the Prescriptions of the Faculty? The Physick is prepar'd, and won't keep, Sir. -- And since you hinder his Worship from taking my Bolus, I'll come upon you, and you shall take it for him.
Be gone, Sir. -- You are not us'd, I see, to talk to People's Faces.
Medicines are not to be jested with, Sir, nor my Time to be lost. I came here by Dr.Order, and shall acquaint him how I have been hinder'd in the Performance of my Function.
Brother, you'll be the Cause here of some Mischief.
A great Mischief indeed! spoiling a Bolus of Dr.Prescription. -- Once more, Brother, Is it impossible to cure you of the Doctor, for that's your Disease, and nothing else?
Brother, you'll make me mad. -- I wish you had my Distemper, and then we should see if you would rattle at this rate. -- Hah! here comes Dr., and Fury in his Face too; Heaven preserve us!
Very fine! this. -- I have heard a verypleasant Story from Mrs.here; my Prescriptions contemn'd, and my Medicines rejected.
Indeed, Sir, it was not --
Sir, 'tis a very great Insolence, a rank Rebellion in a Patient against his Physician.
Horrible!
A Bolus that I took the pains to make up my self!
'Twas not me.
Invented and compos'd according to the nicest Rules of Art!
Monstrous!
And which was to have wrought Miracles upon the Animal Spirits!
'Twas my Brother --
To send it back contumaciously.
'Twas he --
'Tis an enormous Insult on the Faculty.
He was the Cause --
Such a Crime against the Profession as can never be enough punished.
Right, Doctor.
I therefore declare, that from this time forth I break off all Correspondence with you.
'Twas my Brother --
I'll have no Alliance with you.
You'll serve him right, there, Doctor.
And to prevent any Relation between us, I thus destroy the Deed of Gift I made to my Nephew in favour of the Marriage.
I'm glad o'that; let him take it for his pains.
'Tis my Brother has been the Occasion of all this Mischief; let it be brought again, and, to make you amends, I'll take double the Quantity.
I should have set you to rights in a very little time.
He does not deserve it.
I wanted but a Score or two of Medicines more, to have done your Business effectually.
He's unworthy of your Care.
But, since you refuse to be cur'd by my Hands --
Ah! Brother, Brother!
Since you have withdrawn from me the Obedience a Patient owes his Physician --
That cries for Vengeance.
And have declar'd your self rebellious to my Regimen and Prescriptions --
Not at all, not at all.
I abandon you to your evil Constitution, to the Acidity of your Stomach, the Alkalescency of your Blood, the Acrimony of your Bile, and the Feculency of your I'll-humours.
Well said!
And my Will is, That within these four Days you enter on an absolutely incurable State.
Ah, Mercy! Mercy!
That you fall immediately into a.
Good Doctor!
From ainto an.
Doctor!
From an, into a.
Dr.!
From a, into a.
Spare me, good Doctor!
And from a, into a, the Condition your Folly has brought you into. -- And so, Good by t'ye, Good by t'ye.
O Heavens! I'm dead. -- Brother, you have been the Ruin of me; I feel the Faculty taking Vengeance of me already.
In good troth, Brother, you are out of your Senses, and I would not for any thing you should be seen in these Fits. Pr'ythee feel your own Pulse a little, and don't give up your self to such wild Chimeras. Here's a lucky Opportunity now, of getting rid of your Doctors; or, if you are born to be a Slaveto 'em, you may easily procure another, with whom you'll run less Hazard than with this.
Joy, Joy, Sir.
What now?
Rejoice, Sir.
For what?
Rejoice, I say.
Why, you impertinent Hussy, won't you tell me for what, first?
No; I'll have you rejoice beforehand; sing and dance.
Was there ever such a Slut?
You are cur'd, Sir.
Cur'd!
Ay, there's a Doctor come to see you, that will cure you of all your Distempers at once.
Heaven forbid! -- Pr'ythee who is it?
I don't know him; but He and I are as like one another, as two Drops of Water, all but his Beard; and if I were not sure that my Mother was an honest Woman, I should swear she had play'd the Wag before she married my Father.
Desire him to walk up.
This happens to your Wish -- one Doctor leaves you, and another immediately comes in his room.
Ay, but Doctorwas perfectly well acquainted with my Constitution, and knew the way to deal with me exactly. -- Oh! Oh! I feel at Heart all those -- I don't know what to call 'em -- those strange Distempers he threaten'd me with.
One would think Dr.held in his Hands the Thread of your Life, and by a supreme Authority, could shorten or prolong it as he thought proper: Reflect a little, that the Principles of your Life are in your self, and that Dr.Anger is as incapable of killing you, as his Medicines are of keeping you alive.
Oh lack! Oh lack! And pray, wise Sir, what would you, out of your profound Knowledge and Skill, advise one to do when one happens to be sick, then?
Nothing.
Nothing?
No, nothing, but keep your self quiet. Nature herself, if we'd let her alone, would gradually throw off the Load she labours with. 'Tis our own Impatience spoils all; for when we have but just Strength enough to struggle with our Distemper, we must take Loads of Drugs to burden us the more. Believe me, Brother, it must be a wonderful robust Constitution that is able to bear both the Physick and the Disease.
Mighty well, Sir, with your Nature and you. -- But is not this Nature to be assisted by Art, Pray?
Lud! Lud! Brother, how you are impos'd on! When a Physician talks to you of assisting, relieving, and supporting Nature; when he talks of sweetning the Blood, strengthning the Nerves, and restoring the Lungs, 'tis nothing but a specious way of prating, which gives you Words instead of Reasons, and Promises instead of Effects: For when you come to make Trial, you find it a mere Dream, which leaves nothing but the Regret of having ever thought it real.
Sir, your Servant.
Your Servant, Sir. -- By my Troth,herself!
They are very like one another, indeed; but 'tis n't the first time we've seen such sort of things.
I hope, Sir, you'll pardon my Curiosity in visiting a Person of so famous an Indisposition as your self, and offering you my small Services in relation to what Bleedings and Purgations you may have occasion for.
Sir, your Servant.
I observe, Sir, that you look very earnestly at me, pray how old d'ye think I may be?
Old! why Thirty, belike.
Ha, ha, ha! why, I'm above Fourscore, Sir.
Fourscore!
Yes; you see an Effect of the Secrets of my Art, that preserve me thus lively and vigorous.
I profess, a jolly Youth, for one o'Fourscore, if he could have but hinder'd the Growth of his Beard, Brother.
O! by no means; a Physician's Skill lies chiefly in his Chin.
I am, Sir, an Itinerant Physician, who travel from Town to Town, from Kingdom to Kingdom, to find out Patients worthy of my Practice, and fit to exercise the great and noble Secrets of my Art upon. I scorn to amuse my self with the little Fry of common Distempers, the Trifles of Rheumatisms, Scurvies, Vapours, and Megrims. Give me your Diseases of Importance, good Purple-Fevers, good Plagues, good confirm'd Dropsies, good Pleurisies, with Inflammation of the Lungs. These are what please me; these are what I triumph over; and I wish with all my Heart, Sir, that you had a Complication of 'em all upon you at once; that you were given over by all the Physicians, and at the very Point of Death, that I might demonstrate to you the Excellency of my Medicines, and the Desire I have to do you Service.
I am very much obliged to you, Sir, for your kind Wishes.
Let me feel your Pulse. -- Come, beat as you should do. -- Hey! this Pulse plays the Fool. -- Ye don't know me yet, I find. -- Who is your Physician?
Dr..
Dr.! Who is he? I have not hisName in my List of eminent Physicians. Where does he say your Distemper lies?
He says in the Spleen; others in the Liver.
They are all of 'em; I say, that it lies in your Lungs.
In my Lungs!
Yes; where's your Pain?
I have every now and then a Pain in my Head.
The Lungs exactly.
Sometimes a Mist before my Eyes.
The Lungs.
Sometimes a violent Palpitation of the Heart.
The Lungs.
At other times I am taken with a violent Pain in my Belly, as if it was the Colick.
The Lungs again. You have a good Appetite to what you eat?
Yes, Sir.
The Lungs. You love to drink a Glass of Wine?
Yes.
That's the Lungs. You take a comfortable Nap after Dinner.
True, Sir.
The Lungs, the Lungs, I tell ye. What does your Physician order you to eat?
He orders me Broth.
Ignorant!
Chicken.
Ignorant!
New-laid Eggs.
Ignorant!
And above all, to drink a good deal of Water in my Wine.
-- You must drink good, unmix'd,Wine, to thickenyour Blood, which is too thin. -- You must eat good fat Beef, good fat Bacon, goodCheese, Rice-Gruel, and Craw-fish Soup, to corroberate and conglutinate. -- Your Dr.is an Ass, and knows nothing of his Business; I'll send you a Physician of my own bringing up, and will visit you sometimes my self, whilst I stay in the Town.
Sir, you'll oblige me extremely.
What the Duce d'ye do with this Arm?
Do with it?
Cut me off this Arm immediately.
Why so, pray?
Don't you see that it draws all the Nourishment to it self, and hinders the other from thriving?
Ay, but I've occasion for my Arm.
Here's an Eye too, which I'd have instantly pluck'd out, were I in your Place.
Pluck out my Eye!
Don't you perceive it injures the other, and occasions those Mists you complain'd of but now? Be guided by me, and have it taken away directly; you'll see the better with your Left.
There's no haste for that, Sir; 'tis as well let alone.
But hark'e Sir, is there not a certain Gentleman, one Squire, that is to marry your Daughter?
Yes, Sir, he is just arriv'd fromfor that Purpose.
The same. -- 'Twas there he was constituted and inducted my Patient, but feloniously withdrew himself from the Remedies I had prepar'd for him.
Why, ay, Doctor, your Physick is Money at any time; so that he has actually stole your Cash.
Pardon me; I don't intend to lose him so neither; he's tied and bound my Patient, and I'll have him seiz'd wherever I find him, and either cure him, or be the Death of him.
Has he any Distemper on him, then?
Yes.
What Distemper, pray?
No matter: Physicians are oblig'd to Secrecy. 'Tis enough that I injoin you not to celebrate the Nuptials, without my Consent, under pain of incurring the Resentment of the Faculty, and bringing the worst of Maladies into your Family.
Nay, if it be so with him, I shall be in no Hurry for the Match.
Be sure you don't. -- He may run away as much as he pleases; but I'll get a Decree against him, and force him to be cur'd; yes, tho' there were a Complication of Distempers, thirteen to the Dozen: His Body is mortgag'd to my Conduct; and it shall never be said, that a Patient got the better of his Doctor.
You have my Consent, Sir, to physick him your Belly-full.
Farewel, Sir. I am sorry I must leave you so soon, but I'm oblig'd to be at a great Consultation to-day, upon a Person that dy'd Yesterday.
A Person that dy'd Yesterday!
Yes; to consider what ought to have been done to have kept him alive -- and so your Servant, Sir.
Sir, your Servant. -- Sick People, you know, are excus'd from Ceremony.
This is a thorough Doctor now, and talks like himself.
Yes, but he goes a little too fast, tho'.
Oh! that's the way of all your eminent Physicians.
To cut off an Arm, and pluck out an Eye, in order to make the other better! I'd rather 'twas not quite so well. A pleasant Operation truly, to make me at once both blind and lame. -- But you'll excuse me, Brother, if I go to my Couch and take a Nap, for I'm so fatigu'd with these Affairs. If you have a mind to sit by me a Quarter of an Hour,you'll meet with some very good Books in my Study: There's a Treatise upon the Virtues of Water-Gruel; another against eating Fish or Flesh; and another to prove, that we ought to eat both.
Very well, I'll attend you, Brother.
So far, so good: I have look'd out sharp to all things yet; the Doctor's Business is done, I believe; and now I'll so fatigue our Country Squire, that he shall make more haste back again than ever he did to come. O! here's my Chap, dress'd Bridegroom-like.
Mrs., your Servant.
Sir, Your Servant.
You seem, Mrs., to look at my Clothes. I was desirous to put my self into the Court Fashion, for the Credit o' my Country.
O' my Word, Sir, you make another-guise Figure than any of our Courtiers.
Ay, why so my Tailor told me. The Suit is rich, and proper for him that wears it, and will make no small Show and Noise here; Hey? -- But, pray, can you bring one to the Speech of your Lady?
No, Sir.
Is she gone out, then?
No.
Busy, belike?
No.
In Company, may be?
No.
Um, um, that's strange indeed!
Why, look ye, Sir, my Lady is often abroad and at home, at the same time; engag'd, and yet doing nothing; in Company, and yet no Body withher: In a Word, my Lady's an Oracle, and I am her Priest.
Then you must be brib'd, I suppose.
-- Give me your Hand, Mrs.; let you and I shake Hands a little, and then, belike, we shall be better acquainted.
Psha! be quiet. Why, what a Fool 'tis!
-- Um, no, Troth, the Man has more Wit than I thought he had.
When I'm marry'd to your Lady, Mrs., you shall have an excellent Place on't.
You marry my Lady, Sir?
Why ay, I'm come on purpose to marry her, now.
To -- to marry her?
Yes.
In Marriage, say ye?
Yes, to be sure; how else can it be?
Um -- I'm sorry for it.
Sorry for it!
Ay, I was thinking -- but 'tis no matter, I beg your Pardon.
What d'ye mean by that?
Nothing, nothing.
But, pray now --
Nothing, I tell you; I spoke too hastily.
Nay, but I must know what's at the bottom of all this.
No, no, 'tisn't at all necessary you should.
Ods my Heart! but it is tho'.
Well, if it is, you must excuse me there.
By what you said o' me, this Morning, Mrs., I took you for my Friend.
Ay, marry, no body can be more so; from the Moment I saw you, I felt an Inclination for you; I saw something of Ingenuity --
Your Servant.
Something lovely --
Oh, Mrs.!
So majestick --
Ay, something manly, as one may say.
So cordial --
Ah, sweet Mrs.!
This is all true. -- But here is a Thing that one's Neighbour's Interest is concern'd in.
Hark ye, Mrs., here's this Ring you must wear for my sake. -- Nay, 'tis in vain to say, No; for wear it you must. -- And this, I hope, will oblige you to open your Heart to me.
Let me see, I'll consult my Conscience a little on the Case. -- In the first Place, here's my Master pursuing his own Interest, and endeavouring to provide for his Daughter as advantageously as possible, and we ought to do no Man an Injury in such an Affair. -- Not that the thing is any manner of Secret; but shall I go discover it to one who's ignorant of it? No, we are forbid to speak Evil of our Neighbour, that's true; but then on the other side --
Ay, now for t'other side!
Here's a worthy Gentleman, who's a Stranger to the Town --
And has been strangely us'd in it.
Who comes thro' Thick and Thin, with an honest Intention to marry a Woman he knows nothing of -- an open-hearted Gentleman --
And a Man of Parts, too.
Who places a Confidence in me as his Friend, has presented me with a Purse most curiously wrought.
Of Twenty Guineas.
And a Ring to wear for his Sake.
Which cost Twenty more.
And shall I see this courteous generous Gentleman abus'd and impos'd on, without so much as telling him of it?
No, to be sure.
Well, I find I may let you into Matters, without wounding my Conscience; but let us endeavour to tell 'em in the gentlest way possible, and spare People as much as we can -- To say that this youngLady o' mine leads a dishonourable Life, would be a little too harsh; let us therefore seek some milder Terms to express our Meaning by. The Word,, perhaps may do it; no, that dosn't quite come up to't -- that of compleatseems to hit our Purpose the best.
Cocket! Cocket! What are your Cockets?
Oh! your Coquets, Sir, are your prancing, prattling, gaming, galloping, witty, wanton, fine Ladies; who rail at their Friends, jilt their Lovers, and cuckold their Husbands; and are true to nothing but Scandal and Strong-waters.
Oho! are they so? are they so? I am not such a Coxcomb then, as to have any Business with a Cocket.
Why so? there's not so much Harm in't as People imagine, perhaps.
O! isn't there so? I'm your Servant for that; I'll put no such Cap on my Crown, I assure ye; the Brows of theare not made to bear Branches.
Pooh, Pooh! 'tis what Husbands now-a-days sit down satisfy'd under. If you can't so well bear to see it done under your very Nose, why, you have nothing to do but, when the Galant comes, to take your Cane and Gloves, and very civilly walk off.
Good, good! Ha, ha, ha! I am a very proper Person to be made a Stalking-Horse of, no doubt. They fansy'd, I warrant ye, that, Esq; had no Guts in his Brains, to inform himself how the World went, and to see his Honour well secur'd in a Wife. -- But I'll go and ferret out old, and let him see, i'cod! that aMan is not so easily to be bubbled
Ha, ha, ha! a rare Gudgeon, truly!
Very well; bid 'em go up one after another, the Scotch Woman first.
Hist!, is the Coast clear?
Yes, yes, oldis employ'd above.
Well, and how are we? how came you off with your Scene of Quackery?
As Quacks of all sorts do, Sir; with flying Colours. I soon routed the Doctor, and run away with his Business.
Bravely said! But where's our Squire? what's doing with him?
Oh! we are doing very handsomly by him above Stairs.
Is the Farce we contriv'd, in Action now, then?
Yes; Ha, ha, ha! He'll have enough of Wives, I'll warrant him.
Well, but what have you for me to do now?
Let it be your Business to contrive the Winding-up of the Play, while I play my Scenes with him. -- You understand.
Ay, ay.
And as soon as I have planted him as I would --
Very well; that will do the best of any thing in the World.
But here he comes. -- Get you gone quick, for we mustn't be seen together.
What the Murrain can all this mean? Are the People in this Town all stark mad?
What's the matter, Squire?
I shall certainly be murder'd here in this cursed Place! -- jabbering Jades! brazen Whores!
How! What's that?
Why, a couple of foul-mouth'd Carrions have been abusing me at such a rate, within; and pretend that I am marry'd to 'em both.
Marry'd to 'em both!
Ay, and threaten me with Justice, and swear they'll have me hang'd.
Mercy on us! an ugly Business! a very ugly Business, and Justice here is as rigorous as Vengeance against that sort of Crime.
Ay; but I am as innocent o' the Matter as you be, Mrs..
No matter for that; if you are accus'd of it, 'tis enough. You have nothing for't, but to make your Escape as soon as you can; there's an Army of Constables after you already, I warrant 'em.
O Lud! O Lud! O Lud! for Goodness sake, what shall I do, Mrs.? Have you ne'er a dark Room you could hide me in? ne'er a Cupboard that you could ram me into?
Um! I have hit on't. Come along with me quickly; I'll tell you the best way to get off, without being known.
Dear Mrs., let us be gone then, directly, for this Town rains nothing but Plagues. What the Murrain had I to do, to come to?
Was ever the like seen? I hope they'll have him hang'd.
You had like to have been finely fitted with a Son-in-law.
'Tis very true, that I had so. What shall I do in this perplexing Affair? I am so confounded, I can fix on nothing.
Well, Sir, I have been making Preparations for the Wedding that's to be to-night.
What Wedding, Hussy?
Why, Madamand Squire, Sir. And, as my Lady is out of the way, I have taken upon me to order a handsom Supper, a Concert of Musick, and a --
Why, you meddling Baggage, there's to be no Wedding, nor no Supper, nor no --
No Wedding! ay, but there is, tho'.
I tell you, there is not.
Lack-a-day! Sir, you forget your self; didn't you say that it was to be to-night?
If I did say it, I unsay it again.
You may do as you will; but marry'd they shall be, now things are gone so far, that's positive.
Heyday! whereabout are we? -- Why -- why --
I have more Love for you than to suffer you to make your self laugh'd at, for saying and unsaying in this manner.
I want none of your Love.
But I will Love you, in spite of your Teeth.
Will you hold your Tongue, Serpent? I'll make you be silent, or I'll --
Be it so. But if I don't speak, I'll think.
Think as much as you will; but take care you don't speak.
Brother, I am almost mad. What must be done?
I wish I might speak.
What must be done, Brother?
Why, they must be marry'd.
Then what I say, signifies nothing? Hey! Baggage, Hey!
What ails you, Sir? I don't speak to you.
What then?
I talk to my Self.
Very well.
I have thought seriously of it, Brother
Why don't you speak?
I have thought seriously of it, and it must be so.
Why, you tormenting Beast!
And therefore I'll go send for the Parson this very Moment.
Her Insolence has put me mad! How am I tormented on every hand! -- Ah! Brother, let me advise you never to marry.
Never a second time, Brother; and a young ravenous Widow, too.
That's not the Thing; I don't speak of my Lady; she's all the Comfort I have -- but, Children, Children, Brother, they are the Bane of Matrimony; they are so many Serpents, which a Man hatches and breeds up only to sting him to Death for his pains.
We only think 'em so, by not considering 'em as what they are. The little Gaieties and Excesses of Youth, are as much the Beauty and Perfection of that State, as Care and Policy are of Age; and yet because they an't immediately grave and gray-headed, we are dissatisfy'd and offended.
Ah! Brother, no body knows the Cares, the Anxieties, the Pangs of a Parent, but those who feel 'em; I profess, I am quite oppress'd and bore down by 'em. Ah!
Come, come, Brother, this is all Distemper; we'll talk more of these things by and by: In the mean time I have order'd an Entertainment below, which will dissipate your Concern, and dispose you to judge the better of what's proper to be done. Things won't appear so dismal, after a Song and a Dance; 'twill do you more good than all the Drugs in Mr.Shop. In social Mirth, and gay Delights, we find The truest Cure for a distemper'd Mind.
Well,, how go we on?
With Wind and Tide, and Fortune herself sits smiling at the Helm.
Blessings on her for it!
I have put our Chap into such a terrible Fright, about the Severity of the Law here against having two Wives, that he's resolv'd to fly for't; and that he may escape more easily from the Constables, which I've told him are plac'd in every Corner to apprehend him, he's gone to disguise himself in Woman's Habit.
Ha, ha, ha! I should be glad to see him in that Equipage. -- But now,, what have we to go upon next?
Why, we have nothing now to do, but to sow the Seeds of Discord betwixt Husband and Wife, and the Day's our own.
That will be a difficult Task, I fear; she's a sly Beast, and won't easily be trap'd.
Courage, Man; I have Snares for Foxes, as well as for Woodcocks.
Thou art a dear, charming, courageous Wench, and shalt be rewarded accordingly.
But see, here comes our Lass -- away, quick, that he mayn't see us together; as soon as I've got him fairly pack'd off, I shall go to work upon the old Gentleman within; and be you ready to appear upon proper Notice.
Success attend you.
So, Squire, why you make a very graceful Figure! You've the perfect Air of a Woman o' Quality. I defy them to know you in this Equipment.
'Tis strange, tho', Mrs., that the Forms of Law should not be observ'd in this Town!
But 'tis as I told you; they hang a Man here, first, and try him afterwards.
But when a Body's innocent --
They never trouble themselves about that. -- Then they have an intolerable Hatred for People of your Country, and nothing can please 'em more than to see aMan hang'd.
Why, what have theMen done to 'em?
Oh! yourare mere Brutes, and Enemies to the Gentility and Merit of other Places. For my part, I protest I am in a terrible Fright for you, and should never have any Comfort if you should come to be hang'd.
'Tisn't so much the Fear of Death, as that 'twould be such a Blot in one's Scutcheon.
Right, I don't know if you wou'dn't lose your Title of Squire by it. -- But come, give me your Hand now, and walk like a Woman; and talk, and give yourself all the Airs of Quality.
Let me alone, I have seen People of Fashion; all the Mischief is, I have somewhat of a Beard.
Pho! your Beard's nothing; I have known many Women of Quality have a great deal more -- Come, let us see a little how you behave yourself. -- Good.
Why, my Cauch, there! Where is my Cauch? Lard! what a miserable thing it is to have such Servants as these! Must I wait all Day on the Pavement, and will no body call my Cauch for me?
So.
What, no Cauchman to be found, no Page? I'll break the Neck of these Doings. -- Why Page!Little Rascal! -- Isn't the little Fool to be found? -- Is there no Page there? -- Have I no Page in the Warld?
Admirable!
Who have we here that makes this Outcry? Hah! here's a Face that much resembles what was describ'd to us.
'Tis not me, I assure you.
How! how! What's that?
I can't tell.
There's some Meaning in what you said, and I take you Prisoner.
Nay, nay, good Gentlemen!
No, no, by your Manner and Disguise, you must needs be Squire, whom we are in quest of; let's away with him to.
Oh sad! Oh sad! I'm doom'd to be hang'd then, at last.
Mr., for my sake, I conjure you not to carry him to Prison.
'Tis impossible --
Come, I know you're a Man that will harken to Reason. Is there no way of adjusting this Matter with a few Guineas, or so?
Stand off a little.
You must give him some Money -- quick, quick.
O cursed Town!
Hold your Hand, Sir.
How much is there?
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten.
No, I can't do't; my Orders are positive.
Lard! stay.
Quick, quick, give him as much more.
But --
Lose no time, I tell you. -- Sure, you have a mind to be hang'd! -- Here, Sir, here.
I must run away with him, and live with him, then; for I durst not shew my Head again here.
Then, pray, take great care of him; I beg you will.
I promise you that.
Be gone then, quickly, Squire. -- I love you so much, that I wish you a hundred Miles off.
Good by t'ye, dear Mrs.. -- That's the only honest Body I have met with in this Town.
By t'ye, Bubble, and Fortune bless thee, for thou art one of her own Dotard Brood. -- But I'm wanted by this time somewhere else.
So, Brother, what think you of my Entertainment? Isn't it as good as a Dose of?
Ho! goodis a good thing.
Well, Brother, since this Match is now at an End, and you and your Doctor are at Variance with one another, I hope I may have the Liberty to propose the Person I was speaking of for my Niece.
No, Brother, I'm resolv'd to send her into the Country, and there confine her, for offering to oppose my Will and Pleasure. I find there's a Love-Affair under the Rose, and have discovered a certain private Interview, which they don't think I have.
Very good, Brother; and suppose there should be some little Inclination in the Case, where would be the Harm of it? You have no reason to be displeas'd, since nothing's intended but what's honourable.
Be that as it will, she shall go into the Country, that I'm resolv'd on.
I can guess, Brother, who put you on that Resolution. There's one Person in the World you'll please by it, I'm certain.
I understand you, Sir; you are always touching on that String. My Wife is a great Heartburn to you.
Yes, Brother, since 'tis necessary to be plain with you, 'tis your Wife that I mean; and I can no more bear you ridiculous Fondness for her, than that you have for Physick; nor endure to see you run hand-over-head into all the Snares she lays for you.
Ah! dear Sir, don't speak so of my Lady; she's a Woman that no body can say any thing against; a Woman without the least Grain of Artifice or Design, and loves my Master -- there's no saying how much she loves him.
Ay, ask but her now, how excessive fond she is of me.
Most excessive!
How much Concern my Illness gives her.
True -- she's always praying that she might see an End of it.
And the Care and Pains she takes about me.
Right. -- Shall we convince you now, Mr. Heartly, and shew you directly what a surprising Affection my Lady has for my Master? -- Permit me, Sir, to undeceive him, and let him see his Mistake.
As how,?
Hark, my Lady is just return'd. Do you, Sir, but stretch your self out in your Chair, and feign your self dead, you'll then see the violent Grief, she'll be in, when I tell her the News.
Hey! -- Um! -- I profess I've a mind to take her Advice. -- No, no, I can never bear to hear the Shrieks and Lamentations she'll make over me; and yet 'twill be a Comfort to me to hear them, too; to feel her virtuous Tears bedew my Face, and her sweet Lips kissing my Cheeks a thousand, thousand times, to bring me back again to Life and her. -- Ah! Ah! verily, I'll do it; verily, I'll do it. And then, Sir, what will become of your fine Surmises? -- But,, ar't thee not afraid that her very thinking me dead, will break her Heart?
To be sure, Sir, if you should keep her in her Fright too long.
Oh! let me alone for that; I'll make the Experiment this very Minute, this very Minute. -- Reach my Chair, here.
So, so.
Do you hide your self in that Closet, Sir.
But is there no Danger in feigning one's self dead?
No, no; what Danger should there be? 'Tis only shutting your Eyes, and stretching your self out. --
Now, now, Sir, we shall shew you your Error, with a Witness, and convince you how much you have injur'd the best of Wives.
'Twill be pleasant enough afterwards, Sir, to see how blank your Brother will look. -- Here's my Lady! Close, close, you've no Business with your Cane; hang your Arms a little more dangling; and look more dismal, than ordinary, if possible.
Oh Heavens! Oh fatal Misfortune! What a strange Accident is this!
What's the Matter,?
Ah! Madam. Ah! Ah!
What is it? What dost thee mean by this Blubbering, pr'ythee?
My Master's dead, Madam. Oh! Oh!
Dead!
Ay, alas! quite defunct.
Art thou sure of that?
Too sure, alas! No body yet knows any thing of this Accident; there was not a Soul but my self to help him; he sunk down in my Arms, and went off like a Child. -- See there, Madam, how he lies stretch'd out in his Chair!
Now, Heaven be prais'd for the Sight: --! what a Simpleton art thou, to cry?
Cry, Madam? Why, I thought we was to cry.
A great Loss indeed, to cry for! What good did he do above Ground? -- A grunting, grumbling, ill-shap'd, filthy Fellow; never without some poisonous Slop in his Maw; always coughing, hauking, and spitting; for ever dying, and yet too much alive to get him under Ground. -- Thou poor, pitiful, credulous Fool, farewel. -- Sweet, charmimg, wanton Widowhood, thou only Recompence for Marriage Slavery! thou only End and Aim of prudent Wives! once more, thou'rt welcome.
A very excellent Funeral Oration.
Oh! how my Heart exults at Thought of Liberty, and long neglected Joys! -- Alas! poor Dear, thou hast lost, then, the small matter of Breath thou wer't Master of. O' my Conscience, he looks better than when he was alive. This is the only time,, I ever beheld him with Pleasure. -- But, come, thou must assist me in executing my Design; and, depend on't, that in serving me, thou wilt most effectually serve thy self. Since then, by good Fortune, no body's yet acquainted with the Thing, let us carry him to his Bed, and keep his Death conceal'd 'till we have thoroughly settled our Affairs; and then,, I'll enjoy the Pleasure of Revenge too, in its turn, and make Misspay swingingly for herInsolence. Hah! here she comes, and her Fellow with her; this is a little unlucky.
Confusion! What brings them here now? What can be the Meaning of this? or, what will be the Consequence of this critical Scene? -- I wish I could give them Notice, that they might know how to behave -- but 'tis impossible; we must stand it, now.
Yes,, your Uncle has, by this time, made my Proposal to your Father; I'll therefore no longer trust my Passion to precarious Artifice, but make my Claim with Openness and Honour.
What ails thee,? Why those Tears? How does my Father do?
Ah! Madam.
What's the matter?
Alas! he's dead, Madam.
My Father dead!
Yes, you see him there; he expir'd this Moment in a Fit.
Oh!
Hah! help her,, she faints.
Tender Creature! -- But see, she recovers.
This is a cruel Stroke, indeed! to lose my Father, who was every thing in the World to me; and to lose him at a Time too, when he had conceiv'd a Displeasure against me! the Thought of this adds Stings to my Affliction.
Be comforted, Madam, nor strive to aggravate your Grief by such Reflexions;will supply the Loss of a Father.
No,, let's talk no more of any such thing; I'm determin'd to retire into the Country, and be no longer conversant in this World. -- Yes,my dear Father, if I have formerly oppos'd your Inclinations, I'll now execute one of your Intentions at least, and atone by that for the Disquiet I have given you.
You have Liberty to go, Child, as soon as you please. -- I have a Will in my Pocket, here, which takes all manner of Trouble off your Hands: and you may soon pack up, I believe, all that belongs to you.
Yes indeed, Madam, your Father has left the sole Disposal of every thing to her Ladyship.
Then my Calamity's compleat, indeed. -- My Father! No, he did not, could not do it; 'twas that artful, wicked Wife, who seduc'd him into an Action so contrary both to his Reason and Nature.
Let not that Particular, Madam, add any thing to your Distress; you have still an affluent Fortune at command, and I rejoice at this Opportunity of adding some little Merit to my Passion.
Why, you both act your Parts miraculously well!
Act, do you say? No, Madam, I'm no more a Countefeit in Grief, than you are in Joy.
Why, really, Child, we have both reason enough to be in earnest.
Barbarous Monster! to insult a Poverty, her own Treachery was the Cause of.
But I shall not resign my Right so tamely as you may think; the World shall be made acquainted with the Story, Madam. -- Yes, Madam, it shall know by what scandalous Methods you practis'd on my Father's easy Temper, to ruin, most unnaturally ruin his own Children, to glut your Appetite for Wealth -- and then, how ungratefully, how savagely you revell'd at the Death of this good deluded Husband, whose only Crime was being fond of such a Wife.
Whilst you entertain yourself with these fine Reflexions, Child, I'll beg leave to go andsettle a little necessary Business.
But hold, in the first Place, let me search for his Keys, for there's Money and Papers I ought to secure.
Softly, softly, Madam.
Hah!
So, Mrs. Wife, is this your Extreme Love and Fondness for me?
Bless us! the dead Man alive again!
Ah! my dear Girl, come to my Arms, let me embrace thee, my Child. Thou art my own Daughter, my own Flesh and Blood, and I'm overjoy'd to discover so much Good-nature in thee.
How welcome and agreeable is this Surprize!
I'm very glad, Madam, I've discover'd your Affection, too, and heard the fine Panegyrick you made upon me. -- A grunting, grumbling, filthy Fellow; always hauking, coughing, and spitting. -- Hey! Mistress. Ah! this is such a Lesson as will make me wiser for the future, I believe.
'Tis such a Lesson, Fool, as I shall make thee repent having ever got from me. Thou shalt pay so dear for thy Wisdom, as shall make thee wish thy self in easy Delusion again.
Mercy o' me! What a Woman 'tis! -- Hark ye, Madam, don't threaten, for I shall now make you go seek your Fortune, instead of my Daughter.
Wilt thou so, Man?
I shall procure a Will to take all manner of Trouble off your Hands; so you may soon pack up, I believe, all that belongs to you.
Ha, ha, ha!
Say'st thou so, my Soul? Hast thou forgot, then, the Five Thousand Guineas, and asmuch more in Notes, that were hid behind the Wainscot?
Ods my Heart! what a Fool have I been!
And now, thou shalt be altogether as great a Wretch; for I'll so chastise thee for this Curiosity! I'll so trample on thee, Worm!
Out o' my House, I say.
Ha, ha, ha! You talk wildly, my Dear; you are light-headed, and don't know it. -- To bed, to bed, Child, and send for a Doctor and Nurse, in an Instant.
How, Madam! I can no longer bear to see my Father abus'd in this manner; and must tell you --
Peace, Peace, Child, and shut your Mouth again; you'll say some foolish thing else, that will make one blush for you.
Blush! Fy on you! you are an audacious wicked Woman.
Hold, Madam, 'tis in vain to make any Opposition; where all Sense of Shame and Decency is lost, Reproof is but thrown away.
Oh! your Servant, Sir! by your sage Looks and profound Silence, I really mistook you for a rational Creature; but an Ass is soon known when he offers to bray.
I'gad, she'll prove too many for them all.
Was there ever such Impudence! I shall go mad indeed! I -- I -- I'm all on Fire!
Then set open the Windows, and cool your self, my Love, whilst I go abroad in pursuit of Pleasure. I have been coop'd in an Hospital long enough; 'tis but just I should now enjoy the Fruit of my Labour. -- Oh! I shall so harass you, my Dear, that you shall wish your self as dead as you pretended to be.
Will you so, Mistress? Will you so, Mistress? I'll take care howyou make use of your insolent Tongue in this House any more, tho'. -- I -- I --
Why, why, what a shameless, terrible Tigress, am I yok'd to?
So, Brother, now you see --
Yes, yes; and hear too with a Vengeance.
I swear solemnly, I could never have imagin'd this.
However, Brother, the Stratagem has not
been amiss, since by this means you have discover'd the 
real Sentiments of your Family, and learnt where to
place your Affection and Favours.