Well, Friend, what think you now of our Preachers?
They seem to have a deal of Fervour, and what you call Zeal; and I hope are honest Men and mean well; but truly I think 'em a little touch'd in their Heads, and are going into a Distemper call'd by Physicians.
I am sorry, Friend, you shou'd take in such an Opinion of them; for I judge them to be not only good Men, but to be endowed with a large Measure of the.
The Spirit of God is a Wise, Calm, reasonable Spirit; and the Author of none but wise and reasonable Discourses, Gestures and Actions. I hope you will not charge their Grimaces, Gesticulations, bodily Heats, weak and rash Speeches and strange Doctrines on the Spirit of God; nor any thing that is false and absurd, Uncharitable or Ridiculous.
I acknowledge the Spirit which isis wise, gentle, meek and mild, charitable and kind; yet we read of very odd Things the Prophets of God did when filled by his Spirit, and animated by holy Zeal.
WhatProphets did in an Age and Country when and where it was customary to teach Men by Types, Figures and Signs is not to be drawn into Imitation by Christians. Nor do we find that the Apostles and first Preachers, sent out by Christ, practised any such Things. And the Discourses of the Prophets and of Christ and his Apostles are wise, calm, charitable, just and strong. Nor can I think their Behaviour was any way odd, scenical and antick, such as becomes a Stage rather than the Pulpit.Besides, your Preachers give not the least Proof that they have more of the Spirit of God than other Men.
You know that by the Foolishness of Preaching God saveth Souls, and chooseth weak Things to confound the Mighty.
There is a wide difference between, and the. The Gentile Philosophers and Wise Men called all Preaching of the heavenly Doctrines of a crucified Saviour, even the rational and noble Sermons ofand. But wasto rise from the Dead and hear at what a rate your Ministers murdered and mangled the Gospel of his Master, he wou'd call it.
If God convert Souls by it, this will justify it against all your Satyr.
May not a Friend say, if God convert Souls byand, by broad Hats and Coats cut to the Quick, and by silent Meetings, will not this justify them? Conversion is the change of Men's Hearts and Lives, and their Living according to the Gospel; which is quite another Thing, and far better than raising the Passions, striking the Imaginations of weak Women and Enthusiastick Men.Besides, what Aptitude have bodily Motions, wry Faces, distorted Limbs, and tuneful Nonsense to convert Souls?
I hope you wou'd not have our Preachers to stand stock still in the Pulpit, and deliver their Sermons like so many speaking Posts. I love to see and hear a Man talk with Life and Concern, as if he was in Earnest.
I do not likeany better than you. But great is the Difference between the silly Motions and Gestures, Screwings and Tones of your Preachers; and that Action and Gesture which carrieth Dignity in it, and which becometh the Awfulness of the Gospel Doctrine, and the Gravity of the Pulpit. Tho' I approve of neither, yet I had rather see ain the Pulpit than aor a: As I had rather see Peopleunder a dull Sermon, thanat the ridiculous Behaviour of the Preacher.
You represent our Preachers as a parcel of Fools, I think very unjustly; and that you mistake the Fruits of the Spirit of God, for the Effects of Folly and Enthusiasm.
Your Preachers may have common Sense upon other Subjects and in other Places, but they seem to leave it all behind them when they get into the Pulpit, and begin to talk Divinity. And if I am mistaken in 'em, I cannot help it. My Reason and the Gospel tell me, That the Fruits of the Spirit are Wisdom, Prudence, Meekness, Goodness, strong Arguments, warm Perswasions, Sincerity of Heart and Beneficence of Life; such as we find in the Life and Sermons of St.,and of his Master. --- Not bodily Passions and Postures, wild and furious Zeal, Uncharitable Censures, damnatory Sentences, and Unscriptural Doctrines.
You run on to great Lengths; if some of our Preachers are not quite so prudent and modest as we cou'd wish 'em; I am sure they are veryPreachers, andDivines, and on this Score we value 'em.
InSense every Man is sound andwho preaches up thedelivered in theand; or who perhaps publish the gross Errors of Dr., and otherWriters. But in the Judgment ofevery Man is sound and orthodox, who isand; that is, who seeks the Truth with all his Heart, and lives agreeably to the Gospel. That one Text proves it.Psal.cxi.10. This notion of Orthodoxy is supported by the whole Body of the, which every where pronouncesandChristians blessed. It is also consonant to the dictates of, that a wise and good God shou'd not require of any Man more thanto find out the Truth, andin practising it. The plain Language of Scripture and Reason is, that everyis a sound Man, and everyOrthodox.
But I mean, that our Ministers preach sound Doctrine, and are themselves sound in the Faith.
So does every faithful Preacher, preach sound Doctrine; and every upright Christian is sound in the Faith. Upright and honest Men, unless under the strong Prejudices of a false Education, cannot mistake the great Doctrines and Laws of Jesus Christ; if, instead of searching the Books of Men, they look for them in God's own Book. But as you are wonderful Dealers in these two Wordsand, let us briefly consider in what Sense St.uses the word. ByI apprehend St.means Doctrine that condemns Whoring and Lewdness, Lying and Stealing, Malice and Murder, that is, the greatof Religion and Morality. Now what Ministers best preach this sort of, I leave you to Judge. Ais a Mind steddy to Christ and Christianity; or a being. Psal cxix. 8. Themention'dsurely does not mean the. nor any, nor any Words which Man's Wisdom (or Folly) have taught; but Words which the Holy Ghost hath taught, Words of Scripture. Men who will not indureare Men who love not to hear, and will not be governed by the Laws of Jesus Christ; Men who (with all their Faith) walk after their own Lusts; who have itching Ears, and run from Preacher to Preacher, being fond of every new Doctrine. These are the People who can't indure sound Doctrine; and you know who they are.inare Gospel motives and strong Arguments, fit for Exhortation and Conviction., v. 13. Men's living up to their Knowledge, Faith and Profession; not attending to Fables, and human Doctrines; owning God, as well as with the Mouth. ver. 16.is preaching and giving Rules of Practise, of Virtue and Morality to both Sexes, to the Aged and the Young suitable to their State.means to be faithful; asmeans to be sincerely Charitable.is just and rational Speech, which cannot be confuted and condemned;by human Doctrines;delivered, not comically; from a, not an inflamed Head. Thus I have gone thro' all the Texts in thewhich speak of; and leave you to judge whether your new tantivy Preachers, who come riding in from all Parts of the Country, are theyou boast them to be.
I own the Contexts of these several Texts seem to countenance your Exposition of them. Therefore to let the Wordsandlye by; I think our Ministers teach veryDoctrine, and that there was great need of 'em in Town to put a stop to those Errors which begin to spread so fast.
I am willing, Neighbour, as far as my Ability goes, to try the Matter with you, on which side the Truth lies. To this end let me know what are those peculiar Doctrines your Teachers come here in such Numbers to support, or what Errors do they come to oppose.
One of the principal Doctrines they come to maintain is the Doctrine of the ever blessed.
If by the Doctrine of theyou mean the Doctrine ofand; they might have stay'd at home; in regard, as far as I know the Town, this Doctrine is firmly believ'd by every Preacher in Town, and by all their Hearers.
I chiefly mean the.
I know no Christian, much less any Christian Preacher who denieth it. Is it therefore well done in you and your Preachers to spread such false Reports of your Fellow-Christians? I hope you thinka great Sin; anda Work of the Devil. Can you therefore justify your Teachers in such a Charge, before they know it to be true and are able to prove it; and which perhaps they know to be false?
I cannot justify Lying and Falsehood, Calumny and Clamour in any Cause. I am sensible the Cause of Christ and Truth do not need them. But they mean that some Preachers and People in Town deny theof Jesus Christ, and his Equality with the Father.
Is not this a very wicked way of proceeding, to charge Men with denying the Divinityof Jesus Christ, who only deny hisandwith the Father. For my Part, I hold Jesus Christ to be God, or a God, because the Father hath given him divine Perfections, and universal Dominion, or Headship, Authority to judge, and has commanded all Men to worship him. But I can't bring my self to believe his, because I believe in the same supreme Deity of God the Father; and it appears to me a plain contradiction to say there are two Persons or Beings who are both of 'emor; and I never yet had Faith eno' to believe two contradictory Propositions. As my Reason, my Understanding, the Candle of the Lord within me, telleth me there can be but oneor: So I think the whole Scriptures lead me to think that thisis the; and not the Son of God the Father. Before the Lord Jesus Christ became Man, or had a Body prepared for him, he came from the Father, was sent by Him, and imployed by him; But can thebe sent or commissioned by another? Shou'd we not abhor so absurd and blasphemous a Thought? Therefore it is impossible that Jesus Christ shou'd be the; and wou'd you have me believe Impossibilities?
But does not St.affirm that Christ thoughtit. Phil. ii. 6.
That Translation is, I think, given up by most learned Men; because it corresponds not tothe Original Greek. However I think it must be wrong. 1. Because it no way suiteth the, which speaks of the same Person as, Image or Likeness of God, asto God, andby him. 2. Because it is contradictory to the Reason God has given us as our highest Guide, to conceive that the Son, who was begotten by the Father, whohim, who hath his Life, Power, Dominion, Glory as a Gift and Reward from the Father, should beto, who came from none, nor can receive any Thing, which he had not originally and underived in himself. This appears to me another Contradiction to make a derived and an underived being equal. 3. Because it is a Sense contrary to all those plain Texts which speak of Christ as the expressof the Father asby him; ashis Will, as seeking his Glory, as praying to him to be taken back into his original Glory, as appointed by God universal Head and Judge.
But does not Christ himself say,, John x. 30.
Christ says,(as one Person);(as another Person) wou'd you have him contradict himself in the same Breath, by saying we two Persons are. And this too, after he had just affirm'd that all his Miracles he wrote, and that his. 'Tis an easy, natural and just Sense, thatand thewere one, as he did the Father's Will,and acted by Commission from him, and pursued the same End and Design; this suits the whole Context. Why then shou'd we attempt to force upon the Words a sense unnatural, unintelligible and contradictory, that is to make Nonsense of it. When Christ says,also; You'll notall Believers or Apostles upon such a Text.
But our Ancient Divine have always taken it for a.
Some ancient Divines, I am told, have taken it otherwise. And as toit is a Word I scarce well understand, but as far I do understand it I can't think that a begotten and an unbegotten Essence are the same. And the Sense I have given appears to me so just, that we need not seek any other.
Tho' there may be some Difficulties in this Matter not easily got over; yet I think we cannot speak too honourably of the Son of God; nor can I bear to hear any thing lessening said of him.
Are you not, at least ought you not to be as Zealous for the Glory of, who so loved the World as to send histo save it? Is not God the Father greatly dishonoured by setting up a Rival with him in supreme Empire? Can any thing be more affronting and dishonourable to the Son of God, than to suppose that he is this Rival, who declares he always sought the Father's Honour? Can any Conduct more displease him than toas thedid, by saying He made himselfwithGod, because he said he was the? Are not the Scriptures the Measure of the Honours to be paid to the Son of God? Shou'd not we follow his Example, and make his Father's Honour our chief End? For my Part I never heard any of our Divines speak a dishonouring Word of the Son of God; and it is a very bad Office in your little nibling Teachers to accuse them of it. If Jesus Christ be honoured as the only begotten Son of God, as a Teacher sent from God, as the promised Messiah and Saviour, as the only appointed Mediator and Intercessor, as universal Lord and as final Judge: Is not this all the Honour the Scriptures claim for him? Did he ever challenge more? Does a string of great swelling Words, hard and unintelligible Names,, do him any Honour? Or, is not the doing his Will, and keeping his Commands the truest Honour? Will he own any others as his Friends, but such as do whatsoever he commands them? Will crying,, or any pretended Honours paid him with the Lips be accepted while He is denied in Works?
These you mention as only chiming Words, are great andPoints, above our Comprehension; yet we ought to believe them, tho' we do not understand them.
All your Contradictions and Jargon you cover with the sacred Name of; they are indeed Incomprehensible, just asis, nothing in them is comprehensible but the Absurdity of them. If I cou'd comprehend any Truth in them, I shou'd readily believe it; but to tell me I must believe what I do notunderstand, is to tell me I must believe. This blind Belief you are taught. But Jesus Christ acted in another Manner; and has not required us to believe any Doctrine, but what he first clearly revealed and explained. If any Doctrine was a Mystery before, his Revealing it has made it no longer a Mystery.
I hope I can convince you that you are wrong here by one plain Instance. You believe the Doctrine of the, yet I hope you do not pretend to understand it.
I believe no more about it than I do understand; I believe the Dead shall rise and live, and I very well understand what Rising from the Dead and Living again means, as well as I do what Rising from Sleep, and Living again means. But as to theor Manner of the Resurrection, nothing about it being, revealed, I have no Ideas about it; and therefore can believe nothing about what I understand nothing.
The Doctrine of the, &c. of the Son of God is a Doctrine indeed, but not; therefore if revealed, ought to be received.
If it be, we have nothing to do with it as I have shewed, and can believe nothing about it: If it, it is revealed, and may be understood and believed; otherwise it is not revealed. And, I think, I have proved that this Doctrine, as your Teachers represent it, isby Jesus Christ and his Apostles; and that itfrom the God of Truth, being not only above, butto our Ideas of God, and to all the Dictates of Reason.
However I cannot think it safe to go off the antient Protestant Doctrine in this Article of our Faith.
Nor can I think it safe to go off the much more ancient Gospel Doctrine; nor to be governed by blind, implicit Faith in any of our Teachers?
Will you set up your Judgment against your Teachers?
All the Protestants did so, when they left the Churchof; you Dissenters do so, in leaving our Church. Thedid so in followingandand. Our best Protestant Divines teach us to do so, when ever our Teachers depart from God's Word and teach for Doctrines of God the Words of Men. Now when any Preachers preach theof the Son of God, according to my Understanding they preach the Doctrines of Men instead of the Truths of God. Ought I not then to follow my own private Judgment, or to believe and act according to my own Understanding and Conscience after I have obtained all the Light and Help I can? Do not you act thus, and every honest Man? If I have God's Word on my side, is not that enough? But besides I have our most learned Divines, and those I count the best Preachers on my side also; and I do not intend to forsake them to follow a Parcel of bold Fellows, who might do well enough at their, but make sad work of it in the.
I'll reply to all your Reasoning only this, That. 1 Cor. ii. 14.
This is a Text which every Enthusiast and Impudent Prater maketh the last Refuge. You do not consider Neighbour, what a spirit of Pride and Presumption it discovers to suppose all who differ from you; and all on your own side. Have not we the sameof the Spirit to be our Guide that you have; and where has God promised your Teachers morefrom the Spirit than other Men who seek it as earnestly as they. But your Teachers are as remarkable forin the Pulpit as for thethey deliver there. But enough of this. Pray what other Fundamental Doctrines do these new Preachers come now to Propagate?
That great and most comfortable Doctrine of God's electing from all eternity a certain Number out of the fallen Race of Mankind, to everlasting Life.
But did not God, from all Eternity, foreseein a fallen and helpless Condition?
Yes.
And did he decree Help only for a very few of these?
Yes, only for a few.
Are not the Rest for whom he ordained no Help equally his Off-spring, his Creatures and Children?
Yes, He is the Maker of All.
Where then is his, his, thesounding of his Bowels over those Millions of undone Creatures, whom he resolved not to help?
The Grace of God is, and He may do what he will with his own.
If God's Grace be, upon your Principles it is very. What can we think of a Father, who seeth all his Children in Misery, and who has Ability enough to help them all, and yet resolves to send Help to a very few only. Will that Rule bring him off, "that he may do what He will with his own?" Instead of a merciful, good and tender hearted Father, will not the World Judge him a hard hearted Wretch; who saw the Ship split in Pieces, and all his Children like to be drown'd; and while he had Boats enough to save them all, yet sent them out only to save two or three out of a hundred perishing Children. You talk a deal ofand, but when your dark Scheme is examined, and your hideous Doctrine opened, there appears little Grace and Charity in it; God is robbed by it of his chief Glory.
But God's Grace is free to the Elect.
These you say are very few; none of the; perhaps none of the; amongst thenone but such as hold your Fundamentals; so that thewill be reduc'd to a few. As ifwas a Region of Enthusiasm, Error, Bigotry, and Uncharitableness; and the Elect a parcel of proud, self-conceited Separatists.
You grow warm, Friend, and carry your Reflection too far.
If Warmth can ever be justified, it may in such a Cause as this. To see and hear Doctrines published and defended which obscure the richest Grace of God, and represent him as thein the Universe; who, when He cou'd easily and honourably Help the infinite Race of his fallen Off-spring, decreed Help only for a very few, and that withoutat all on his Children's Part, those being previouslythan the Rest who are left to perish under his unpitying Eye. Will it not excuse a little Warmth, to hear the good and blessed God represented not only as the mostand, but as the most; who tho' he hasno saving Help for the greatest Part of his lost Children, yet pretendsthem Help; and also a mostwho threatens a severer Damnation if they accept not his offers, which he knows they cannot accept? Is not this ahis Creatures already Helpless, and anover their Miseries; in stead of shewing them any Mercy? Will any wise, just and good Father act at this rate? And shall we ascribe all this Folly, partiality and unkind Dealing to God?
We must not measure God by Man; nor the Ways of God by the Ways of Men, his thoughts and ways are far above ours.
They areours in Mercy, Goodness, Grace, Wisdom and Justice, notours. If we must judge at all of God's Wisdom, Justice and Charity, we must judge of 'emand, as we do of Men's bytheirs. Does not God call Men to judge of the Equity and Kindness of his Ways, and to compare them with Men's? Must we not judge of them by the best Ideas of Justice and Kindness we have? Now can we possibly judgeto be Wise, Just and Merciful ifare not so? And can we possibly, while we conceive of him as no way lovely?
God hath Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth; and what is Man to contend with God; hath not thepower over his own Clay?
Pray cease abusing and misapplying Scripture; quote not God's own Word against Himself, to prove him without any Mercy towards Millions of his perishing Creatures. God was at Liberty to shew Mercy to the lost Nations of the World, when therejected offered Grace. He acted, both in callinginto his Kingdom, and in rejecting the, according to; but he willed both these Events according to Reason and Justice. Nor did God hardenHeart any other way that we know of, but by kindness to, and reprieves to Himself; and leaving him to pursue the wicked Counsels of his Heart. But you make Godthan any, and morethan; He set Taskmasters overto torment them and diminish them for a few Years: But upon your Principles, God torments his own Creatures and Children Millions of Years and Ages for what they; and this only to shew what his Power and Wrath can do, or from pureillnature; whereasacted from a Principle of Self-Preservation.
But Sinners may help many of their Sins; and therefore are justly condemn'd for doing what they shou'd not have done, and for not doing what they cou'd do.
Many of your Preachers say they are decreed to be damned for being; and I am sure they. And is not this a cruel, unwise, and unjust Decree? Can any but a Devil make such a Decree?
You talk strangely, and run great Lengths; I hope our Principles are not chargeable at this Rate?
It is plain they are, I go not a tittle farther than your own Principles carry me. If God has decreed to damn Millions of Men for being fallen in, he has made the most unjust Decree that ever was made, a thousand Times more unjust than the Decree ofto drown all the Male Children, because they were born ofParents, or were born; neither of which cou'd the Children help. This is horrid Doctrine.
I own as you represent it, this appears horrid Doctrine, I cannot think thus of the ever blessed God, our Preachers do not talk in this way.
No, they hide the horrid Consequences from you, and cheat you with Contradictions.
I have heard them often say, that Men will be damned for not believing and rejecting Christ; and for not being converted to God.
If God; has decreed to damn Men, for not believing in a Christ, who never died for them:If he has decreed to damn Men for not being converted, when he has decreed not to convert them: Is not this decreeing to damn them for not believing Contradictions, or Falshoods; and for not doing Impossibilities? Is this that God who is, and whose tender Mercies are over all his Works? Can a wise, a just, a merciful God order weak Men to remove Mountains, and then damn them if they do not?
Since God offers Salvation to all, Men are justly condemn'd if they never try to accept it.
Thus you make God the greatest of all Cheats when he offers to Sinners a Salvationfor them, and which he has absolutely decreed never to give them: And when he offers itthey cannot comply with, without, and he has decreed never to give them that Grace: And when he threatens ato them if they do not believe and obey the Gospel, which he knows they cannot do. Is this the Divinity of your Preachers! This is indeed a new Gospel, just as unlike the kind and merciful Gospel of Jesus Christ; as a false and merciless Devil is unlike the true and merciful God.
Tho' I am not for these Extreams; yet I can't but think the Doctrine of God'sa veryDoctrine.
Must not He be a perfect Visionary, or a hard-hearted Son, who cou'd take any Comfort from a Decree of his Father to give him his whole Estate, while all the rest of his Children are left to endless Beggary? Can a wife and good Child take any Comfort from a Thoughtwhich wou'd represent his Father as a partial Tyrant, relentlessly cruel to the greatest Part of his Off-spring? Can any wife and good Man comfort himself in a Doctrine which paints God in so unlovely and horrid an Image; and which leaves Millions of God's Creatures in helpless Misery for ever? Can any Man justly take Comfort in a Doctrine which makes itthat he is not elected, but must be for ever damn'd? Doth not the Gospel give better Grounds of Comfort arising from God's Universal Love to a lost World, and the general offers of Mercy?
But if Sinners will notand use their best Endeavours, they will deserve Punishment.
Why shou'd Men try at Impossibilities? Will their best Endeavours change God's Decrees? If Men must stand or fall, there is Room for Endeavours, and for Perswasions to use them; but if according to, there is room for neither.
If Men have lost their Ability to repent, believe and obey, may not God justly punish them for not using it?
If they have wilfully lost it, they may be punished as far as that Crime deserveth; but then to require them to do what they haveto do, is; and to punish them again for not doing it, is; and to make them fine offers on Condition they will do, what they have no Ability to do, isand. Is this Gospel? Are these glad Tidings? Is Satan more unlike an Angel of Light, than these Articles are to the Gospel of Truth and Love? But praywhen and how did Men lose their Ability to repent, to believe and obey the Gospel?
They lost it in; and by and at the Fall.
I suppose the Women lost it in, and the Men in. And did they indeed lose it near 6000 Years before they had it, or before they had a Being? I wonder to hear a Man who can talk good Sense about Trade, Civil Justice, Affairs of State, talk so point-blank Nonsense in Divinity. But supposelost a Power to repent, believe and obey the Gospel, before he had it; and lost it from us many Ages before we had a Being; Is it Just to condemn to Hell Fire innocent Children for what their great Ancestor did 4 or 6000 Years before they were born? Or can you think God is at all Angry withfor whatdid; if we approve of, and imitateTransgression, we may be punish'd for such Approbation and Imitation; but not for his Transgression.
Tho' I cannot say, that God is Angry with us for whatdid, yet the Scripture says, That; and that.
But must we interpret these Texts against all Rules of Reason; and against the Unchangeable Law of God? That Children shall not die for the Iniquity of the Father. Seexviii. 20. I own we suffer loss thro'Fall; and have an Hereditary Disease conveyed to us, which worketh Death; as many Children lose Estates and Healththro' the Iniquity of their Parents; That St.bymeansis plain not only from Reason, for no other Sense can be true; but from his own Explication.But as Menthose who are made unhappy thro' the Fault of others, so does God; He pities the human Race and in his Love and Pity has sent his Son to redeem and save them.
Tho' I shou'd allow that we are not properly guilty ofSin; yet may not God impute it to us, as he was our Representative?
If we had been in Being, had been Principals in the Affair, andhad acted by our Order, his Action might justly be so far imputed to us. But will a just and good God impute to you and me what we never did, or possibly cou'd do; what we knew nothing of, nor possibly cou'd know; what we never consented to, or approved of? Will He charge to our Account what we are as Innocent of as the Child unborn is of his Father's Crimes and Follies? Shall we thus quit our Understandings, and give up all the Principles of Reason, Truth and Justice, in order to compose an absurd and unrighteous Scheme of Divinity!
Tho' these Things seem so contrary to human Reason; they are agreeable to the Holy Scriptures.
A fine Complement upon the Holy Scriptures, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ; as if it was the most irrational and absurd Book in the World. Is this the way to recommend your Notions to Men of Sense and Reason, to allow that they are irrational and absurd? Is not this blaspheming theHoly Bible, to suppose the Doctrines of God, the great Author of Reason, are contradictory to Reason? For my Part, I receive the Gospel, because I believe it to be the most wise, reasonable, just, sincere and friendly Institution in the World. If, upon Examination, it appear an Unreasonable Gospel, I ought to reject it, because such a Gospel can never come from God. There are manyin it which are easily misunderstood and abused by fanciful Men. But is any Thing more rational, more agreeable to human Reason than the Preaching of Christ and his Apostles?
I own their Discourses are becoming Men of Sense, and who had the Spirit of God. But what will you make of those several Texts which so plainly assert aandin the Epistles ofand.
Those Texts have been strangely applied to God's choosing from Eternity a few particular Persons to everlasting Life, without any Respect to their Behaviour, and for no Reason at all; contrary to the whole Stream and Design of the Bible, and contrary to all wise Rules of Government; and in contradiction to a Judgment to come, when Men will be saved or condemned, not according to absolute, but according to their.
Pray, Friend, how will you understand these Texts, if not in the Sense of our Divines.
As far as my Reading and Judgment go, and as some, whom I esteem the best Writers and Preachers teach. Those Texts are to be understood of God's first Electing and Adopting theSeed of; and then upon their crucifying the Son of God and rejecting his Gospel, God's choosing, electing or adopting all the spiritual Seed oftho' amongst the, all virtuous and good Men, all who believ'd the Gospel; and this agreeable to his ancient Designs, before he laid the Foundation of theAges.
I own this is a plausible Account, agreeable enough to the History of the Old and New Testament; and carrieth in it a grand Scheme of Providence, and is free of all Absurdities. But it is not the Sense given by our old Protestant Divines, Men who had the Spirit of God.
I have as great a Respect for our old Divines as you; but not a blind Faith in any Man. They brought a great deal of Light, and did a great deal of good; but shall we restrain the Spirit of God to them; or must we make no Progress in Knowledge? Or if God raise up other Lights, must we refuse their Help? I doubt not, if our old Divines were now alive, they wou'd agree to the Sense I have given.
Nothwithstanding, I think we ought not too suddenly to depart from the Principles and Faith, for which our Father's suffered.
They suffered for a Scripture Religion, and the Rights of Conscience and private Judgment, and used their own Understandings and Reason, as we do ours. They suffered, because they cou'd notas their Fathers did; and wou'd not, in Matters of Religion and Conscience, as their superiors required. They did not suffer for the peculiar Opinions of a Party, but for thecommon Rights of Mankind, and the Doctrines in which all good Christians agree.
To pass over these Points; how will you defend the hated Doctrine of, so dishonourable to theof God?
You are great Boasters of, and yet are the greatest Enemies to it in the World. Is itin God to have no Pity on Millions of his helpless Creatures, but decree them to Hell for being unhappily born? Is itin God to order his Son to die for a very small part of Mankind only, when without suffering any more he might have died for all? Is itin God to send abroad his Gospel and Ministers to spread the News of a Saviour; when hereby the Number of thecannot be diminished, nor theincreased? Is itin God to command Men to do, what he never gave them Power to do? Is itin God to offer Men a Saviour, whom he knows they cannot accept? Is itto condemn Men for not believing in a Christ who never died for them, and in whom they never cou'd believe without irresistible Grace, which is yet denied them? Are your Ministers thethen? Are they not the chief Disparagers of it?
However you represent the Matter, our Ministers preachandmore than any other Men, and for this Reason we admire and like 'em.
I know they have about twenty or thirty hackney Words and Phrases, which come into almost every Sermon; take these from them and they are at a full stand, and can't make anotherSermon.is one of this precious List. But, in my Opinion, they are the best Preachers ofand, who open, inforce and apply the whole Gospel, of which the Sermons ofare doubtless a Principal Part.
You seem to put off the Article of. as if afraid to meddle with it.
If byyou mean a Faculty or Power in Man, to turn his Thoughts to this subject, or another; to do good or ill Actions, to choose the way of Life or of Death, when both are set before him; to receive or reject the offers of Christ, when fairly made; I can't but think every Man hath this sort ofBut your Preachers. have made aof the Word, and try to fright Women and Children out of their Senses by it. And the sound ofterrifies some weak-headed Men almost as much as the sight of a.
You seem to raise the Creature very high: This exalting of Man tempts him to be proud of himself.
I raise him higher than the Stones of the Field, and the Beasts of the Earth, because God has rais'd him higher. Nor is it any Temptation to Pride for a Man to believe himself a, and a; but that he is a reasonable Creature is a Motive to admiring Thankfulness; and that he is a Free-Agent is a Motive to Watchfulness, Diligence and Caution. Besides you who declaim against, act upon this Principle as much as other Men: You expect to be praised when you do well; you blame Men who cheat you; you call toAccount your Servants and Children, reward and punish as you think they deserve; you exhort and perswade to Religion and good Works: Thus you act and live upon the Principle of, while in Words you deny it. Thus do Antinomian Notions in Divinity turn Men's Heads, and quite intoxicate their Brains; so that tho' on any other subject they talk sensibly, as soon as they enter the subject of Divinity, they begin to rave and talk wildly.
I allow Men, but not to Good.
Unhappy Case! better for us we had never been made, than made under a necessity of Sinning. Is Man the Workmanship of a wise and merciful God, who has only given him a Power to, but no Power to help himself? Besides, is like the Rest of your Divinity, Self-contradictory; what Freedom is there, without a Power to do good. God's Law is,; does not this imply a Power to do it, or as much Freedom to do Well as to do Ill; unless bad Habits and Custom in Sin have, in a moral Sense weakened this Power? Besides, if Men have no Power to do good, how are they, whether they will behave well or ill? And if they have no Power over their own Actions, how will they beat last? Why are Menand exhorted to do good, if they have no Power, or no Direction of that Power? Is any thing, which is impossible? Is not yours strange Doctrine, which at once over-throws the grand Doctrine of a future Judgment; and renders needless and ridiculous all Preaching?
Man had a Power to do good, but lost it in, and God is not obliged to restore it.
This is the old senseless Story confuted before, and which indeed confutes it self. Are you conscious of any Being or Powers you had four or six thousand Years ago? Letbear his own Guilt, and every Man his. But supposing this Doctrine as possilble, true and just; as it is impossible, false and unjust; yet is it fair to, as if I had a Power which I have not; and toandfor what the Judge knows I have no Power to do.
You talk as if Man had a Power to, without the Almighty and irresistible Grace of God.
A Man may go on so long in a Course of Sin, till he is grown hard and inflexible, and has lost all Inclination to turn to God and a new Life. But to say a Manunder the Light, Calls and Aids of the Gospel, is to represent God as very weak and unjust, to be at so much Expence in calling Men to Impossibilities. It is to make the Gospel not only a useless, but a deceitful Institution. It is an intolerable Abuse of Mankind, and makes their Case almost desperate. Will a good God thus tantalize his own Children? Is this the Doctrine of?
But our Teachers all say, That no Man can come to God unless irresistible Grace draw him.
And then He cannot help turning, then there can bein not turning; andin turning to God. A fine Account of the Gospel! Are Menfor not having irresistibleGrace? Orfor not resisting Almighty Power? Will GodMen for ever in Hell for, which was his own Act, not theirs; or for, which was to be effected by his Power, not theirs? Or will GodMen for ever in Heaven, for doing what they cou'd not help doing; or for what they really did not, but what God himself did in them? Is this judging Men according to their Works?
I have heard our Divines say, God will reward his own Work, and crown his Grace with Glory.
Your Preachers have got the wonderful Art of perswading their Hearers, that all their mysterious Nonsense is sublime Divinity. God will reward Men according, not according to his; And if Men improve well the Grace of the Gospel, their Piety and Virtue, Labours and Faithfulness shall be crown'd with Glory. This is the Doctrine of the Bible, plain, intelligible Doctrine.
Still I can't believe that any Man can come to Christ except God the Father draw him.
And is not God drawing all Men, who live under the Gospel, by Cords of a Man, and Bands of Love? But Men do resist the Holy Ghost, and when God wou'd heal them will not be healed, nor come to Christ for Life; being unfruitful, and disobedient.
You are still for exalting Man, and laying stress upon his Righteousness and good Works; whereas all our Righteousness is as filthy Rags; and I expect to be saved only for the Righteousness of Christ imputed to me and received by Faith.
I allow the false and deceitful, the out-side and ceremonial Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ofand Christian Hypocrites; their Fastings, Tears and long-whining Prayers, their furious and blind Zeal for dry Opinions and Doctrines of Men, may well enough be compar'd to. But I hope the Righteousness of the Saints, their Love and good Works, their Holiness and Obedience, their Mercy and Charity; their living soberly, justly, devoutly, is not Filthiness and Rags; unless you will call the Image of God, and Imitation of Christ Filthiness. Is not Righteousness and Loving Kindness, being Good, and doing Good, the Glory of God? and is it not the highest Perfection of Man? Does not this render Men, procure them a, and intitle them toandat the coming of Jesus Christ? And will you dare to call it alland Rags? Take care, Neighbour how you fling Dirt on God's Image, affront the Spirit of Holiness, contradict the whole Gospel, confound Holiness and Unholiness.
Butrenounced his own Righteousness, which is of the Law, and trusted to that which is thro' the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith.
HisRighteousness, or Conformity to the Ceremonial Law, he did renounce; he trusted not in Circumcision, his Relation to, his bitter persecuting Zeal.But hisRighteousness, his Conformity to the Gospel, he did not, he cou'd not renounce. No, this was his chief Endeavour, to conform to Christ in Sufferings and a new Life, in pressingafter the Mark, by holy Obedience, in walking by the Rule of the Gospel, and in a heavenly Conversation.
I dare trust to no Righteousness and good Works of my own for Acceptance with God.
But dare you trust God's Word, that if you continue in well-doing, and seek, in that way Honour, Glory and Immortality, you shall have eternal Life? Trusting in God to be saved in the Way of Faithfulness and Gospel Obedience, at the End, (and as the Crown) of a Sober, Just, Charitable, Religious Life, is not trusting.
I am sensible I am a guilty Creature, and can plead nothing of my own, therefore I trust in the imputed Righteousness of Christ.
We are all guilty before God; but if renewed by Repentance, we are incouraged by the Gospel to plead that Repentance as a Qualification for, and Title to Pardon. As to the, it is a Phrase no where to be found in God's Book, nor is easy to be understood, and I wonder you shou'd be so fond of it, and lay such stress upon it.
Our Divines have always spoke of this as a Fundamental Doctrine, and I cannot give it up.
Your Divines have used themselves to talk wild and strange Things; have bewitched People with their Sorceries, and led Captive silly Women by sugared Phrases, but at the Bottom a poysonous Doctrine.
I wonder you shou'd thus represent so great a Gospel Doctrine.
As there is not a Word of it in the Gospel; so
it is an Encouragement to bad Men and loose
Women, who, tho' destitute of Virtue and
Goodness, tho' without Sobriety, Chastity and a good
Life, yet hope to be saved by the Righteousness
of another, while they have none of their own.
Thus are the Hands of the wicked strengthened,
and Virtue and Vice confounded. This Doctrine
is also a Discouragement to good Men; as if all
their Labours of Love, their Obedience,
Faithfulness, Diligence, Self-denial, Charity, Goodness
were nothing Worth; unless they also believe in
the unscriptural and unintelligible Doctrine of
the Righteousness of another imputed to them.