Whoseare you?
Your's.
Why do you think so?
Because you teach me to call you, and are fond of me, and maintain me.
'Tis true, my Dear, I provide you Food to satisfy your Hunger; Cloaths to cover you, and keep you warm; a House to shelter you from the Severities of the Weather; an easy Bed to sleep on; a Variety of innocent Amusements to divert you; and proper Advice and Physick to cure you when you are not well. At my Cost you have been properly attended in your most helplessInfant State, when you could neither go nor stand, nor tell your Wants; have been preserved from all Sorts of Injuries, kept clean, and wholesome, and healthful, and taught by Degrees to go, and speak, and any Thing else you were capable of learning, that might be useful to you. Now what do you think induces me to do all this for you? Did you ever do any Thing, or any Thing equivalent to this, for me?
No. But I will do whatever I can for you as long as I live, and whatever you would have me do; and always love and honour you; and shall never think I can make you Amends for such Kindness to me.
You promise fair, and I hope will be as good as your Word; and assure you, you shall never be a Loser by such Dutifulness. Whatever I require of you shall be as much for your own Good as mine, and more; even those Things wherein I may be obliged to deny your Inclinations.
Will my dear Father ever deny me any Thing I have a mind to?
Not willingly, my Dear, but out of Kindness to you. I have seen more of the World, and the Consequences of Things than you; and may perceive Danger, even to yourself, where you apprehend none, but only Pleasure and Delight; should I see you running headlong towards a deep Pit, or Precipice, or Place where I knew were wild Beasts or an infectious Distemper; would it not be a real Kindness to stop you, tho' it were by Violence, and ever so much against your Will?
The greatest Kindness you could do me; and I will confide in the Wisdom, Experience, and good Intentions of one who was born so long before me; and from whom I have received already so many indubitable Proofs of good Will.
O My dear Papa, I have thought over and over of what you said to me Yesterday, and dreamt of it in the Night, and long to talk with you again, and ask you Questions.
Come then, my Child, what Question have you to ask? I shall answer them with Pleasure.
You made me sensible how much I am indebted to you for my Being, and Protection, and innumerable Benefits, particularly during my Infancy. Were you once a Child like me, and had you such a Father to take Care of you?
Yes, I remember him with Pleasure, tho' he died before you were born.
And your Father had a Father, I suppose; and his Father, perhaps, the like before him.
True, my Dear.
But was it always so? When, and how did this Relation, and Succession of Parents and Children begin?
It must of Necessity have had a Beginning, and it had so. Thatyou hear strike one, then two, then three,at certain Distances of Time, from Day to Day, did not always do so; but was contrived, and made, and set on going, some Years since, by an ingenious Artist, who still looks after it, and keeps it in Order. And he that contriv'd, and made all the World; the Sun, Moon, and Stars of Heaven, that rise, and set, and distinguish Night and Day; the Earth, and all the Trees, and Plants, and Grass that grow out of it; and all the Creatures that inhabit it; and Manat the Head of them all; and preserves them all in their Places, Courses, and Successions; he is the first Origin, theof the whole Universe; even, who never had a Beginning, but always was, always must be unchangeably the same.
O! I am astonished at the Thought, and yet it must be so. But where is this? Cannot I go to him, and see him, and converse with him, as I do with you?
Where is he, Child! Where is he not! He is every where; he is always present with you, and with every one of his Children, and every one of his Creatures; more nearly, more intimately so, than it is possible for me to be with you. He continually upholds and preserves every Faculty we have of Action, Perception, Speech, or Thought, and sees, and knows every Thing that passes in the World; or in the very Heart of Man.
Does he know my Thoughts before I speak them?
Most assuredly he does; for he is the Father of Spirits. He endowed you with the Power of Thought, and constantly preserves every Faculty of your Mind; and therefore knows every the least Motion or Affection thereof.
You surprize me. I thought I had no other Eye to stand in Awe of so much as your's; but find there is one, who sees what you see not, even my secret Thoughts; I cannot help being greatly concerned about my Behaviour towards so great a Being. I want to know more of him; what Power he has to do me Good or Hurt; what are his Dispositions towards me; what will be pleasing or displeasing to him; wherein he resembles, and wherein he may differ from you, my immediate Father, whom I know, and love, and confide in.But, in short, I scarce know what Questions to ask you about him.
I will save my dear Child the Labour of studying for Questions upon this Head, by giving you as short and plain an Account as I can, of what is most material for you to know concerning him; and at the same Time answer any Questions you may interpose as well as I can, and you are able to understand Things. But this must be some other Time, because my Business calls me off at present.
Let it be soon, my dear Papa.
God bless you.
Now, my dear Child, I have a leisure Hour at your Service: Can you leave your Play, to talk on serious Subjects with your Father?
If I could not I should be very unworthy of such a, and of such. Besides, the Subject you are now by Promise to go upon, is of all the Subjects the most engaging. To be acquainted with another, even greater than you, promises me new, and high Delight.
You cannot promise yourself too much from it. He is infinitely greater and better than I, or any Man, or any Being besides himself; the greatest, and the best of all Beings, and of Fathers. He can do whatever he pleases; can make, or destroy the Earth, the Sun, the World, in an Instant, as easily as you can move a Finger: But he is as good as he is wise and powerful. He consults anddelights in the Happiness and Perfections of his Creatures. There is no Creature, not a Sparrow or a Worm, but shares his Protection, Bounty, Care, and Goodness. Whatever little Good, or Protection you may seem to receive from me, or any other Creature, comes ultimately, and chiefly from him; nor can any Thing, or Person else, be more than an Instrument in his Hand, of conveying Benefits to you. He makes the Earth to yield us Food; and makes that Food wholesome, nourishing, and pleasant to us. 'Tis his Wine, and Milk, and Meat we feed on; his Wool and Flax that furnishes us with comfortable and decent Garments. He causes us to breathe, and live, and move; to sleep, and awake again; or, as the Scriptures speak,. 'Tis for this Reason you are taught to thank him for your Food, and ask his Blessing on it; to commit yourself to his Protection every Night, and thank him for it every Morning.
And is he pleased with these my Prayers and Praises?
Yes, if they come from your Heart; from a grateful, humble, dutiful Sense of your Dependance upon him; because such a Temper of Mind, so cherished, kept up continually, and improved, is for your Good; therefore he is pleased with it; for no one can wish you so well as your Heavenly Father doth.
Not you?
No, not I, nor you yourself.
Why does he wish me well?
Because you are his Offspring, whom he has made a reasonable Creature too, and so much liker, and nearer to himself, than the Brute Creatures; and yet he wishes well to all hisCreatures, in their Places, and does them good; he designed them for Good, and obliges them to do one another Good; and rational Creatures to do it of Choice, and with Pleasure, as he himself does. As God is every where, knows all Things, and can do whatever he pleases in Heaven, and in Earth; so he constantly over-rules all Things and Events, for the Good of the whole, or the greatest Good; for. His Goodness so infinitely exceeds the Goodness of allother Beings, and all their comparitively little Goodness is so entirely owing to his, that our blessed Saviour might well say,.
I said I wou'd do every Thing in my Power to serve, and please you, on Account of your Goodness to me; but O! what do I then owe to this best of Beings, my Heavenly Father, of whom you tell me?
Be sure you owe him the highest possible Degree of Gratitude and Love; so to love him, as to love nothing else in Comparison of him; or to love every Thing else that is good chiefly for his Sake, from whence, even from whose Goodness, it proceeds; who makes it so good, and so good to you.
I would be very solicitous to please so great and good a God and Father; and especially not to displease him; and therefore want to know wherein I may be liable ever to do that. Is he ever angry, as you sometimes have been, when I or any one else has done amiss?
No one can be so perfectly averse to Evil as God is; and tho' he is not of like Passions with us, is not angry in such a Way as to imploy any Weakness, or Imperfection; yet may he be said to be angry, and very angry too, with theWicked, or those who do amiss; and the Anger of so great a Being must be very dreadful; and not less, but more so (to an ingenuous Mind) for his Goodness; for even his Anger arises from his Goodness.
How can that be?
All Evil is naturally hurtful, not to God, but to his Creatures, whom he wishes well, and on that Account is most displeasing to him. If you do amiss, you hurt yourself at least, and perhaps others also; and this must needs displease your Friend, who desires your highest Welfare, and that of every other Being too, which your Misconduct may possibly injure.
This is indeed the greatest Reason, that can be, why I should fear to offend him.
And it is a Reason, too, why you should trust in him. For if you hurt not yourself, he will never hurt you, nor suffer others to hurt you any farther than he will turn it to your real Advantage, and punish them for it.
If I could be secure from their injuring me any more, methinks I should be sorry to have those who have injured me severely punished.
You do well to cherish such a forgiving Temper; and if you forgive your Enemy, and he sincerely repent, God will forgive him likewise. In that Case, his Repentance is Punishment sufficient, and may give you the juster Pleasure, as it will not only sufficiently avenge you, but also prove a sure Means of reforming him, and doing him, in the End, the greatest Good.
Since you have said so much about Evil, pray inform me what is Evil, that I may know precisely what will offend my heavenly Father, and what, on the other Hand, he approves.
That is a very pertinent and important Enquiry, and, that I may answer it the more distinctly, I will take another Opportunity for it, having already over-stayed my Time. Farewell, my Dear.
Farewell, Papa, and thank you for spending so much of your precious Time upon me.
Pray, Mamma, where is my Father? Is he gone from Home?
Yes, my Dear, he went out this Morning very early.
When will he return?
I hope in the Evening, at farthest; and sooner, if he can dispatch his Business. Why do you ask after him? But I know it is because you love your Father.
I do indeed, and honour him, and you too very much, as I am in Duty and in Gratitude bound. Methinks I see, even now, by my little Sister in your Arms, something of the Care and Trouble you took with me before I was able to set my Foot to the Ground, or help myself in the least; since that I have been made sensible of yourcontinued Care and Kindness towards me, in innumerable Instances; but in nothing else so much as in the Pains you both take to instruct and form my Mind.
I am glad, my Dear, you are sensible of that, because you will be the likelier to improve by such Instructions, the more you apprehend the Kindness and Importance of them. But why did you think your Father was gone Abroad?
Because you perform'd Divine Service in the Family this Morning; which you don't use to do when he is at Home.
since you took such Notice who officiated in that Service, I hope, my Dear, you went yet farther, and took Notice also what was said, and joined in it with the concurring Sentiments and Desires of your own Heart.
I assure you, I did; and; and after what my Dear Father has told me concerning, 'tis impossible I should ever hear that Divine Being spoken of, or spoken to, without being greatly concerned in it. I heard this Morning, to my Grief, some Children in the Street use the Name of God with great Freedom, Irreverence, and Indecency: Father forgive them(thought I) they know not what they do; but what Parents must they have the while? And how distinguishedly bless'd am I in both mine? Sure there are no other Parents like you.
Many, I hope, Child, that are much better; and yet I am afraid there are more who are worse. Do you pray daily to God to dispose Parents more universally to instil into their Children early the Knowledge and Fear of God; and to bless our Endeavours of this Kind for you. -- O! here is your Papa returned already.
I am glad, then God has prosper'd him in the Business he went about, perhaps, Mamma, in Answer to your Prayers.
And his own and your's too, perhaps.
Is it possible he should have any Regardto such a Child's Desires as mine?
Yes, or to the Cries, or Groans, or Sighs, or other Tokens of Distress, made by Creatures incapable of Thought, or Speech, or conscious Application to him, as you are: But let us go welcome your Father Home.
Now, Sir, will you instruct me how to behave aright?
I will, my Dear.;
I would first know my Duty to God.
In one Sense all Duty, is Duty towards God; as you may apprehend from what I have already said. But there are some Duties more immediately and distinctly owing to him; as that you set him always before you; consider him as always present with you; think of him with the profoundest Reverence, and Respect, Trust, Delight, and Joy; Thankfulness for his Mercies, and Resignation to his Will; and exercise and cherish this Regard of your Heart to him, by frequent, affectionate, and humble Worship of him: That before all Things you obey him.
What rather than you?
Yes, if I should command you any Thing contrary to, or inconsistent with his Commands; which I hope I never shall, and then your Obedience to me will be Obedience to him, which is the Perfection of filial Duty.
What are his Commands?
The deliberate Determination of our own Judgment and Conscience concerning what we ought to do, and to forbear, is; and for our yet better, and readier Direction, wehave hiswhich I shall instruct you in more particularly another Time, whichhas summed up in a few comprehensive Words, that will give you at present a general Idea of them, namely,: By which you see our Duty to others, and ourselves too, is to be done as Duty to God, being included in his Commands.
Is there any other Duty or Regard I owe to God?
Yes, that you imitate, as much as possible, his moral Excellencies; his Uprightness, Truth, and Goodness. This is paying him a due Regard, to make him your highest, choicest Pattern, and it is at the same Time a Duty you owe yourself, to make a right Use of such a Help to Virtue.
Can I be under Obligations to myself?
Certainly, very great ones; and if you neglect them, or act contrary to them, you'll find something within you will call you to a severe Account; I mean your own affronted. God has given you these high Powers, and thereby raised you above the Brute Creation, and to a Life far above the mere Animal Life. You have Appetites and Passions in common with the Brutes; but you have also a rational Soul to direct, and govern those Appetites, and Passions. If you thus use your Reason, you'll improve it; but if you neglect it, you'll weaken it, and give an unnatural, and destructive Force and Strength to your animal, brutal Appetites and Passions, and degrade yourself into something much worse than a, and much more miserable; nothing can be more degrading, more disgraceful, and detestable, than for a reasonable Creature not to be Master of himself, and his own Appetites and Passions.
In what Respects am I, or any other Person, liable to be deficient in this Self-Government?
In many Instances. Whenever your, or, are much excited, you will be liable to disregard the still, small Voice of, or even the warmer Remonstrances, and Expostulations of.
Can you give me any particular Instances?
How so?
Because it will weaken your Reason, and Resolution, and heighten such Appetites and Passions into a kind of, or. Haveyou never observed little Master, -- what violent Passions he goes into, if he may not have, and do whatever he list; or seen our unhappy Neighbour -- drunk in the Street?
Yes, but I always took them, and others like them, to be.
You judge, indeed, very right: They are the worst of; but then they are not naturally so, but become so by indulging, or being indulged in their Humours. They have Reason as well as you, or I, but have lost the Use of it, and you may easily do the same.
I hope I never shall.
I hope so too; but then it must be by proper Care. Your Mother and I have hitherto endeavoured to guard you against any dangerous Efforts of Appetite, Humour or Passion; but you must learn to guard yourself against them by that Time you go out into the World, or we may be taken from you by Death, and you owe thus much to yourself, to your Interest, and Comfort, Reputation, and Respect among Men, and to him that made you, and gave you Understanding for this Purpose. Both God and Man, and all intellectual Beings, must look down with the utmost Contempt upon a Wretch, that has lost that Government of himself, he was once endowed with; and even he himself, if ever he thinks at all, must despise, and loath, and be a Torment to himself. Therefore, my Dear Child, think well of this.
I will.
Farewell.
Have you thought of what I said to you last?
I have, and prayed to God to be the Guardian of my Understanding as long as I live, and to continue long to me the Benefit of your's, and my Dear Mother's excellent Instructions, and Example. But you intimated, that there were Duties owing to others, as well as more immediately to God and myself. What may these be?
O! I long to exercise, and shew such a Sweetness and Greatness of Mind as this.
All these Duties you have mentioned, or hinted at, to, are highly reasonable at first View. Methinks no-body should ever act contrary to them, at least, I hope, I never shall.
Let not my Dear Child, however, be too secure, because many a very promising Person has failed in his Duty in such Instances, and to such a Degree, as not even themselves could once have expected, or believed they would have done some Time before-hand. When the Prophet of the Lord, with Tears in his Eyes, foretold what Crueltieswould commit on the Children of; burn and demolish their Cities; slay their young Men with the Sword; dash their Children; and rip up their Women with Child;Answer was, Is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do this? Yet such a Dog he proved, after he had first murder'd his Sovereign, and usurped his Throne. Whenforetold his Disciple, just before his last Suffering,made Answer,: But he did before the next Morning.
These Instances are surprizing, and alarming indeed. But what should ever induce me to act a Part I at present so much, and so justly abhor, or forsake the fair, and flowery Paths of Virtue?
I will take another Time to lay before my Dear Child the principal Dangers of this Kind for your timely Warning. In the mean while, think of the, and set your Heart upon it. God bless you.
I Am now to inform my Dear Child of the manyfold Dangers you are encompassed with, of gradually impairing, and loseing that Innocence, and those virtuous Principles, of which you seem at present happily possessed, that being, you may be.
For that very Purpose I desire to know them, and hope I shall make that Use of the Information.
But it seems easy to prevent all this by never letting loose the Reins.
True, my Dear, that is the most effectual Way, and you may think it easy at present to deny, and govern those Appetites, and Passions, whichhave hitherto had a watchful Eye over, and kept under the best Regimen they could. Now that Care must devolve by Degrees upon yourself, and if you steadily proceed, you will find it easy still, and pleasant. But if this Care and Government be ever remitted, it may become very difficult, and next to impossible to recover it. There is scarce a more useful, or comfortable Thing than, or more easily managed, within proper Bounds, kindled, or extinguished, increased, or diminished, by applying, or with-holding Fewel; but if too much increased, or neglected, and let to get hold of the Building, it may soon become too vehement to be suppressed, and consume the stateliest House or Town to Ashes. Such is the Quality, very nigh, of the human Appetites and Passions.
It would be base and foolish indeed in me to lose that Government of myself, whichandhave made so easy to me. If this is all the Danger, tho' it be considerable, I hope I am in a fair Way to escape it.
You are, thank God, but yet, be not secure. This is not all the Danger by a great deal.
Then let me know the worst.
O! my dear Father, you make me tremble too, least such a Succession, such a Complication of Temptations should, in some unguarded Moment, overcome me.
This Fear of your's revives my Heart, and will by the Grace of God preserve your Virtue. Treat it as you would your, be ever very regardful of its alarms; for they are of the utmost Necessity to your Safety.
But why has God exposed the Virtue of his poor Creatures to suchand?
For the confirming, strengthening and exalting of it. The most glorious Triumphant Creature-Virtue, is, and the more, greater, and compleater its Victories, the more confirmed, triumphant, and glorious it is. But Victory implies preceding Combat, and the greatest Victories are those over the most formidableOpposition, and that succeed the hardest Conflicts. Be alarmed therefore, but do not murmur at any such Trials as these any more than needlesly run into them, leave God to chuse your's; and along with your greatest possible Caution and Resolution, seek, and trust in him to bring you safely, and honourably off.
But now another Apprehension comes into my Mind, seizes, and almost sinks my Spirits.
What can that be, Child?
I fear least I have already broken thro' the sacred Bounds of my Duty, and so lost myand. Some Words and Actions of my past Life, as well as secret Workings of my Heart, appear to me not so perfectly agreeable to the excellent Rules you have taught me, as I could wish; nor have I Ignorance to plead, tho' not then so well instructed as since: For, well I remember, at the very Instant, something within me smote me, and suggested I did amiss. As I have already offended God, I fear he should abandon me, and then I am undone, nor do I know how he will deal with me for my past Faults.
There iswith God for worse Sinners than you.
I would willingly hope so; but are you sure of that; or do you only hope as I do?
I am very sure, and doubt not to
make you so too, when I can be at Leisure to talk
with you again on these Heads.