Mr. --, I sent for you, to consult in what Fund it will be most proper to lay out some Money, that I have just now received of the Legacy left me by my Uncle, Mr. --
'Tis a great Pity, Sir, you did not receive it two or three Months ago, the Stocks being of late considerably risen upon the Preliminaries settled between the Emperor and the King of; and, without doubt, will be higher when they are published, provided there is nothing in them like what is reported about the Secret Articles.
Pray what may they be?
But no-body will believe it.
Nor can I believe it; therefore let us confine ourselves to the Point, What is the most proper thing to lay out some Money in?
Stock against the World; and you may believe I advise you as a Friend, since I speak against my Interest; for should you lay out your Money in any other Fund, my Brokage would come to more, because it would buy more Capital.
You were wont to exclaim against that Stock as a Bubble, and was for your Solids, as you call them: How comes it, that you have thus altered your Opinion?
For a very good Reason; because there is a Scheme going forward in it, which cannot fail succeeding, it being calculated as well for the Good of the Publick, as for the Benefit of the Company; and therefore when it comes before Parliament, will surely be approved: Upon which moral Certainty I have invested my little Capital in the said Stock, and have persuaded several of my Friends,that had Money by them, to lay it out therein; and such of them as had not, I borrowed it for them at Interest, upon Security of the same Stock: There are a great many other Gentlemen (that were early in the Secret) that have done the same for very large Parcels.
If you are not under Promise of Secrecy, pray open the said Scheme to me, that I may give you my Thoughts upon it?
That I will with all my heart, and debate it with you too, Sir, for 'tis now no Secret. The Case, in a few Words, is no more than this: -- The Company is to apply this next Sessions to Parliament for some Regulation or Reduction of the Duties that are payable upon Teas, which, as the Law at present stands, are so very great, as to tempt the smuggling very large Parcels of that Commodity; and as it carries with it that popular Intention of preventing that iniquitous Practice, so prejudicial to the Fair Trader, there is no room left to doubt but that Success will attend such Application.
And is it thought that the Parliament will gratify the Company, without turning this Thing also to the Advantage of the Nation?
The Nation will be greatly Gainers by it, because if Smuggling be effectually prevented, by lowering the Excise, of consequence more Tea will pay the said Duty.
That's begging the Question, and that I can't grant, nor I believe will that august Assembly; because it seems a Paradox, that lessening the Duty should be the Means of bringing in larger Sums upon the same.
Experience hath demonstrated it in other Commodities; as Spices, Cocoa Nuts, &c.
I can't say any thing to that, only that what happens to be the Case in one Commodity, may not prove so in another; therefore it is very probable, that the Parliament will turn this Project to a certain National Advantage, by reducing the Company's Annuity to 3for by that the Nation will be sure to save 32000a Year; and if the Company will get that yearly Sum by their Scheme, is with me Matter of Doubt.
I am amazed, Sir, at your Doubt! tho' should the Parliament make the Company pay such Tribute for such an Act (which, by-the-by, there is a Chance they won't) it will be the best Bargain the Company ever made, for they'll get thrice that Sum annually by it, as you may see by theof the 9th of.
I don't give Credit to every thing that's printed, any more than I do to every thing that's said; it may be so, or may not be; 'tis at best but a Chance, till tried. We will let this Point rest for the present, and now talk a little about the State of the Company, that I may, if possible, come at the intrinsick Value of their Stock. Know you what Sum in Bonds they have out-standing?
This is, without Exception, the most difficult Question you could ask, to meet with a satisfactory Answer: I own I am not able to resolve it with Certainty, being informed it is a Secret known to but few of the D--rs; but by general Report they are supposed to have as many as they are (by their Charter or Act of Parliament) permitted to issue,to the Amount of their Capital, which is about 3,200,000
I have heard so before; and some People think there is that Sum out in the three and halfBonds, over and above between 4 or 500, 000(at which the Company's Forts and Castles are valued) in 3Bonds, besides sometimes considerable Sums in Loan of the: The Truth of these two last Articles I much doubt, and may have been given out formerly by yourBears (when such were tolerated) to depreciate the said Stock: But upon supposing only the former, we shall find this Point brought into a very narrow Compass,what the Government owes to the Company for their Fund, we'll suppose they owe to their Bond Creditors; and of course the Stock Proprietors have nothing for what they buy, but the Company's Effects in Trade, and their Charter: And do you think these Articles worth above five Millions, which the whole Capital comes to at the present Market Price?
I agree with you there, Sir, and may be they have not half the Sum in Trade, and possibly they would not distribute 100for 100Capital, were they now to break up; and that all the rest, and may be more, isgiven for the probable Advantages of theexclusive Trade for the Term of thirty Years to come: But few People make such a nice Scrutiny into theState of the Company as you; and rather believe, for the generality, that the Capital due from the Government, and also the Stock in Trade, are both the sole Property of the Proprietors.
For this very Reason I am of Opinion, that when the Company comes before the Parliament (who constantly endeavoured to prevent the Unwary being misled) they will immediately reduce the Annuity payable to the Company to 3and will apply the Produce of the Sinking Fund (as soon as the same shall be at Liberty) to pay off entirely the said Company's Fund, and to compel them to discharge therewith the whole Bond Debt (if they can, if not, as far as it will go) that the true Amount thereof may no longer be a Mystery; and the Purchasers of the said Stock will then know, that they give so much (whatever be the Price) only for the Effects in Hand, and Liberty of the Trade.
All what you have said may be very reasonable, and perhaps may come to pass; but I verily believe no body thinks of it but yourself, and therefore you may venture now with a seeming very goodProspect, and get out again with Profit time enough, even before the Scheme is brought into Parliament, and let the Devil take the hindmost; for 'tis remarkable, that the Expectation of any Scheme hath, for the generality, greater Influence on the Stocks, than its Accomplishment.
I don't intend to lay out my Money for a Job only, but with a View to live upon the Income or Dividend (of such Fund as I shall now invest it in. And therefore, considering all our Debate, together with the Precariousness and Uncertainty of their Dividend (the Company being rivalled in Trade by all the Maritime Powers) I am determined not to be concerned in their Stock, but leave it entirely to those that are constantly upon the Spot, and know when are the proper Times to get in or out.
I have told you, Sir, my Opinion; and, since you do not think well ofStock at this Price, am ready to obey your Orders in any other Fund, that may be more to your Satisfaction.
What think you ofStock?
Old Women and Foreigners are very fond of it.
Why are they so?
I believe because they are very well satisfied with the Management of the Directors.
You might have added some other Reasons; such as, because they were never guilty of Exceedings in Dividends; and because they have no Bonds against them carrying the Canker of Interest, they being Money-lenders, and not Borrowers; and because --
There may be a great many good Reasons more: But you was pleased to object against the greatgiven upon purchasingStock, whose exclusive Charter hath upwards of thirty Years to run: Will not the same Objection lie against thegiven forStock, since theirs expires so soon as the Year 1742?
'Tis so most certainly; and therefore I'll let that Stock alone also. Pray give me your Thoughts upon theStock
I really believe it is in a flourishing Condition, which is greatly owing to the Frugality and Application of the present Set of Directors, who have restored the Company's Credit, by putting their Trade under good Regulations, and lessened very considerably the Bond Debt.
Pray what may be the Sum that the Company actually owe?
According to the Account laid before the General Court inlast (the Veracity of which is not to be question'd) only about 650,000
How much is thatupon their Capital?
As near as I can compute about 17but they have more than that Sum due to them in, upon Account of old Dependencies.
I have formerly heard much Talk of those old Debts, but believe what of them were good have (by the indefatigable Pains taken by the present Directors) been e'er now recovered; and for the Sum still out-standing I look upon it only as a Cypher; and the more, because I have heard in Conversation, the K-- ofhath such large Demands upon the Company, as would swallow up that Sum, or more.
'Tis true the K-- ofdoth make some Demands upon the Company, and so doth the Company upon the K-- of; but no Mortal can tell when they will be adjusted.
I declare I am for something clear of all Incumbrances, as well present as future; therefore cannot resolve to lay outmy Money in this Stock neither: Besides, considering that 17ought to be deducted out of the Capital to make it whole, that brings it down to 83; and to give the present Market Price for it, is equal to the buying 3at 112.
You are so very nice, Sir, that I don't know what you can do with your Money. You must e'en lay it out in theAnnuities, since the Trading Companies don't please you.
I don't think I shall do that either, because I have seen a Scheme for a general Reduction of the Funds to 3and if that should come to pass, I shall be likewise bit by coming into them at this high.
I have indeed heard some idle Talk of that kind; but I think it impracticable, and find but very few People (if any) under such Apprehensions.
We have seen it done with all the Ease imaginable from 6 to 5, and from 5 to 4at once upon the whole redeemable Debt; and that, at a Time, when the Sinking Fund and the National Credit were (as one may say) but in their Infancy: Therefore how much more probable is it to be now accomplished gradually, by the very Increase of Credit, andPlenty of Money in the Funds, aided by the large annual Surplus of the S-- F--?
You said just now, that you had seen that Reduction Scheme: Pray communicate to me some of the Particulars?
It lies in a very narrow Compass: It is therein supposed, that theCompany will apply to Parliament (as you was saying in the Beginning of our Discourse) about the Tea Duties; and supposes their Request to be granted, upon Condition of submitting their Fund to be reduced to 3That being done, themay be sent for, and a new Lease granted them for a longer Term, upon the same Conditions, and so on to the other Funds, not doubting that when any of the great Corporations have complied, the remaining will accept Neighbour's Fare.
This is all fine Talking; but it cannot be done without a round Sum of Money in Hand, ready to pay off such obstinate Proprietors as will not be content with such low Interest.
The Scheme hath provided for that likewise, by proposing a Loan to be opened at the, at 3Interest, upon the Credit of the S-- F-- for two or three Years to come, payable inCourse, expecting that large Sums will soon be brought in, rather than invest in Bonds, &c. at such extravagant.
I can't tell what to say to it; it may or may not succeed; but if it should, it will make rare Workfor; from all Buyers, they will become all Sellers, because the respective Dividends will be lessened in Consequence thereof,
Why, do you suppose 1 1/4Reduction of Dividend upon theStock, and only 1upon all the other Funds?
Because thehave 1,600,000original Capital, now carrying 6and 8,500,000additional Capital, attended with 4and consequently 3off the former, and 1off the latter Sum, amount to 133,000a Year, which taken out of about 9,000,000Stock in the Hands of the Proprietors, is more than 1 1/4
Upon the whole, all that I can conclude from our Discourse is, that the Funds are under a very odd. If the Peace should be settled, 3is like to be their Portion; and if the Swordshould again be drawn, they will fall considerably; and much more if we should take Part in the Quarrel. Therefore I'll not concern myself in any for the present; but since so many Estates are advertized for Sale, I'll look out for some agreeable Purchase, and lay out my Money in Land.
And I'll go and give my Friends the Whisper (before the Town and the Foreigners take the Alarm) that they may not be left behind; and wishing you good Success (for the present) I take my Leave of you, hoping, when you have any Commands in my Way, you will not forget me.
You may depend upon my
Friendship. -- Adieu.