The evidence you shall give, between our Sovereign Lord the King and the prisoner at the bar, shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth; so help you God. Kiss the book.
Mr Thomas, pray tell my Lord, and the Jury, what your business is.
I am clerk to Mr Jones, a Stationer, in the Temple.
Look upon this deed
Do you know the hand-writing of that engrossment; if so, tell us whose it is.
This is my hand-writing as far as to the wordsand so on.
How came you not to engross the whole?
I cannot positively say. -- We sometimes leave out the conclusion by gentlemen's desire, in order that they may add a covenant, or some such thing, if it should be thought necessary; but I cannot particularly recollect the reason why the conclusion was omitted in this case.
How many parts of this deed did you engross?
I engrossed this; and, as appears by our day-book, another part.
From whom did you receive the instructions for these engrossments?
From Mr Jones's son.
Were the parts you engrossed agreeable to the draft?
They were.
Look at the wordsengrossed at length in the reddendum and covenant, for payment of the rent in this counterpart; were they part of the original ingrossment, or were they afterwards inserted in blanks left for that purpose?
I engrossed them at the same time that I engrossed the rest, agreeable to the draft.
Prisoner, would you ask this witness any question?
We will now prove the execution of this counterpart by the prisoner. -- Call Mr Fannen.
Mr Fannen, look upon this deed;
did you see it executed, and by whom?
This deed was executed by Mr Ayliffe in my presence.
Tell us, if you can recollect, when this was, and where?
I am not sure; but to the best of my remembrance, it was sometime the beginning of December last, at Mr Fox's house.
Was there any other deed executed at the same time?
There was another part executed by Mr Fox.
Look upon the back of this deed; are you one of the subscribing witnesses?
I am; and so I was to the other part, which was executed by Mr Fox.
Had you any conversation with the prisoner touching thislease immediately after the execution of it?
I had; but I cannot say, whether it was immediately, or a day or two after the lease was executed.
Where was this?
It was in my room at Mr Fox's house; I was not sure, though I guessed, that the deed executed by Mr Fox and witnessed by me, was a lease of Rusley park; and, therefore, I asked Mr Ayliffe, whether Rusley park was let; to which he answered,that Mr Fox had been so good to let it him at the rent of thirty or thirty five pounds a year -- I am not positive which. -- And he expressed great obligations to Mr Fox for his goodness in so doing.
I should be glad to look at that deed.
You shall see it as soon as it has been read. In the mean time, would you ask this witness any question?
No, my Lord.
My Lord, we will now call a witness to prove the concluding words of this counterpartto be of the prisoner's own hand-writing -- Call Mr Ellis Dawe.
Mr Dawe, look at the concluding words in this deed, beginning with the wordsand tell us if you know the hand-writing.
I do: I am well acquainted with the prisoner Mr Ayliffe; and believe these words to be of his hand-writing.
Look upon the endorsement; I mean the title of the deedwritten upon the back of it; Whose hand-writing do you take that to be?
I believe it to be Mr Ayliffe's hand.
Are you well acquainted with his hand-writing?
I am.
Have you seen him write?
I have often seen him write.
We have now fully established this deed, and desire it may be read.
Let it be read.
My Lord, we will now proceed to prove the publication of the lease mortgaged by the prisoner to William Clewer, Esq; and which bears date the 22d of Nov. and is at the yearly rent of 5 l. and for that purpose we will first prove the mortgage, wherein that lease is recited. -- Call Walter Hargrave.
Mr Hargrave, look at your name set upon the back of this mortgage, as a witness to the execution of it; and tell us, whether that is your hand-writing?
This is my hand.
By whom did you see this mortgage executed?
By Mr Ayliffe. -- I saw him sign, seal, and deliver it, as his act and deed.
Where did you see it executed?
At Mr Priddle's chambers, in the King's-Bench-Walks, in the Inner-Temple.
Is your name, set as a subscribing witness to the receipt for the consideration-money, likewise of your hand writing?
It is: I saw Mr Ayliffe sign this receipt for 1700 l.
Did you see the prisoner, at the time of the execution of this mortgage, deliver any title-deeds to Mr Clewer?
Yes, he delivered several deeds to Mr Clewer, and that lease
was one of them.
Do you remember any request being made at this time, to keep the mortgage of that lease a secret? and if you do, tell us by whom such request was made, and who were present.
Mr Ayliffe desired Mr Bradley, Mr Green, Mr Clewer, and myself, to swear that we would keep it secret.
What answer was assigned to this?
We told him we would take no such oath.
Was any reason given for such request?
The reason Mr Ayliffe gave, was, that he would not on any account have it come to Mr Fox's ears.
Pray Sir, have you any particular reason for remembering this lease, so as to be sure, that it was one of the title-deeds delivered by the prisoner to Clewer?
Yes, I have. -- I'll show you.-- I remember it by this stamp.
Mr Jones is come. --
My Lord, with your lordship's leave, we will now go back to the leases engrossed at Mr Jones's, to which he ought regularly to have been examined before, but that he happened not to be in court. -- Mr Jones, do you remember any person's applying to you, some time in the latter end of the year 1758, to have a lease of Rusley-park, in Wiltshire, engrossed in the name of Ayliffe?
Yes; I did three parts of such lease, Fox and Ayliffe. -- My clerk Henry Thomas engrossed two of them, and Henzell the other.
Were there any particular directions given you by the person who brought the draft to your house, about omitting the common conclusion?
I can't positively say, 'till I see the deeds themselves.
We engross'd this deed down to the words,. -- But the conclusion beginning with those words is of some other person's hand. -- It was omitted to leave room forsomething to be added, and must have been ordered so by the person who brought the draft.
Mr Fannen; the last witness, has said there were three parts of the lease engrossed at his house, how many parts did you see executed?
There were only two parts executed; the original lease and counterpart; the first by Mr Fox and the other by Mr Ayliffe.
My Lord, we desire that the mortgage to Clewer, which we have proved to have been executed by the prisoner, may be read, in order to shew that the lease which Hargrave swore was delivered to Clewer, is the very lease recited in, and assigned by, that mortgage.
Let it be read.
We will now, my Lord, proceed to prove, that the lease thus recited in, and assigned by, this mortgage to Clewer, and proved to have been delivered to him by the prisoner, is forged. --
Mr Fannen, be pleased to look at this lease. --
Is the name JohnFannen, written upon the back as a subscribing witness, of your hand-writing?
No Sir, it is not my writing?
Look at the name H. Fox, subscribed at the bottom of it; is that Mr Fox's hand?
It is not.
Are you well acquainted with Mr Fox's hand-writing?
I am.
How long have you been acquainted with it?
I have known Mr Fox's hand-writing these thirteen years.
Is your name upon that deed like your hand-writing?
There is an imitation of my hand, but it is a very bad one.
Do you always write your name in the same manner?
I suppose I may not always write it exactly the same, but as nearly so as possible.
Then, how can you be positive, that this is not your hand?
Because it is a very bad imitation of it.
What reason have you for calling it a bad imitation?
Because it is not like it. It was certainly intended to imitate my hand; but compare that writing with mine upon the counterpart, and you'll see a very great difference.
Look at these
are these of your hand-writing?
They are my writing.
Can you positively swear, that your name on the back of that lease is not of your hand-writing?
I do.
The counterpart, which has been read, is dated the 27th of November: and you have said, that, at the time of the execution of it, there was but one part executed by Mr Fox; I would, therefore, ask you, whether, in that month, or within a short time before or after, you was witness to any other deed between Mr Fox and the prisoner?
No, my Lord, I was not: I remember being a witness to this counterpart executed by the prisoner, and to the original executed by Mr Fox, but to no other deeds within that year.
Call Mr Hobson.
Take that lease into your hand
is the name, James Hobson, which is written upon the back of it, of your hand-writing?
No, Sir, it is not.
Does it appear to you to have been writ with an intention to imitate your hand?
It certainly was intended to be an imitation of my hand?
Does it resemble your hand-writing?
I think very little. There are two letters particularly that are very bad; theis much wider than I write it, and the tops of theare not at all like mine.
Look at the counterpart, are you a subscribing witness to it?
I am: I remember my being a witness to the prisoner's executing this counterpart, and to Mr Fox's executing the original.
Was you ever a subscribing witness to the execution of any other deed between Mr Fox and the prisoner?
I don't recollect that I ever was.
Are you sure that you was not a witness to any such deed in the month of November last?
I am certain I was not.
Or in December?
I do not remember that I was.
When was this deed executed?
To the best of my memory it was upon the 11th of December.
Can you recollect whether you witnessed any such deed within a month or two before, or after, the month of December, 1758?
I don't remember that I was a witness to any other deed at all.
You say you was not a witness to any other deed executed by Mr Fox to the prisoner. -- Pray, look at this instrument; did you not see Mr Fox execute it, and are not you a subscribing witness?
That is my hand-writing, and I saw Mr Fox set his name to this paper.
You may not, perhaps, understand what is meant by a; and, therefore, I will ask you, whether you remember your being a witness in the months of November or December last, or at any time before or after, to the execution of any otherbyMr Fox, besides the lease and counterpart, which you have mentioned?
I do not remember that I was.
Are you acquainted with Mr Fox's hand-writing?
I am well acquainted with it.
Do you live with him?
I do.
How long have you known his hand-writing?
About eight years.
Look upon the name H. Fox subscribed to the deed
is that Mr Fox's hand-writing?
I believe not.
Tell us why you think so.
Because of the I in the H.
which Mr Fox always makes with a pointed top; whereas, the top of this is round; and because of the, the end of which is turned in a different manner from what Mr Fox usually does.
Look at these;
and tell us wherein they differ from this.
The turn of theon the parchment is rounder than in those of Mr Fox's writing.
Do you think it possible for a gentleman, in the course of his signing his name, to write always just alike?
I think it is possible for a man to write always very much alike?
Have you observed any difference in the manner of Mr Fox's signing his name to a frank, and when he subscribes it to a deed or letter?
He does make a difference.
Describe that difference.
Mr Fox uses a differentin his franks, from what he does at other times; he turns the first limb of it towards the right, and draws a strait stroke a-cross.
Pray look at his name on this paper, is this his writing?
It is.
Is not the top of that
larger than the top of this?
It is larger; but they are both pointed.
Is not that
like thesubscribed to the deed?
Compare them carefully.
If you look at them together, you will see a very great difference.
Look at the name H. Fox upon this paper.
Is not that H very like the H at the foot of that deed?
There is but very little difference except in the.
This frank may probably be one of the prisoner's making; for he used sometimes to frank in Mr Fox's name.
Do you know what business Mr Ayliffe was of formerly?
I know nothing more of him than that he was Mr Fox's steward.
My Lord, we will now corroborate the evidence of the two last witnesses, by the testimony of other gentlemen well acquainted with their hand-writing, and with Mr Fox's. -- Call Mr Netherton.
Do you know Mr Fannen?
I do; and have been intimate with him several years?
Have you seen him write?
Yes: I have seen him write many times.
Look at his name, set as a subscribing witness to the execution of this deed.
Is that his hand-writing?
This is not his hand. -- The manner in which this is wrote, particularly as to the shape of the letters, is not at all like it. -- Mr Fannen makes the strokes of his n's farther asunder, freer and rather sharper, and turns the bottom of his J much rounder.
Look at the name John Fannen on these papers;
do you believe these to be his hand?
I believe they are?
Are the tops of these
sharper than those upon the parchment?
They appear so. -- There is more similitude between thenames on those papers, than between either of them, and the name on this parchment.
Do you, or do you not, believe the name John Fannen, on that parchment, to be his hand-writing, or are you doubtful?
I am not in the least doubtful, my Lord; it is certainly forged.
Call Mr Cox.
Do you know Mr Hobson, who has just now been examined?
I do.
Are you acquainted with the manner of his hand-writing?
I am.
Then look at the name James Hobson on the back of this deed.
Do you believe that to be his hand?
That is not his hand-writing.
Are you clear in that opinion?
I am.
Pray, tell us the grounds of your objection?
I object against the, theand the. Mr Hobson makes hisvery narrow; this is very wide; theandare remarkably different.
How came you to be so well acquainted with his hand?
I have received many letters from him.
But did you ever see him write his name?
I have often.
Do you believe Hobson's name upon the back ofthat deed to be his hand-writing, or not, or are you doubtful?
My Lord, I have no doubt at all; I do believe, that this is not his hand.
We desire Mr Calcraft may be sworn.
Mr Calcraft, I need hardly ask you, if you are acquainted with Mr Fox's hand-writing?
I am very well acquainted with his hand; having often seen him write.
Then, Sir, please to look at the name H. Fox subscribed to this deed.
Is that Mr Fox's hand?
I don't take it to be his hand. I never saw him make anas this.
Some persons, from being more conversant in writing, have a more discerning eye than others; therefore, Sir, I would ask you, whether, from your particular acquaintance with Mr Fox's manner of writing, or from your knowledge of writing in general, you can take upon you to say, that you do or do not believe this name to be of Mr Fox's writing, or have you any doubt about it?
From the knowledge I have of Mr Fox's hand, I really believe that this is not of his writing; I never saw Mr Fox make such anas this.
Swear Mr Donisthorpe.
Pray, Sir, are you acquainted with Mr Fox's hand-writing?
I have been acquainted with his hand-writing above twenty-eight years.
Then look upon the name H. Fox subscribed to this deed.
Do you take that to be Mr Fox's hand?
I do not take it to be his hand.
Do you believe, that it is not Mr Fox's hand? or are you doubtful whether it is or not?
I am as certain as I can be of any thing which I did not see done myself, that this is not Mr Fox's hand-writing.
Are you in any station under Mr Fox?
I have now the honour to be his steward.
Do you know Mr Ayliffe, the prisoner at the bar?
I have known him many years.
Are you acquainted with his hand-writing, particularly his engrossing hand?
I am well acquainted with his hand-writing; but I never saw him engross.
Can you take upon you to say, whether you believe the engrossment of this deed
to be the prisoner's hand?
I don't call this an engrossing hand.
Then can you tell us of whose hand-writing you take this deed to be?
I am certain this is Mr Ayliffe's hand, as certain as I am that the name H. Fox at the bottom is not of Mr Fox's writing.
We must desire Mr Dawe to stand up again.
Mr Dawe, you are acquainted with the prisoner's hand; pray, look upon this deed,
whose hand do you take it to be?
I believe it to be Mr Ayliffe's hand.
Swear Mr Dalby.
Did you, Sir, ever see Mr Ayliffe write?
Yes: I have a great many times.
Look upon the body of this deed.
Do you believe it to be of the prisoner's hand-writing?
This is a much stronger hand than he usually writes; but the cut and turn of the letters are so exactly the same, that I believe it to be his, though I cannot say I ever saw any of his writing upon parchment before.
If you never saw any of his writing upon parchment, and you admit this to be a stronger hand than his, what reason have you to say this deed is of his writing?
I have often seen Mr Ayliffe write, and I have received many letters from him; and I say, that the turn of the letters in this deed greatly resembles the manner of his hand-writing.
Let Mr Jones stand up.
Pray, look at the engrossment of that deed.
Do you know any thing of that hand-writing?
This is not the hand-writing of any of my people. -- It is not an engrossing hand, but very badly wrote.
Are you positive that this is not the hand-writing of any of the persons whom you employ?
Yes; I am certain that this was not wrote by any of the people whom I employ, or ever did.
Have you ever seen any writing like it?
It seems to me to be the same hand with the concluding part of the counterpart engrossed at my house.
Give him the counterpart, to compare the concluding words of the two deeds.
Now from your skill and practice in writing, do you take these two conclusions, beginning at the words,to be wrote by the same hand, or by different hands?
They are exactly alike, and appear to me to have been both done by the same hand; and I believe them to have been wrote by one person.
Both what!
The whole of this deed,
and the wordsto the end in the other.
Swear Samuel Lodge.
Mr Lodge, do you know Mr Ayliffe's hand?
Yes; Sir, I have been acquainted with him many years.
Have you seen him write?
I have seen him write several times.
Did you live with him?
I used to be frequently backwards and forwards with him.
Then look at the body of that lease,
and tell us of whose hand-writing it is?
I believe it to be Mr Ayliffe's, it greatly resembles his hand.
Had you not some conversation with the prisoner some time about the month of December last, concerning a lease from Mr Fox to him of Rusley-park?
I remember I copied the draft of such a lease, in order to be carried to Mr Paterson, for his perusal.
What was the rent reserved?
I left a blank for the rent, Mr Ayliffe having told me, that he did not know what the rent was to be; he said it was to be a small one; perhaps, 5 l. a year; and possibly, but a peppercorn.
What was done with this draft?
When I had wrote it, I believe I carried it to Mr Paterson.
Do you know of the engrossing of that draft?
No, Sir, I don't.
Did the prisoner, at any time after the lease was executed, tell you what the rent was?
He told me it was five pounds a year.
Did you see the lease itself after it was executed?
I did.
When did you see it, and upon what occasion?
I can't directly say the time; but I believe it was in December last; Mr Ayliffe delivered it to me, among other writings, at Mr Priddle's chambers, or coming from thence.
Did he at that time tell you what the rent was?
No; not at that time; but I looked to see. I had to put the parcelinto my pocket; and going soon after, to the vault; and having no waste-paper, I took out the writings, which were wrapped up in a new's-paper, and tore part of it off. This gave me the opportunity of seeing that the lease of Rusley was in the parcel; upon which, I had the curiosity to look into it, and see what the rent reserved was; and then I saw that it was 35 l.
Was that lease of the prisoner's hand-writing?
No: it was a very different hand, more like the hand-writing of the counterpart which has been produced here, as far as a person can carry the resemblance of hand-writings in his mind.
Did you look at the name subscribed at the bottom?
Yes: it was signed H. Fox.
You said you had known the prisoner a long time; what was he originally?
I believe he kept a school.
What school?
A writing and reading school, I believe.
Where was it he kept a school?
At Lineham, in the county of Wilts.
You say you are acquainted with the manner of the prisoner's hand-writing; pray, look at the signature, H. Fox, at the foot of this deed,
whose hand-writing do you believe that to be?
It appears to me to have a strong resemblance of Mr Ayliffe's hand-writing.
What reason haveyou to think so; have you ever seen him sign Mr Fox's name?
I have two or three times seen him frank letters in Mr Fox's name; and this looks like Mr Ayliffe's manner of writing Mr Fox's name, though it is wrote larger than what he used to do in the franks.
Did the prisoner use to write Mr Fox's name in the manner it is signed to that lease?
Yes; except the, which he wrote like that used by Mr Fox in his franks.
Are the words, both in the reddendum and covenant of the counterpart, engrossed in words at length; and is there any razure in either of them in the lease set out in the indictment?
The rent reserved in the counter-part is engrossed in words at length, and there is no razure in the lease.
My Lord, we rest it here.
Mr Ayliffe, the counsel for the Crown have now gone through their evidence; this, therefore, is the time to make your defence.
The name to the lease is Mr Fox's own hand-writing; that is all I know.
Have you any witnesses to call.
My Lord, webeg leave to examine a few witnesses for the prisoner. -- Call Gabriel Cruse
My Lord, I was subpoena'd last Monday at Salisbury, and am come up here from the country; I have not been paid for my journey or expences; therefore, I hope I shall be considered.
That is never done in cases of felony.
Do you know Mr Fox?
I know him: but I have very little acquaintance with him.
Do you know any thing of a lease executed by him to the prisoner?
No: I know nothing of his executing a lease.
Did you not hear Mr Fox make some declaration concerning a lease he had granted to the prisoner?
He told me that he had ordered the prisoner to prepare a lease at thirty-five pounds a year; but seemed to think that he had been imposed upon; for he said the lease, which had since been produced to him, was only at five pounds a year. -- That is all I know of the matter.
Explain yourself; what was it Mr Fox said?
He said, that the draft of the lease was at thirty-five pounds a year, but that he had signed the lease without reading it.
Did you ever see the lease he was he was speaking of in Mr Fox's hands?
No: I never did.
Call Adam Brown.
Are you acquainted with Mr Fox's hand-writing?
Yes: I know it well.
How long have you been acquainted with it?
About a dozen years.
Here, take this deed.
Look at the name H. Fox at the bottom of it; do you or do you not believe that to be Mr Fox's hand?
The first glance of it shews a great aukwardness. -- This is not Mr Fox's hand, but a very bad imitation of it. -- There is a stiffness in this that I never observed in Mr Fox's writing.
Call Thomas Bonnell.
Of what profession, Sir, are you?
I am an Attorney.
Pray, look at this deed
did you ever see this in Mr Fox's hands?
No, Sir, I never saw it before.
Did not Mr Fox make some acknowledgment to you about it?
That was matter of private conversation, which I don't know whether I am at liberty to repeat.
Raise your voice; I don't hear you.
Mr Fox asked me if I knew any thing about the lease of Rusley-Park.
Where was this conversation?
I attended Mr Fox at Holland-House. -- He told me Ayliffe had grossly imposed upon him, for he had made the rent 5 l. instead of thirty-five pounds, and seem to intimate, that he looked upon it as a fraud and not a forgery.He said, he had first intended it should be at 40 l. a year; but that being desirous Mr Ayliffe should have it upon beneficial terms, he had ordered him to make it at 35 l. That was nearly the sense of what passed at that time.
What time was this?
About the latter end of July, to the best of my remembrance.
Was it before or after Mr Clewer had sent Mr Fox the lease that was in mortgage to him?
I believe it was after that. -- I think, Mr Fox told me he had seen it; -- but I will not be positive to this; -- I am sure he said it was 5 l. instead of 35 l.
Did Mr Fox appear to speak of it as an imposition upon him, or as a forgery?
I believe that Mr Fox at this time thought that he had been imposed upon, and made to execute a lease at 5 l. instead of one at 35 l. as he had agreed to.
If you build upon Mr Fox's opinion or belief concerning this matter, you may call him as a witness, and have the benefit of his evidence, although they are not at liberty to call him on the part of the Crown.
Mr Fox, my Lord, is near at hand, and will be forth-coming if they desire to examine him.
My Lord, we don't desire it?
Mr Bonnell, are you not sure that Mr Fox told you he had seen the lease in mortgage to Clewer?
I think he told me so, but am not certain.
Did he say nothing to you about the counterpart?
I think he mentioned it; but to be particular as to what he said I cannot.
My Lord, we beg leave to call some witnesses to the prisoner's character.
That seems unnecessary; for the prisoner's character before this particular fact has not been impeached; on the contrary, it appears that Mr Fox himself, 'till lately, had so good an opinion of him, as to employ him to be his steward. But proceed in your own way.
Call Francis Scull.
Do you know Mr Ayliffe?
Yes, I have known him a great many years, ever since he lived in the parish of Lineham.
What was his general character?
I generally looked upon him as an honest man. I scarcely ever heard any thing to his discredit. -- He was formerly steward to Madam Horner; and when she died he continued steward to Mr Fox.
Did he continue Mrs Horner's steward to the time of her death?
I don't know whether he did or not. -- But I have one particular reason to look upon him as a very honest man. -- He had, it seems, turned away a servant of Mr Fox's, upon which I applied to him to desire he would employ him again; -- No, says he, I'll not employ a servant, or any one, that is not a friend to Mr Fox's interest, my honour will not let me do it: for Mr Fox's interest is concerned, as several persons have made complaints of him to me.
Call JamesDoleman.
Do you know Mr Ayliffe?
I do.
How long have you known him?
I have known him a dozen or fourteen years.
What was his general character?
He bore a very good character during that time; I looked upon him as an honest man, and never heard to the contrary in all my life.
Call John Tuck.
Do you know Mr Ayliffe?
Yes, I have known him many years.
What is his general character?
As to his character, as far as ever I heard, he is a man of credit and reputation.
Where do you live?
At Chippenham in the county of Wilts.
When you speak of credit, What do you mean?
That he is a very honest man.
Don't you know that he has of late been in very distressed circumstances?
I don't know it.
Mr Tuck, you heard what Mr Lodge has sworn against me; did he not give me a very good character but a week ago?
I have heard him give you a good character.
Call Mr Bradley.
How long have you known Mr Ayliffe?
I have known him a year and an half, or thereabouts?
Was you not one of the subscribing witnesses to the mortgage executed by the prisoner to Mr Clewer?
Yes: I was.
Then look upon the back of that deed,
and tell us whether your name there is of your hand-writing?
I will not disown it; that is my hand-writing.
Then I suppose you was present, and saw the prisoner execute it.
I certainly did?
Do you remember any request made at that time to keep this mortgage a secret?
I do.
Was it not that an oath of secrecy should be taken?
I cannot say that. -- I only know that it was desired the mortgage might be kept a secret.
Who was it that desired it?
I believe it was Mr Ayliffe's Attorney.
Did not Mr Ayliffe himself desire it?
I don't remember that I heard him say any thing about it.
Was Mr Ayliffe present when his Attorney desired it?
I believe he was.
Tell us what was said about it?
It was said Mr Fox would be very angry, if he knew that Rusley-Park was sold or mortgaged; and that therefore Mr Ayliffe was desirous it should not be talked of.
Who said all this? Ayliffe, or his Attorney?
I really cannot swear which of them said it; I only know that this was spoke at the time the mortgage was executed to Clewer.
What is the Attorney's name?
Mr Priddle was the Attorney; I think it was he repeated those words; but I cannot recollect positively who it was.
Was it said in my hearing?
I cannot say you heard it. -- You was there when this deed was signed.
Is it an unusual thing for a mortgager to desire that his being under a necessity to incumber his estate should be kept a secret, and his circumstances not be exposed?
No: I conceive that it is often desired.
If a mortgage is paid off at the time, is there any occasion to disclose it at all?
I should think there can be none.
My Lord, we think it unnecessary to reply, or make any observations upon the evidence given for the prisoner.
Gentlemen of the Jury, Are you all agreed on your verdict?
Yes.
Who shall say for you?
Our foreman.
John Ayliffe, Hold up your hand
Gentlemen of the Jury, look upon the prisoner; how say you, is he guilty of the felony and forgery whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?
Guilty.
What goods or chattels, lands or tenements, had he at the time of the same felony and forgery committed, or at any time since to your knowledge?
None.
Hearken to your verdict as the Court has recorded it: You say that John Ayliffe is guilty of the felony and forgery whereof he standsindicted, and that he had no goods or chattels, lands or tenements, at the time of the same felony or forgery committed, or at any time since, to your knowledge, and so say you all.
My Lord, there is another indictment found by the Grand Jury of the county of Middlesex, against the prisoner, for the forging and publishing another duplicate of the lease of Rusley; upon which we are ready to proceed to tryal, but that we think it will be taking up the time of the Court unnecessarily, as the prisoner is already capitally convicted. And, indeed, as a second conviction could only serve by way of aggravation, we do not desire to throw any difficulties in the way to mercy.
It certainly is unnecessary.