Call Mr..
I am a broker.
Do you know the prisoner at the bar?
I have known him 15 years.
Did the prisoner apply to you to borrow any sum of money for him, and when?
The prisoner at the bar applied to me to borrow a sum of money for him of Mr. Richard Holland in March last, upon eight warrants for tea lying in the East India company's warehouses.
How much was the sum?
It was 1000 l. I went to Mr. Holland and told him I wanted 1000 l. upon eight warrants and a note of hand; I gave him the list of the numbers of these warrants, which security he at first approved of, so I went for the warrants to Mr. Baker, and he delivered them to me with his own hand, and this note of hand for 1000 l.This is what is usual, part written and part printed; it was filled up by me, and signed by Mr. William Baker.
What did he say these warrants were for?
For tea, lying in the East India company's warehouses.
What did you do with these warrants and the note of hand?
I delivered them to Mr. Richard Holland, and he gave me a draught upon his Bankers (Frame and Barcley) for 1000 l. which I received, and gave to Mr. Baker with my own hand.
This is what I delivered to Mr. Holland. Can you be positive that you took a list of these warrants at that time?
I have got the list here which he gave me at first, and it is the very identical note I gave to Mr. Holland.
How long have you known Mr. Baker?
I have known Mr. Baker upwards of fifteen years.
What did you think of him at this time for substance and honesty?
Had I had money of my own, I had such thoughts of his substance and honesty, that I would have lent it him in my own name.
Mr. Gastineau applied to me about the 23d of March for 1000 l. to lend Mr. Baker, and also brought me the security the same day; as to Mr. Baker I never saw him in my life till I saw him in the Compter.
What did Mr. Gastineau bring to you for security?
He brought to me
this paper, and eight warrants
I delivered this warrant to Mr. Deputy Slater with the others, for him to go to the East India house to see if they were right.
The eight warrants I received of Mr. Holland, I carried to the East India house to have them examined. About the 15th of Nov. I applied to Mr. Holbrook, who looked and said he could not find the check for them, and that he believed them to be bad, for he could not find the numbers to tally; then he apprehended the goods were delivered; he looked into the sale book to see if the goods were weighed off, and found in the entry book that they had been delivered for the warrants which I had, so assured me they were bad ones.
What did he mean by bad warrants?
That are not good for any thing; then he said he had orders from the directors to stop any warrants of this kind; I told him I did not care to part with them, for I had them of a friend whom I had a great regard for; he desired, if I had no objection, I would go to Mr. Chauncey chairman of the East India company, which I accordingly did, and Mr. Holbrook took the warrants and went along with me; he sent a servantto Mr. Holland, who told him what had happened; Mr. Chauncey said he'd detain the warrants let the consequence be what it would; their check is so regular that they cannot be imposed upon.
What did Mr. Holland say upon coming there?
Mr. Holland said he believed he could have his money again upon giving up the notes, and that he look'd upon the prisoner able enough to return it him back.
In whose hands were the warrants then?
They were all in the hands of Mr. Holbrook till we came to Mr. Chauncey, except the 8th, which I had; after we had been there about an hour he ordered Mr. Holbrook to mark the warrants, and some time after he desired me to mark them; said I, they have been out of my possession a considerable time; I marked No. 784, so did he, and declared he had it of me.
How long have you known Mr. Baker?
I have known him many years.
What has been his general character?
His general character was so good as to substance and honesty, that I would have given him credit for 1000 l. at any time in my way.
Who delivered this warrant (No. 784) to you?
Mr. Slater delivered it to me.
Where has it been ever since you went with Mr. Deputy Slater to Mr. Chauncey?
It has never been out of my possession since, and there is my mark upon it.
Tell us whether you gave Mr. Gastineau any sum of money.
I gave him a draught upon Mess. Frame and Barcley, bankers, for 1000 l. and he delivered the warrants, Mr. Baker's note, and defeisance to me.
Is the draught paid?
It is paid, and credit given upon the account.
Were all these brought to you as a joint security for 1000 l.?
They were, there was this note, and the others as a collateral security.
Did you know the prisoner before?
No, I never knew him, or heard of his name, before the broker came to me; but I really believe, had there not been this prosecution carried on, we should have had our money, by what I have heard.
Do you think he had an intention to defraud you?
I don't know that he had, and, by circumstances I have heard since, I don't think he had; I have heard he has paid Mr. Martin and others, and I believe he would have paid me.
Did you then apprehend these eight warrants to be good ones?
I did then.
Do you not think, if a man delivers to you a forg'd warrant, he hath an intention to defraud?
I cannot tell that. I understand he has done these things, taken them up, and paid the money; this might have been the consequence, but I cannot tell his intention.
Supposing it comes out they are forg'd, whether or no you are not defrauded?
To be sure, if I am not to have my money again, I am defrauded.
Do you think two frauds are worse than one?
That they are, Sir.
Did you think you was defrauded, when you went to Mr. Chauncey?
I did, Sir.
Did you lend the money upon the security of the warrants, as well as the note?
I did, and supposed them to be real good warrants.
As you now find them to be bad ones, don't you think yourself defrauded?
I was deceived, or defrauded, in that respect no doubt.
Should you have lent him the money on his word alone?
I should not.
I am warehousekeeper to the East India company. I made a thorough search to see if these warrants were forged; I turned to my sale book in order to see for the number, and found it; there is the letter of my journal put down, to which I referred, and found the goods were delivered; then I immediately thought these warrants were forged.
Did you search about No. 784 in particular?
I cannot say I did that more than the others; I particularly searched every one, but did not look for the receipt, which we generally check the warrants with, for that night it was too dark to do any thing of that kind; our journal is at all times so correct, that I was very certain it was a forgery; since that time I have looked to see for the receipt that will check with it, but have none that will.
Whether or not if these are honest good warrants, there is a receipt, which is cut through the marble part that runs cross, that will check with the warrant?
Yes, sir, there is.
And when the warrant is real and good you try it by checking it with the receipt?
That is the way we examine them.
What was this warrant for?
For three chests of bohea tea described under particular Numbers.
Did you find that these quantities of goods had been delivered out?
Yes, they were.
When did it appear they were delivered?
They were delivered the 15th of Feb. 1749, to Mr. William Hayter.
Are you acquainted with the hand writing of Mr. William Webb?
He is the company's joint treasurer.
What is John Sedgwick?
He is an officer employed by the company to assist the joint treasurers.
What ship did the goods delivered to Mr. Hayter come by?
By the Dragon, I have the original warrant.
Do you know any thing of the delivery of these goods, in February?
Yes, I do, by having the warrant; the persons who deliver them, write down the two initial letters upon it; the warrants are never deliver'd back to our custody, till some part of the goods are deliver'd; this is a warrant, number 676, Ship Dragon, Robert Sedgwick, per William Hayter; Folio 110, Number 113, to 15; three chests of bohea tea, at 3s. 3d. deliver'd 15th. Feb. 1749, sign'd, T.P. that is the person that wrote the warrant off.
How came you by it?
The person that came to take the goods brought it, that is the usual method; thereis a receipt given on the back of the warrant; the receipt is in this manner receiv'd, the 15th of February, 1749; the full contents for William Hayter this was given by Mr. Toby Chauncey, he was Mr. Hayter's apprentice.
I was apprentice to Mr. William Hayter: he is dead.
Do you know of any goods that were deliver'd out of the East-India warehouse, for him?
Yes, sir, I do.
The goods were deliver'd to Mr. Hayter accordingly; I have the receipt here, and I also sign'd the receipt on the back of this warrant; they were bought at the company's sale, Feb. the 15th 1749, by Robert Sedgwick; the warrant is to Robert Sedgwick, for William Hayter.
I am a broker; I transact business at the East-India company's sale; I remember being employ'd by Mr. Hayter, to buy these goods for him; I gave him a written order to receive these very goods.
Did you not buy goods under this description, for Anthony Hotchkin?
No, I never did; this, in our book, is set down to Mr. William Hayter, 137 l. 16s. 4d. if our principal request it of us, we fill the warrant up.
After you have fill'd them up, what examination is there on the behalf of the company, to know that they are rightly fill'd up?
None, as I know of; sometimes they take time to take them out of our sight, before the delivery of them; sometimes an hour, and sometimes a day.
Is there a note brought, which they call the clearing note, from the accomptant's office?
The use of that is, upon orders given to the warehouse keeper, to weigh any goods, he delivers a printed paper, as this,. We call one a weighing note, and the other a clearing note; the accomptant keeps the weighing note, and he likewise signs the clearing note to us, when we carry it to see whether the clearing note, and the warrant agree.
Are the warrants fill'd up by the officer, or the bearer?
I believe they are seldom fill'd up by the company's officers; there are such great numbers come in on the prompt day, it is not practicable for the Clerks to fill them up that day themselves; the quantity is so great.
Look upon this.
Who fill'd this up?
A clerk in our compting office.
Who fill'd up the other?
I don't know that.
I am joint treasurer to the East-India company; it is my duty to sign the warrants; I generally do it upon receiving the money.
Look upon this warrant, and tell us whether it is sign'd by you?
It is not, my lord.
I wrote the William Webb here.
I am assistant to Mr. Dorrington, who is one of the joint treasurers; when warrants are deliver'd in, they are sign'd by Mr. Webb, if Mr. Whitehall, the countersigner, is busy.
What is Mr. Whitehall?
He is the counter-signer.
Look upon this, and tell us whether it is your own hand writing, or not?
I believe not, my lord, here is aI don't think to be like mine.
Look upon the name, is that Mr. Webb's writing?
I have seen him write many hundred times; I believe it is not.
Can you be positive your name there is not your hand writing?
I am certain it is not.
How come you to be certain, you was not just now?
There are the letters,and, and thein John, are not like mine.
Is the whole name of your own hand writing, as it there stands, or is it not?
I am positive it is not.
Look upon the back of this paper, is that your hand writing?
This is not my hand writing, and the goods were not bought by me, nor for me.
Do you frequently buy goods of the company?
I do, at all sales there in the tea way.
I have lent at times nineteen hundred pounds to William Baker upon warrants,
one was for tea, the other for pepper; that for tea was by the ship Dragon; I had them from his own hand, but cannot swear to the identity of this by the Dragon, it having been some time out of his hand; the other by the Tavistock.
Look upon that defeisance, and upon that warrant and number.
Here is 113 to 115, the same numbers he delivered to me; the figures correspond, but I cannot swear this is the identical warrant he delivered to me; my defeisance only mentions the quantity and price; the date was 17 Mar. 49.
I had two warrants deliver'd to me, by Mr. Alveringa, to go to Fenchurch street warehouse, to be check'd; I left them with Mr. Fyfield, at the compting-house, where Mr. Holbrook is warehouse keeper; they were examin'd, and found the goods were deliver'd, Mr. Fyfield took the two warrants, and desir'd me to come up to Mr. Holbrook, I did; then he carried me to Mr. Chauncey, and ask'd me, if they were the same warrants; they were a few minutes out of my custody; they were produc'd by Mr. Holbrook there, and I believe them to be the numbers; Mr. Fyfield had deliver'd them to Mr. Holbrook.
When was this?
It was in November; I cannot tell the day.
I met Mr. Fyfield, and Mr. Pacheco, in Fenchurch-street; they said, they had two forg'd warrants, he gave me this; I went to the India House, and acquainted Mr. Chauncey with them.
Compare that warrant with the good,
Here is Folio 110, No. 113, to 15; three chests of bohea tea, weight 966 1/2, at 3s. 3d. ship Dragon: the number of the warrants differ, and the date, that is all, Sept. sale, 1749, the other things are the same.
Thus we think we have prov'd the forgery, and the publishing of it.
, This fact is laid in the indictment to be done in order to defraud the said Richard Holland bydepositing the same with him, as a security for the sum of a thousand pounds; it appears by the evidence of Mr. Holland that the prisoner did not borrow any sum upon this note singly, but it was a joint sum of money which Mr. Holland lent upon the credit of eight warrants and a note of hand; if it had said, he deposited this warrant together with several other warrants, that would have been according to the evidence now given; but by this indictment it appears to be deposited a single note for the sum of a thousand pounds. Mr. Holland says all the eight warrants were deposited at once, and nothing has been said to contradict him upon that; so I submit this to your Lordship and the court, whether this evidence does support this indictment.
.
The question is, Whether the fact, that has been examined to, lies in this indictment, which was a joint contract for a thousand pounds lent upon two securities, one a promissory note, and the deposit of eight warrants. It was not on the deposit of this single warrant, No. 784. I dare say, if Mr. Holland was asked if he lent him the money upon this only, which is but 146 l. or thereabouts, and the note, he would answer, he did not. This objection is of no weight whatsoever, but I cannot blame the gentlemen to do their best in every thing that occurs; they have a right to try their chance, but they have not a possibility of doing the prisoner service upon this objection. It is said this was done with intention to defraud Richard Holland, by depositing the warrant with him as a security for the payment of a thousand pounds. Can any body doubt, upon this evidence given, but that this was deposited with Mr. Holland as a security? every one is a security. Had it been alledged he deposited this warrant as the only security for a thousand pounds, it might admit of some objection; but, as it is alledged, it is impossible. Can it be deny'd, when the evidence is recollected, but that this warrant (No. 784) was deposited as a security? then this verifies the indictment. It is one of the numbers deposited for a thousand pounds. Suppose he were indicted for theseven other warrants, then it may be aver'd these seven others were part of the number; and also this 784 was part of the pledge for the security for a thousand pounds. Can any one doubt, but that would be a good plea? always in those cases these pleas are well supported by averments. Then taking it so, we make use of only one of these to proceed upon, to save time and trouble of the court. Pledged for a security it certainly was, and therefore there cannot be any colour of reason to say but this verifies the indictment, that it was deposited with others for a security.
I am a stranger to causes of this nature. I 
have acquainted my counsel with my case, and
refer it to them.