We desire in the first Place, Mr.himself may be sworn,
Mr., give an account to my Lord and the Jury of the whole Matter.
Onlast I was invited to sup at Mr., and being there, he proposed to me to go to Mrs..
Was this before or after Supper?
This was before Supper: We supp'd about seven, and after Supper about ten a-clock he call'd me out of his Parlour, I follow'd him; we went into the Church-yard. It was then very dark, the Moon did not shine. He took three or four Turns before the House where Mrs.dwelt, then he stood still and made a noise.
What kind of Noise did he make?
It was like a Hollowing.
Were you under any Fear or Apprehension from that Noise?
Yes, my Lord, I was afraid, and made up towards the Wall; but in a quarter of a Minute somebody came behind me, and knock'd me down.
Did you then know who that Man was?
I did not.
Can you tell what was done to you afterwards?
My Lord, I cannot, for on that Blow I lost my Senses for some time.
How long was it before your Senses returned?
My Lord, I cannot tell, but in some time I got up, and return'd to Mr..
In what Condition did you find your self?
I was ready to die and faint, and I was found very much wounded.
Did any Chyrurgeon come to you at Mr.?
Yes, Sir, Mr..
After the Person came up who knock'd you down, did you hear Mr.say any thing?
No, my Lord.
Can you tell whether he stay'd any time, or what became of him?
No, I cannot.
Was he there when the first Blow was given?
Yes, he was.
Will the Prisoners ask Mr.any Questions?
Mr., was I present when you were knock'd down?
Yes, Sir.
Do you remember that you saw me?
Yes.
How near was I to you?
You were close by me when I was knock'd down.
Call Mr.and swear him,
I think you are a Relation of Mr.?
Yes, Sir, I married his own Sister, and he married Mr.Sister.
Was you at Mr.house lastat night?
A Day or two before last, I and my Wife and Daughter were invited to sup with him, and accordingly we went. I came about six a-clock, and found Mr.and Mr.drinking a Glass of Wine in the Parlour before Supper.
Was there any other Company with them?
No, the Women were above Stairs. I sat down with them, and we three staid in the Parlour till Supper-time. When Supper was ready, we went up Stairs. Then after Supper between eight and nine, we three came down into the Parlour again. Some time after,went out of the Room, and then came back again and gave a Call, or beckon'd to Mr., who follow'd him out of the Room.
At what time of night was this?
After nine a-clock at night.
How long was it before Mr.return'd?
He was gone about ten Minutes, and then returned.
Was he in any disorder when he returned?
He seem'd to be out of breath, as if he had been walking faster than ordinary.
How far distant is the Church-Yard, where this Gentlewoman dwelt, from Mr.House?
The Church-Yard is about twice the length of this Shire-House from Mr.House.
What diddo when he came in?
Immediately he drunk a Glass of Wine to me, and after he had sat some time, he went out of the Room. I heard a Noise up Stairs, and being told my Daughter was ill, I went up, and in a little time came down again into the Parlour, where I found Mr..
Did you ask him what was become of Mr.?
I did then ask him what was become of Mr., and he told me that he believ'd he was gone home in the dark. In about two or three Minutes after, Mr.came in. He was very much wounded and bloody. I was so surprized that I could not take particular notice of him.
How long was it fromgoing out to his coming in again?
It was near half an hour.
So thenreturned in about ten Minutes, andin near half an Hour.
Yes, my Lord.
Did Mrsee Mr.when he came back to his House?
Yes.
What did he say?
He seem'd to be in a great Consternation.
Do you know of any Estate that would have come to Mr.after Mr.Death?
I cannot positively say it of my own Knowledge.
We will ask Mr.that Question. Pray, Mr., would any Estate have come by your Death to Mr.?
In case I had died, One hundred Poundswould have come to his Wife as one of my Sisters.
Have you then no Children, nor Brothers?
No, my Lord; my next of Kin are three Sisters, one of which is Mr.Wife, she would have been one of my Heirs.
Call Mr.;
What do you know concerning this wounding of Mr.?
I am a Chirurgeon by Profession; and the first day oflast at Night, about Eleven a-clock, I was sent for to Mr.at Mr.House: When I came, I found him very much wounded and cut, and in a very weak Condition, and that he had lost a great deal of Blood. I examined his Wounds: One Wound began at his right Ear, divided the fleshy part of his Cheek, and ended on his upper Lip just under his right Nostril; the Flesh was all divided, and the Jaw left naked. Another Wound divided the right side of the Nostril, and made an oblique Cross over the Wound, and ended near the right under Jaw.
Was his Nose slit?
Yes, Sir, the Nose was cut from without into the Nostril; the Edge of the Nose was not cut through, but there was a Cut or Slit in the Nose that went through: I sow'd it up: it was indeedbut with one Stitch; it is yet visible, and the Nose was cut through.
Were there any other Wounds?
There was another deep Wound under his Chin, that reach'd from one Jaw to the other. There was another Wound, which began at his Chin, cross'd the left under Jaw, and tended towards his Ear. There was also a small Wound on his left Cheek, another on his upper Lip, and another on his left Temple.
How many Wounds had he in all?
Seven.
Do you think there were seven distinct Wounds, that had seven distinct Blows?
I take it, that every one of the seven Wounds had a distinct Blow.
With what Instrument did you apprehend those Blows were given?
It was cut so clean, that I thought it was done either by a Knife or Razor.
Let the Jury see Mr.Wounds.
Swear;
I think you are a Constable in?
I am.
Had you any occasion to speak toconcerning this Matter, and what did he say?
I had a Warrant from Aldermanand Mr. Serjeantto apprehenduponExamination.
The Question ask'd you is, What you know ofConfession, and what he hath said to you about this Matter?
Afterwas committed, I was with him, and ask'd him, Whether he was concerned in the wounding of Mr.? He told me, Yes he was. I ask'd him, Whether Mr.was with him: he said he was. I ask'd him how longstay'd with him: He said, That he had struckthree or four Blows beforeleft him.
What else did you ask him, or did he say to you?
He told me, that he was walking up and down in the Churchyard whenwhistled to him, and that on that Signal he went up and assaulted Mr..
Did he give you any account how long and where he waited before the Fact was done?
He told me, that he was desired by Mr.to be up and down in the Churchyard about Nine a-clock that Night; and that being a cold Night,gave him a Bottle of Brandy, and told him he could not tell what timewould come home, but desired him to be ready and to stay let it be never so long.
Did he tell you with what Instrument he did it?
He told me, He did it with an Hook or Bill, that was new ground for the Purpose, and that it was in his House at the right hand of his Door. I went according to his Direction, and found it, and brought it to him; and he said, That that was the Hook. -- The Hook I have brought with me, and this is the Hook that I have now in my Hand.
Call;
Give my Lord and the Jury an account what you know of this Matter.
I am the Gaoler; and the Day after Mr.was committed to me, about five Minutes after One, he sent for me up into his Chamber, where his Wife was crying and in great disorder, as he seem'd to be likewise. She was desiring her Husband to discover. When he came to himself, he told me, That he andhad had a Design to murder Mr., and had attempted it several times; and desired me to go and secure. I went to the Alderman, and told him of it, and he gave me the like Orders. Coming from the Alderman I met Mr.Man, who ask'd me whether I had found him; on which I ask'd him, Who, and what he meant, thinking him to be ignorant of his Master's Confession: but he told me, that his Master had discovered it to him, and had sent him to take up. Whilst we were talking, we sawcoming up, and we desir'd onea Smith, who was shooing a Horse, to assist us; which he did, and we secur'd.
Did Mr.confess any thing to you concerning this Fact, and the manner of doing it?
Yes, my Lord, he did. He told me several times, that he had a design to murder, and that he employ'd, and deliveredinto his hands.
Did he tell you that?
He did tell me so: He told me also, That it was done with an Hook; and that he had bidto cut his Weasand or Windpipe; and that ifhad not been a cow-hearted Dog, he would have so done, and secur'dfrom telling Tales.
Didtell you what Means he used to do this to Mr.?
He said, That he call'd him out of his House, went into the Church-yard with him, and there delivered him intohands.
Did he say what Signal was given?
Not that I remember; but he said, Thatwas placed there by his Appointment.
For what Design?
With an intent to murder him. Whenstruck him,said, he went away immediately.
What have you heardsay concerning this Fact?
I have heardsay, That he andhad lain in wait several times and at several places to murder Mr..
Didgive you any account what he did at this time to Mr.?
Yes, he did; he said, That he struck him a Blow with his Hook, and that not quite striking him down, he gave him a second Blow which did; and that, as he was falling, (who was never us'd to swear) cried out, God damn him; and that then it went to his very Heart to think that he should kill a Man with an Oath in his Mouth.
Did he say he gave him many Blows?
He said, He gave him several Blows, and that he thought he was dead.
Call:
What do you know of this Matter?
When I heard what happen'd to, I said, I knew the Person who did it, or the Person who employ'd him to do it; and the reason was, because three Years, or three Years and a half ago, Mr.sent for me, and said to me, at first I thought it to be in a jesting way, that he wish'd Mr.out of the World, he was a good-for-nothing Fellow, his Wife had a trick of playing away his Estate, and he wish'd some body would knock him in the Head. Sir, said I to him, what advantage would that be to you? He shook his Head, and said, A very good Estate. Said I, I thoughthad but a small Estate. Yes, said he, a very good one. Then I began to think there was something in it. After some little time, said he, I do not value ten or twenty Guineas to knock him in the head. Then I began a little to reflect that he should have such an opinion of me, that I should be such a sort of Person.
What then did you say to him?
I told him, That I would not kill the greatest Villain in the world for ten such Towns as.
What did he say afterwards?
I do not remember, I have forgot if there was any thing else.
How came you to remember this?
When I heard of this Fact committed on Mr., then it came fresh into my Memory.
Call,
What Trade are you of?
A Blacksmith.
Didat any time sendfor you, and what past thereon?
On the Friday beforelast, which was on a Monday, Mr.sentto me, who told me his Masterwanted to speak with me.
Did you go?
Yes, I went to his House, and he order'd me to come up to him in his Chamber. When I came up, he told me that he wanted a good strong Horse to carry his Weight. I told him I did not know ofany one then; but when I did, I would let him know. Upon that he said, By God, how do you go on, Boy? I hear you have lost most of your Business, you have got no Iron nor Coals, and you are afraid of a Goal; I have a thing now in agitation that will make a Man of you as long as you live. I said I should be very glad of that. Said he, Can you keep a Secret? Yes, said I, as well as any one to serve my self and my Friend. Said he, Can you keep one of the biggest Secrets in the World? I told him, As well as any body. Said he, You are pretty much in Debt, and if you will serve me in this, I can make a Man of you as long as you live: do you think you could cut five or six Mens Heads off without Scruple of Conscience? I told him, No; it was too much for a Man's Conscience to bear. Said he, What, a Scruple of Conscience to do such a thing as that? There are those above who have done ten times worse. I suppose, Sir, said I, you mean theGentlemen. Yes, said he, so I do; they have ruined Families, and begger'd Gentlemen: To cut Mens Heads off is but a Trifle to them. Said I, Mr., I believe you speak only in joke, by way of merriment. Said he, What, do you think I sent for you by way of joke? I told him, I could not do any such thing. Then, said he, do you think you can cut off one Man's Head without Scruple of Conscience? I told him, No. Then, said he, If you can't cut off a Man's Head, and lay it down upon the Table before me, you are not for my turn: On that he fetch'd a Bottel of Brandy, and gave me a Glass or two, and then said to me,, I would have you go home, and consider of it for two or three Days, and if you can cut off a Man's Head without Scruple of Conscience, you shall have plenty of Gold and Silver, and any thing else you ask. I told him, I needed no Consideration, for I could not do it. Then, said he, sendto me. And as I went out, I sawat the Door, and sent him in to Mr..
Did he say any thing else to you, or any thing about Mr.?
I live in a House of Mr., and Mr.had been formerly his Steward, andacted under him. And Mr.said, that he heard my House was out of repair, that it would be his after Mr., and whether I should not like it better for him to keep it in repair, as he had done before.
I think, my Lord, we have done with our Evidence, and have sufficiently proved Mr.andto be guilty not only within the Intention but the Letter of the Statute of the 22d ofII. upon which they stand indicted. We have proved the Malice premeditated and forethought, the Intention to maim and disfigure by slitting the Nose (for Mens Intentions must be construed by their Actions) and the maiming and disfiguring accordingly; and that Mr.was privy to, and the Aider and Abettor of the Offence: And therefore, Gentlemen of the Jury, we can't doubt but that you will find them both Guilty; and that your Verdict and their Conviction will be with the Suffrage of all Mankind.
, What have you to say for your self?
May it please your Honour, my Lord, the first time thatbegan with me about this Matter was on a Wednesday in last Barley-Harvest. He sent for me to mend his Copper, and after I haddone it, he bid me go to the further end of the, and there he must speak with me, and which came first should stay for the other. I was there before him; when he came, he was on horseback, and his Horse kicked about in a furious manner, that the People took notice of it. When they were gone, he told me that he had a thing for me to do, but not to be done presently, and that if I did it I should want for nothing. I ask'd him what it was. He said, about Mr., to set him aside, that is, to kill him; but he said, it was not to be done presently: so he put his Hand in his Pocket and gave me Eighteen Pence. I told him, I never did such a thing in my Life; I could not do it. Said he, It is not to be done presently, we have time to consider. A while after he sent for me again, and ask'd me, Whether I had considered of it. I told him, I could not do it. Said he, We must setaside; for Mrs.hath got a trick to play; she will make away what there is from me and my Child. I said, I never did any such thing; I could not do it, and desired him to forbear. I went away and left him in his Chamber. Within a while after he came to my House; said he,, what is the reason you can't do this for me? Said I, I cannot do it. Said he, What signifies it, I would do it for you. I said, I could not do it. The he went away very uneasy, and in a Week or Fortnight sent for me again to his Chamber, and there was at me again. I told him, I could do no such Work. Said he, Why can't you do this Work? I have been a good Master for you, I made my self look little to bail you when you were in Gaol. I turned about and cried. Said he, What makes you cry? Your Crying signifies nothing; the Money that I shall give you, will do you and your Family a kindness. Said I, I can do no such thing. Said he, It signifies no more the killing of him, than to kill a Dog, for they do no good with what they have. Yes, said I, Mr.is a very good Master; I work'd for him and his Father before him: and so I went away. Afterwards my Wife died three days beforelast: she was buried on that day, and being very poor, I sent my Daughter to desire a little Money of him to have the Bell toll'd for my Wife; but he sent me none. My Wife was buried on a, then on thehe sent his Boy for me; I went down to him, and when I came, I fell a weeping for the loss of my Wife, and having ten Children. Said he, What makes you cry? you must pull up a good Heart; tho your Wife be dead, you may have Friends; here is that which will do you a kindness hereafter. Said I, I am very sorry for the loss of my Wife. Said he, What signifies that? she was carried well into the Church, and is, no doubt, happy; she is gone before you; we must all go in our time: I was a Friend to you in her Illness; I sent her a good Doctor at my own Charge: this twenty Pounds that I will give you will be a brave Estate for you.
What were you to have this twenty Pounds for?
It was to kill Mr.; he told me, that I must set aside Mr.; he offer'd me Twenty Pounds to do it; but I then refus'd it. On, New-Years-Day, in the Morning,sent his Boy for me to come to him; and between Eight and Nine, in the Morning, I went to him. He was in his green Room. Now, said he,, we shall have the fairest Opportunity to kill Mr.. I told him, I was loth to do it; it was very cold, and I had an Ague. Said he, I will give you that, which shall warm you; he went to his Closet, and gave me out of the Bottle, that he used to carry in his Pocket, half a Pint of Brandy, and told me, that happen how it will, I must not come near his House any more that Day, lest afterwards there should be some Suspicion; but said he, Whether Ague or not, you must be at Mr.Porch, which is in the Church-yard, about Eight a-clock in the Evening. I went there between Eight and Nine; about Nine,came out, and gave me a Whistle; on that I went up to him; he told me, Mr.was very jolly, and he believ'd, it would be late before he came out. I told him, I did not care to stay. Said he, You must stay now; this is the Time that will do it. I staid 'till Ten-a-clock; then he came to me again in Mr.Porch, and told me, That he believedwould not go 'till Eleven-a-clock; but the later the better. Then he went from me again, and a little after Ten,andcame out together, and onwhistling I came up to them;was then before, and coming to get against the Wall. I came up to; he bid me have a care not to hit him instead of, being very dark; so he took me by the Sleeve to lead me up to, and said to, Brother, stand still; on that I hit him two Stroaks with my Hook; tho' I never heard him swear before, yet he now swore, God damn him; on that,said, What! Doth he swear? Secure him, down with him; he stood by him 'till I gave him several Blows, and then he went away.desired me to take away his Watch; for, saith he, As to his Money, he don't carry above Half a Crown or Three Shillings in his Pocket; and when I go to, I will sell the Watch for you.
Whatsaith againstis no Evidence against, and should not have been mention'd by him; but what he saith relating to himself before the Fact, is so twisted with, that without the Whole it is not so intelligible as to himself. However, the Jury are to take notice, that whatsaith, is only Evidence against himself, and not against.
After you had given him those several Blows with your Hook, what did you next?
I began immediately to reflect on what I had done, and went away forthwith to my own House, where I was about to take a Line to hang myself.
Have you any Witnesses, or any body to speak for you?
My Lord, here are my two Daughters in the Court; I desire your Lordship would be pleas'd to hear them,and;
What say you,?
On thebefore New-Years-Day,sent for my Father by his Boy; I told the Boy, my Father was in Bed, and sick of an Ague and could not come. The Boy came again, and said, my Father must by all means come; but he would not then go, but he went to him on New-Years-Day in the Morning, and came home again. About Five or Six-a-clock in the Evening, my Father went out with a Hook in his Hand; and he said, he should not be at Home 'till Eleven or Twelve at Night; and if any body came for him, he bid us not take any notice but that he was at Home. We thought he took the Hook to cut some Wood with.
Have you any thing more to say?
When my Mother died, I went to Mr.to borrow Five Shillings of him, to have the great Bell toll for my Mother; and told him, that my Father would pay him again. He said, What signifi'd the ringing out of the great Bell; her Soul would be never the better for it; but, if he'll satisfy me in my Request, he shall have Five times Five Shillings.
What say you,?
did frequently send for my Father, at all times both of Day and Night; and he would often come to my Father, and when he came, they would go out, and walk down the Backside, and talk together. After this Fact was done,sent his Boy for my Father, and the Boy said, They must not go together, for if they did, People would take notice of them.
, have you any thing more to say?
This Day Nine Weeks, which was a Week after the Fact committed,sent for me, and said,, I wish you would have done the thing I order'd you; but you have been before Aldermanand the Recorder, and have told your Story well; but hold you fast, they will examine you again; I shall --
This is subsequent to the Fact, and is not Evidence against. If youhave done; then Mr., what have you to say for your self?
May it please your Lordship, I am much asham'd, and very unable to defend my self; I am asham'd to think I should be concern'd in so heinous a Crime against Mr.Life; I am even confounded at it; it is indeed a very great Crime, and I know not what to say for my self. As for, he hath asserted against me several things that are false.
I have told the Jury, that what he hath said is no Evidence against you.
When I first spoke of this Matter to, he said, he should value it no more than the cutting off the Head of a Dog. I did, indeed, go out with Mr.that Night, but I was not near him whenstruck him, but retreated to my own House in a Moment. My Lord, I am very sensible that a Point of Law may arise on the Statute whereon I am indicted
Whereon?
With respect to my Intention.
Your Intention is Matter of Fact, and must be try'd by the Jury, whether your Intent was to maim and disfigure; this doth not seem to me to be a Point of Law; if there be any Point of Law that shall arise, you shall have Counsel to speak to it; but whether you slit Mr.Nose, with an Intention to disfigure him, is a Matter of Fact.
My Intent was to kill Mr., and not to maim or disfigure him.
But that is the Question the Jury are to try, Whether you did not of Malice slit his Nose, with an Intent to disfigure him. If the Jury do not find that you so did, you must be acquitted on this Indictment. Supposing your Design was to kill, yet your Design might be likewise to maim; and this the Jury must try; this is Matter of Fact for their Consideration.
This is a very penal Statute, and I am unable to 
plead my own
Cause; I beg your Lordship to assign me Counsel.