Mr., will you give an Account what happen'd to you, on the Fifth oflast, and how far it concerns the Prisoner?
On the 5th oflast, I happened to be at the Tennis Court, and staid there till about three o'Clock. While I was there, the Prisoner was standing talking with One, and then came up to me, and inquired of me, when I should see my Lord, for he wanted to know if my Lord would play the Match out, that if he did not care to play it he should pay; I told him that if mymy Lordowed him any Money he would pay him without doubt, that I was going down towith him to Morrow and would speak to him, I then asked the Prisoner how much it was? and he told me there were twenty Guneas due to him for a Horse and Fifty Guineas at Tennis, I replied that if my Lordwould give me an Order, I would pay the Money.
Did You offer to pay the Money then?
I said I would, my Lord! provided I had an Order from my Lord. I staid there till about three o'Clock and then I went into the City, intending to dine at a Friend's House, but I met with some Acquaintance which came from, and we agreed to go to a Tavern together, I staid with them some Time, and being at a Loss for a Horse to go my Journey, as I was to set out very soon the next Morning, I went from the Tavern to find out One Mr., who I knew had a Horse would do for me, Mr.was not at Home, But was gone to, accordingly having got directions where to find him, I went to, where I saw Mr.; he gave me a Ticket for his Horse, and I took my leave of him, thinking it to be my best Way to go cross the Fields home to, and accordingly I went toCommon, crossed over the Road and went into the Fields.
What Time was this?
It was almost Nine, when I left, and it was between Nine and Ten, when I got into the Fields. When I got into the Third Field I saw a Man before me in the Field, on my right Hand, and presently two more.
Were they all three together?
Yes, my Lord, there is a Bar to get over, after that I was over that, they seperated, one went to my Left Hand, another to my Right, and the third came after me; seeing myself thus beset, I turn'd back to look, and saw a Man coming towards me in a, a thin middle-sized Man: He came up to the Bar, and leap'd over at once; he had a Pistol in his Left Hand, and a large Oak Stick in his other: After he had leap'd over the Bar, he cry'd out,; and immediately came up to me, and clapping a Pistol to my Breast demanded my Money.
Were the other two Men near you, when you were thus attack'd?
One was about sixteen Yards off, the other more.
This Man that presented the Pistol to you, was dress'd in Brown, you say: What were the others dress'd in?
In Brown, they were all dress'd in Brown. After he had demanded my Money, I told him, I had a Guinea and a Half, and that I would give him; but not satisfied with that, he laid on me with his Stick as hard as he could: The first Blow that I receiv'd, was on the Left Side of my Head; upon which, I rais'd my Arm, and defended myself with my Cane: I receiv'd six Blows on my Head and Left Arm, and then he drew a back Stroke, and cut me just under my.
Did not the two Men come up to you all this While?
No, my Lord, I found myself very much bruised, and said to him, you Rascall, you Villian You, are not you a Rascal to abuse aGentleman, when he tells you what Money he has, and offers to give it You? why did you STRICK then? Said he, I could not well defend myself any longer with my Cane, so I threw it down and clos'd in with him, and in the Scuffle fell with him, he then put his Hand in my Breeches Pocket, and took out One Guinea, a half Guinea, an Iron Ring, a Bunch of small Keys and a Silver Seal, and finding I had no more,! says he,? He then demanded my Watch, and in the Warmth of my Scuffle I was simple enough to let him understand that I knew him, for upon his demanding that,, says I,. When he had robb'd me, he leap'd over the Bar again, and went up to the two Men, and they all went away together.
You have told the Manner of your being robb'd; Now, I would ask you, if you were then certain that you knew the Man, and by what?
As soon as he came up to me I knew him, for his Hat was flapp'd, and stood a little on one Side, so that I saw his Face very plain, and knew it perfectly well, tho' it had a yellowish Cast round the Chin, as if it had been rubb'd with something; besides I knew his Voice.
Did you know the two others?
No, I did not.
You say, you knew the Person that robb'd you. Look at the Prisoner: Now, consider the Oath you have taken, as you shall answer it to God, the Court, and your Country, is the Prisoner the Man that robb'd you?
Upon the Oath I have taken, he is the Man that robb'd me; I knew him the Moment I saw him, and could not be mistaken.
What did you do when he left you?
I went directly Home.
What Time was it when you come Home?
Between Nine and Ten, I sent for Doctor, and he came to me and dressed me, I told him I had been robb'd, the Manner of it, and that I knew the Person. The next Morning, which was, I came to Town, thinking to enquire his Name, and that I should see him at the Tennis Court. I went to Justice, and he would not grant me a Warrant; so I went to the Tennis Court, and told the whole Story to my Lord, who advis'd me to let the Warrant alone till the next Day; because he was to be at the Tennis Court then at Play: Accordingly, on the, having got a Warrant from Colonel, I gave it tothe Officer, and went with him to the Tennis Court, where I pointed out the Prisoner to him, and he took him, and carried him before the Justice, where he was examin'd, and committed to the Gatehouse.
Did you see the Prisoner between the Time of the Robbery being committed, and his being apprehended?
Yes, I saw him on theat the Tennis Court, and spoke to him, and he seem'd to be very much confounded.
I would ask you a Question or two, Sir, if you please. Did you declare to Nobody that you did not know theMan that robb'd you, and said, it was a Soldier?
I did say, he wasto a Troop, and that I knew him, but not readily knew his Name.
Have not you said, that you could not swear to his Face, only to his Voice?
No, I always said, I knew both his Face and Voice.
Call. Mr., do you know any Thing of Mr.coming Home, on, the fifth of? Give an Account of it?
I am a Tenant of Mr.; he came Home to, between Nine and Ten o'Clock onNight, the fifth oflast; he was very much beat and bruis'd, and said, he had been robb'd, and had lost a Guinea and Half, and some other Things, and that he had been very ill us'd, but he knew the Man that did it?
Did he say, who it was?
He said, that he knew him, but did not mention his Name.
Did not he say, he was robb'd by two Soldiers.
He said, the Man that had robb'd him was a Soldier, and that he knew him very well.
Call Dr.. Mr.was you sent for to Mr.on the 5th of, what Time, and upon what Account.
Between Nine and Ten o'Clock on the Fifth of, I was sent for to Mr., I live in, I went to his House, and dress'd him, he said he had been robb'd, and that he believ'd he knew the Man.
Did he mention no Particulars.
Not while I staid, but I was not there long.
What Time was it when you was at Mr.?
It was almost Ten o'Clock, but not quite Ten.
Mr., did you see Mr.any Time, and when since the fifth of, did he mention any Thing about his being robbed, and what?
I saw Mr.on the, he said he had been robb'd, that he should know the Man again if he met him; for he was a Soldier, and he had given two Watermen something to dog him who had seen him inFields.
Did he say, he knew the Man or his Name.
No, he said he should know him again if he saw him, that was all.
Call. Mr.do you know Mr.?
Yes, very well.
Do you remember where and at what Time he was on the fifth oflast, or were you with him?
I dined with him at his own Lodgings in, it was a little after Three, and I staid with him till almost Seven, when I was going away, he said he was going towards the, and if I was going that Way he would accompany me; but as I was going another Way we parted, and he went towards the,
Pray, Sir, when was this?
It was on, the Fifth of.
How came you to be so very particular in that Day, you see Mr.often, can you remember any other Day of the Month that you were with him, or dined with him.
Not directly, but that being Post Night, I wrote a Letter that Night, which makes me remember the Date. I offer'd to give this in before Colonel.
Did Mr.send for you when before the Colonel?
No, I heard of his being apprehended, and went voluntarily.
Call. Do you know any Thing of seeing the Prisoner at his Uncle's on the Fifth of, and what Time was it?
I am a Servant to Mr.. He lives the Corner of the. Between Seven and Eight o'Clock, onNight, young Mr.came to our House, and ask'd for his Uncle, I told him he was not at Home, but was gone up to thein, and he said he would go to him, for he had got on a new Fustian Frock and Breeches, and I took up the Flap to look on it.
Do you usually take up the Flap of Peoples Cloaths that come to your Master's House?
No; but I thought I might take that Liberty with young Mr..
What was he dress'd in do you say?
In a white Fustian Frock and Breeches, a white Waistcoat and Stockings.
How do you know it was the 5th of?
I am sure it was; he was taken up on the, and it was thebefore.
Perhaps you may mistake the Day, how often does he use to come to his Uncles?
Once in three Weeks.
What just once in 3 Weeks and no oftner?
Yes, sometimes oftener.
Call Mr.. Sir, please to givean Account what you remember of seeing Mr., on the 5th of.
I live next Door to old Mrin the; young Mrcame to me, on the 5th of, between 7 and 8 o'Clock in the Evening. I remember the Day for I had wrote to my Lawyer to meet me that Evening, and he had mislaid the Note and came to me to know the Time; when Mrcame to me it was between 7 and 8 o'Clock, and he said he was going up to his Uncle at the.
Did you see him go into his Uncle's?
No, he said he had been there when he came to me: I live next Door.
What Cloaths had he on?
A white Fustian Frock; I did not mind what else. He did not stay long with me.
Do you know where he went to?
He said he was going to the, he went that Way.
This does not prove any Thing as to the Time of the Robbery.
We are coming to that now my Lord. Call Mr. Sir, give an Account where you saw your Nephew on the 5th oflast, where you was in his Company, and how long he staid.
I went from Home onthe 5th of, about seven o'Clock in the Evening and he went up to the Genoa Arms in, a little before Eight o'Clock mycame in, he sate down and drank with me, there were several People in the Room.
How do you know it was about 8 o'Clock.
We all guessed it to be about Eight.
Did you guess it so that Night, or Since?
That Night. We gues'd it to beabout Eight o'Clock. He staid till past Nine, and then he and I went out, and after standing some Time at the Door, we took a walk roundGarden Piazza, and I went Home, and he went Home to Bed.
How do you know he went Home?
He went that Way.
Were any People in Company with you at the?
Yes, several: Mr, Mr, Mr, Mr, and several others.
What Cloaths had he on?
A white Fustian Frock and Breeches, and a white Waistcoat.
Call Mr. Were you at the, Sir, on the 5th of, and did you see the Prisoner Mrthere?
I remember the Day very well, for I wrote several Letters that Day: I was at the, and young Mrcame in about a Quarter before 8 o'Clock: He sat down by his Uncle, and they drank two Half Pints of Wine; while they were drinking, one of the Company pull'd out some Patterns of Cloth, which we look'd at, and I taking Notice of MrCoat, and talking of the Price of Cloth, says he, What do you think the Outside of this Coat and Breeches cost me? it was light Fustian: Five or six and twenty Shillings said I. No, said he, but sixteen.
He had a light Fustian Coat on you say?
Yes, a light Fustian Coat and Breeches, white Waistecoat and white Stockings. They staid till a Quarter after 9, and then youngwould have had t'other half Pint, but the old Gentleman said it was late, he must go Home.
How do you know it was a Quarter after Nine? Had you any Clock, and did you look particularly upon his going?
No, my Lord, but the old Gentleman saying it was late, one of the Company pull'd out his Watch, and it was a Quarter after Nine all but one Minute. They staid about three or four Minutes in the House, and then got up and went into the Yard, and there they stood talking a Quarter of an Hour: From the Yard they went down the Entry to the Street Door, and there they stood again; they were Half an Hour in the Yard, and at the Door.
Did you see them all the While?
Yes, for I sate fronting the Window, and saw them all the While they stood in the Yard, and at the Door, and when they went away I am sure it was above Half an Hour after Nine.
Call Mr. Do you remember seeing Mron the 5th ofat the?
Yes, Sir, I went into theabout Half an Hour after Seven, and Mrcame in not very long after me; so that I believe it was near Eight: He staid there till past Nine, and then ask'd his Uncle, old Mr, if they should have another Half Pint, but the old Gentleman did not care for any more Wine; so they went out and stood talking together in the Yard, and at the Door for near Half an Hour, and then went away.
What Cloaths had young Mron at that Time?
A white Fustian Frock, white Waistcoat Breeches and Stockings.
Did they stand in Sight when they were in the Yard, and at the Door?
Yes, I saw them all the While.
Call Mr. Sir, Was you at the, on the 5th of?
I was there about Seven o'Clock, young Mrcame in about Eight; he staid till a Quarter after Nine, and then went out in the Yard, where he stood talking with his Uncle Half an Hour, that is in the Yard and at the Door.
Do you know any Thing of a Watch being pull'd out to see the Hour.
Yes, old Mrsaying it was late, and he did not care to drink no more, I pull'd out my Watch to see what o'Clock, and it was exactly fourteen Minutes after Nine, they staid some little Time in the House, paid their Reckoning, and went and stood in the Yard and at the Door.
I keep the, young Mrwas in the House when I came in, about a Quarter after Eight, and I left him there when I went out at Nine.
I am Servant at the House where Mr.lodges in; he came home on, the fifth of, exactly at 11 o'Clock: I let him in, and I know what Hour it was, because our Clock was set that Day, and I look'd to see how it went, for one Clock had struck, but ours had not.
My Brother has Seventy Pound a Year or upwards Estate part Freehold, part Copyhold I know it for I received the Rents in my Father's Time, and for my Brother since this Misfortune.
Mr.is Riding Master to the Troop, which I have the Honour to command, it brings him in generally 200; but, I believe, I may say never less than 150. He is a sober Man, bears a general good Character, and I never heard the least Ill of him; this I know, that whenever I send for him upon any Business, he is always ready and with me, almost as soon as I send.
When Mr.came to me for a Warrant, he said he did not know the Man by his Face, but by his Voice: I would not grant him a Warrant, and said, if you cannot swear to his Face, be sure you are certain of his Voice before youswear.
When he was examin'd before me, Mrsaid, ifwas the Man, he had a black Arm, for he had paid him so with his Cane, that it must be black. He stripp'd both his Arms, and not the least Mark appeared; most of the Evidence that has been given in Court was offer'd before me.
WheatleyWheatley.