Give an Account what you know of this Matter, and speak the Truth.
An't please you, my Lord, onthe 1st of. --
Speak slow and deliberately, that the Court and the Jury may hear you.
An't please you, my Lord, on, the 1st oflast, I and my Father were goingupRiver, to catch a Dish of Fish inMoor, in the Parish of, with a Casting-net; we fish'd all the Way up till we came to this Ground?
In whose Possession was the Ground?
It was Mr.Meadow; we were turning back again, an't please you my Lord, in order to go Home; my Father he carried the Net upon his Arm, and the String was fastened to his Arm.
Well, as you were coming back from fishing, what happened then?
By that Time we had got half way in the Meadow, we sawand Mr.running, andout run Mr., and came up to my Father first.
When they came up what was the first Thing they did?
took my Father by the Collar, and demanded the Net, and he refused to deliver the Net.
Did you see him take him by the Collar?
Yes, my Lord.
What became of the Net afterwards?
My Father threw it into the River.
How far were you from the River then?
I was about two Yards from the River. After the Net was thrown into the River,came up with his Gun, and swore, God damn your Blood, deliver your Net, or you are a dead Man; and he fir'd off before he received any Answer from my Father.
In what Manner didhold his Gun?
In this Manner, (pointing the Gun strait forward) holding it about Breast high, stooping a little.
How near was the Gun to your Father when he fir'd it?
It was close to my Father's Side, he put the Gun betweenand my Father, and shot directly into his left Side, here, (holding his Hand to his Hip) he had a Plate Button there which was bruised to Pieces; then my Father said, you Rogue, what have you done, I am a dead Man, and dropp'd immediately.
What didsay before he fir'd?
He swore if he did not deliver the Net he was a dead Man, and then fir'd immediately.
What did you do after you heard your Father say he was a dead Man?
I took a Knife out of my Pocket to cut the String of the Net: Andsaid, you Rogue, I will knock out your Brains too, and held up the butt End of his Gun; upon that I jump'd into the Stream, and cut the String, and drew the Net over to the other Side of the River: then says, the Rogue has got the Net, let us go to the other Side after him.
Who did you see when you came on the other Side of the River?
I saw,and, and whenandsaw these three Men they ran away directly.
How near were,andto you, beforeandran away.
As soon as I got on the other Side of the River, they saw these three Men coming, and then they ran away; and,, andcame through the River to the Side where my Father lay dead; they came from one Side to the other.
What did you do then?
They bid me get a Surgeon; so I went to one, a Surgeon at.
When you came to, did you meet with?
Yes: And I told him my Father was shot, and I believed he was dead or dying, but henever came near my Father; then I went tothe Constable, and he took some Townsmen with him, and went to old Mr.House, atFarm, to search for the Man that kill'd my Father; we beset the House all round, and foundhid up in a Corner.
How long were you there before he was found?
I was there about a quarter of an Hour, or a little more.
Was you present then?
Yes: I was there all the Time; then, an't please you my Lord, they pull'd him down.
Where was he hid?
He was hid in a Place which is five or six Foot from the Ground, where they put old Iron and any Sort of Lumber, 'tis a boarded Place or Room over the Wash-house; a Place where the Women makes Medicines for sore Eyes.
Was there a Chimney in it.
I do not know.
Was he standing up or lying down, or how was he when he was found?
I do not know, for I did not see him till he was pull'd down; he was carried in a Chair into the Yard, and sat there about a quarter of an Hour, and then was put into the Cart that brought up my Father, and was carried to the Round House at.
This is all you know, is it not?
An't please you, my Lords, I can tell you a great deal more.
Who pull'd him down?
I do not know.
Was this Wound the Occasion of your Father's Death?
Yes, it was.
Go on, you say you have other Things to say.
He lay in the Round-House all Night, the next Daythe Prisoner and I, went in a Cart to a Justice at, and there as onethere, who said to me --
Whatsaid is no Evidence against the Prisoners.
We will let this alone a little.
Can you prove he was any ways employ'd as an Agent by the Prisoner.
I believe we can.
My Lord, please to ask him whether there was no Quarrel, Bustle, or Strugling, between,, and, before the Gun went off.
There was no Quarrel or Jostling, my Father never gave him an ill Word.
Did your Father make no Resistance?
No, no Resistance at all.
Was there no Jostling, nor any Thing else pass'd?
Yes:took my Father by the Collar, andcame up in the mean Time.
What happen'd between your Father andbeforecame up?
He demanded his Net.
I thought you said there was some jostling?
No other Jostling than laying his Hand upon my Father's Collar, but my Father never laid his Hand upon him.
How near were you whenlaid his Hand upon your Father?
About a Yard and an half off.
You say he shot off the Gun, I ask you what you mean by shooting off the Gun?
Why he fir'd the Gun to shoot my Father.
What do you mean by shooting off the Gun?
He came up directly, as if he was going to shoot a Dog.
Did you see him draw the Trigger of the Gun?
No, I did not.
Was the Gun cock'd before he came up?
I do not know.
Did you say that it was?
I do not know that I did.
Pray was any body present at the Time?
There was no body near but,, and, nor no body came up.
Did the Prisoner offer you any Money?
Yes, he offer'd to settle 50a Year on me.
Where was this?
When I was at, the next Day after my Father's Death.
How came you there?
We went to a Justice's at, but he not being at home, we put up at the Red-Lion there, and while we were there, Sircame in and ordered us to go to; accordingly we went to one Mr.into a little Room, and there was, Mrs., and the Prisoner; Youngoffered me 100 l. a Year, but the Prisoner said he could not settle 100 l. a Year upon me, for he had more to do for, but he said he would settle 50 l. a Year on me: this was said in the Presence of the Prisoner.
Did he mention what he would give you 50a Year for?
Because I should not come in as an Evidence against him.
What is the Reason you did not comply with his Offer?
I told them I would not sell my Father's Blood at any Rate.
Pray in what Manner did Mr.,, and your Father stand, when this Accident happened?
stood betweenand my Father, and had him hold by the Collar.
Do you know, and had not you some Talk with him about the Manner of your Father's Death?
No, I never saw him, nor had any talk with him.
Had you any Conversation with one, at, where you say you was offered that Money?
I came out of the Room to ask him whether I should take the Money or not; for he said, I had better take the Money, and not hang the Man.
Then you said nothing at that Time about the Manner in which your Father was killed?
No, Sir.
You say you stood by, and saw Mr.point the Gun to your Father: Did you see him cock the Gun?
I did not see him cock it, the Gun was cock'd when he came up to my Father.
Do you know one?
Yes.
When did you come first to be acquainted with him; before or since your Father's Death?
After my Father was killed.
Did not you meet with him at?
Yes, I believe I did.
Did you ever see him there before?
No, never?
Did you give him any Orders or Authority to prosecute upon the Account of your Father's Death?
No.
Do you know one?
Yes.
Where does he live?
He keeps the White Horse in Piccadilly.
How did you come acquainted with him?
He came toand sent for me.
What did he want with you when he sent for you?
I don't know, I went to live with him as a Servant.
What Business was you of, when your Father died?
I work'd with my Father as a Carpenter.
If you was brought up a Carpenter, how cameto find you out for a Servant?
I can't tell.
How long have you liv'd with him?
Ever since my Father's Death, and I live with him now.
Have you not seen, my Lord -- at?
You say you are Mr.Servant, have you not dined with him at his Table?
Yes.
Do you dine at his Table now?
No, I am his Servant.
Do you know the Reason why you was sent from dining at his Table to draw Beer?
No, Sir.
Do you know one?
Yes.
Do you know any Thing of a Note he drew for you at the?
He did draw something of a Note, but I tore it.
What made you tear the Note?
Because I did not like his Proceedings.
What were the Proceedings you did not like?
I do not know, I did not understand them.
Why, did not you read the Note before you tore it?
No, I did not.
How came the Note to be wrote? Did he say nothing to you about writing of a Note before he wrote it?
Nothing at all, but he desired me to copy it?
What did he say to you when he desired you to copy the Note?
Nothing; it lay upon the Table, and I tore it.
What did you tear it for, if you had not read it?
Because it was about Things that I did not know what they were.
Did not he desire you to copy the Note?
Yes.
What did he say then?
I can't tell what he said.
Was you ever atto see Mr.?
Yes.
What did you go for?
I cannot tell.
I ask you what you went for?
I went for my own Fancy.
Did you not send up Word to him you was sure he would be glad to see you?
I believe I might.
What was the Reason, for which you thought Mr.would be glad to see you?
I cannot tell, I was willing to see him.
Did you never in speaking of your Father's Death, say that it was done accidentally?
I do not know that I did.
Did you never say tothat you were to have 200or had a Promise, or that you were to have Security, and from whom?
No, Sir, I never did.
Did you give the same Account with respect to the holding of the Gun as you do now, before the Coroner's Inquest, and before the Justice?
Yes, I am sure I did.
Did not you give two Accounts before the Coroner's Inquest; part at one time, and went out, and theRemainder when you came in again?
No.
Did you never say that the Butt End of the Gun was up to his Shoulder, and the muzzled Point downward.
No, I did not.
Did you never say any Thing to any body of the Manner of Mr.drawing one of his Feet back?
No never.
Can you tell which of his Legs he drew back?
No, I cannot tell which he drew back.
Did you never say which?
No.
To No-body?
No, never.
You said you went to thewith, and there was something talk'd of relating to a Note, was there any Offer made to you there?
No, Sir.
You talk'd of a Paper that was tore, do you know the Contents of it?
No, Sir, I do not.
Tell us what you know of this Matter, and where you were when you heard a Gun fir'd on the first of?
and his Son were a Fishing; I was 169 Yards some odd Inches from the River as near as I could measure.
What Ground was it in?
They were in the Ground called Mr.Rents.
Are there many Hedges on the Side of the River where the Deceased was?
There were a pretty many Willows, but any body might see through them.
What did you see?
I sawand Mr.come over the Hedge.
What Hedge?
The Hedge that parted Mr.Ground from Mr.Ground, I do not know whether one of them did not come over the Stile, then they both ran after, and his Son: youngcame up first.
Did he lay hold of?
Whether he laid his Hand upon his Collar, or what, I cannot tell; but the Boy run away.
Who was it laid hold of the Shoulder or Collar of the Deceased?
, I saw his Hand upon the Shoulder, or Collar of the Deceased, but I cannot say positively, whether he had him by the Shoulder or Collar.
How long was it after that, thatcame up?
The Boy was gone but a little way from his Father, and when Mr.came up to his Father, he came back again.
How near was he to his Father when this Accident happen'd?
I cannot say how near he was to his Father, I believe two or three Yards off. --andcome up almost together, butcame up after him, the Gun went off after he came up: I saw the Smoak and heard the Fire.
As you were 169 Yards off, how came you to come up?
The Boy called to us and said his Father was killed.
Who came along with you?
, and, came to the River just against the Place where Mr.lay, and we could not get over there without being thus high (putting his Hand to his Middle) but we went over in a shallower Place a little farther.
Wereandthere when you came over?
No, they run away before that.
Wasdead or alive when you came up?
He was not dead, but he could not speak. Idesired the Boy to go for a Surgeon, and he went away directly.
Who came first to the River?
I do not know.
Did you all three come up together?
Yes, I was coming rather before the Boy cried out, for I saw the Man drop, I could not see the Boy for a good while, for he was in the River, and he cut the Net from his Father's Arm, as he says, I did not see that; but I saw the Boy come cross the River, and when I came up I saw that the Net was brought cross the River.
How didlie?
He lay upon his Face; I lifted up his Head, he groan'd pretty much, but he could not speak: I sent the Boy for a Surgeon, but no Surgeon came.
Was you at the Apprehendingof the Prisoner?
Yes, I was.
What Place was it the Prisoner was in when he was taken?
It was a Sort of a wash house, a back-House: he was in a Place where they throw up Hoops and Iron, and any Sort of old Lumber? I saw him lie upon his Face.
Who took him down?
I do not know.
What did they do with him then?
They carried him to the Round-house at.
When you came to the Place where you lay he had hid himself, did he come down of his own accord?
Yes, my Lord.
When you heard the Gun go off, whose Hand was it in?
Mr..
Do you know the Position of the Gun when it went off?
No, I do not.
Did you observe any Struggle between,, and the Deceased?
No other than their striving to take the Net away.
Do you remember any Thing that passed in the Round-House? -- did the Prisoner say any Thing there?
Yes, the Prisoner said he desired to be kill'd out of the way, for being accessary to such an innocent Man's Death.
What did he tell you besides?
He said he would have gone Home for more Men, butwould not let him.
What did he want more Men for?
To take away the Net.
What Answer did he saymade him to that?
I believe it was, that he said we can do it well enough.
Did you see Mr.andbefore they came up to the Deceased?
Yes, I did.
Did you observe Mr.making any use of his Gun before he came up?
I saw him offer to shoot at a Crow.
How long was that before this Accident happened?
I believe about Half an Hour.
Was the Crow flying or sitting?
Flying.
Did you observe whether he did Shoot at the Crow?
Not then, he did not.
How far were you off then?
About as far, I think, as when I saw the Man kill'd.
What was the Position of the Gun when you saw him come up running.
It was on this manner,
You say you sawandin the other Ground, before they came into that Ground which belongs to-- what were they doing there, were they Standing, Sitting, or what?
They were Sitting or Lying under the Hedge, I cannot tell which.
For what Purpose do you imagine they were Sitting or Lying there?
I cannot say that. I may imagine they came to take the Net away, I cannot imagine any Thing else.
Did you see the Boy go into the River?
Yes, and it was just after his Father was shot.
Do you know the Prisoners at the Bar?
I know Mr..
Do you believe this to be the Person who was along with Mr.at the Time that Mr.was kill'd? -- Look at Mr.Face, and see whether that is the Man.
I see Mr., but I cannot say that he is the Man; I saw two Men lie under the Hedge a considerable Time, and saw a Piece in one of their Hands.
In which Ground were they?
I believe in Mr.Ground.
In what Ground was?
He was inGround.called to me, and said there isrunning after, andlaid hold of, the Deceased, and then came up the other with a Piece: I cannot say whether he touched him or no.
In what Manner didlay hold of him?
I cannot say, I was at such a Distance; but I thought he laid hold of his Shoulder.
Didmake away from him?
Yes, for he knew he was out of the Bounds that he ought to have been fishing in; and there was a sort of a Struggle to take away the Net; and I thought thatand the other Person did both snatch at the Net, and then the Gun went off.
In whose Hand was the Gun?
Not inHand, but in the Hand of the other Person.
Was not you attentive at that Time, to see in what Manner he carried the Gun?
It may be this Way, or that Way, I cannot say whether he had the Gun against his Shoulder or no?
How near was he to the Deceas'd?
Very nigh, I believe not above the Length of a Gun?
Did you seeby, when you first came up?
He was near the River.
Did you hear the Boy cry out?
Yes, he said his Father was killed; -- he saw me, and called me by my Name, and said my Father is killed, and I came directly cross the River.
What then became of, and the other?
They ran away; we halloo'd after them, but I did not think the Man was shot, though I saw the Smoak and Fire of the Gun.
Who went over the River first?
We were all three together almost, I cannot tell who was over first, but I believe I was.
What was said to the Boy then?
Nothing; only to go and get a Surgeon.
Who bid him go?
Somebody did, I did not I believe it was, and the Boy ran away directly.
Was there any Surgeon brought there?
No.
Who came there afterwards?
Mr.: he saw the Deceased lying upon the Ground, but he was not there when the Murder was committed?
Was you in the House when he was taken?
No.
Was you with him before the Justice of Peace?
I was examined, but I was not present when the other Witnesses were examined.
What Distance was there between you and the Deceased when the Gun went off?
One Hundred and Sixty-nine Yards.
Do you include the Breadth of the River?
Yes I do.
You say you think that bothandsnatch'd at the Net?
I think they did.
Do you think it was possible for you to hear what passed between them?
I could not hear one Word.
I would ask you, whether young, before he was examined by Sir, did not say to you he believed the Gun did go off by Accident?
He said he believed it was not done wilfully. He had Money offered him, in my hearing, by; Mr.said he could not give him 100a Year; but he would give him 50for he had others to do for; then, said the Boy, I will not sell my Father's Blood; I believe he was in Liquor.
What did you say to him?
I said your Father is dead; the Money will do you good; do not swear any thing against him, if you think it was done accidentally; he said the Money will do me good if I had it; I believe the Gentleman did not do it wilfully.
Had you not some Conversation together, after his Examination before the Justice?
I asked him, after he was examined, what he had done; and how he could swear against him, when he had said so and so to me; said he, I do not know any Thing of the Matter;
Do you know Mr.the Clergyman?
Yes.
Did not you make a Declaration of this to him?
Yes; I said to Mr., thattold me he really believed that the Gentleman did not do it wilfully.
Did not he say it was wilfully done as you were going along to the Justice's?
All the Way he went, he said, he believ'd he did it wilfully, but after the Prisoner had been talking with him, he said he believed it was not done wilfully.
Did you see the Deceas'd after he was Dead?
He lay dead on the Ground that I rent, near the River-side.
Do you know how he came by his Death?
I was going up to look after my Ground, and when I came within 200 Yards or thereabouts of it, I met 3 Men, who told me oldwas killed; and said, there he lies; I saw several People there, and so I went up and saw him lie dead there.
Do you know where the Prisonerwas taken?
He was taken in a back Building belonging to Mr.House.
Did you hear him say any thing at that Time.
I did not hear him say any Thing, I believe he was in a Fit, for he trembled and fell down behind the Door.
Was you atbefore the Justice?
Yes I was.
Had not the Boy been drinking, and did he not sleep before he went into the Justice.
I believe he did, for about 3 quarters of an Hour, which refreshed him.
Have you not received Money to pay the Witnesses for attending here on this last Cause the last Sessions, and from whom?
Yes, I paid some of them, I think it was by Mr.Direction who subpoena'd me up; I asked him who was to pay me, he said I should be paid half a Crown a Day for my Time, which was as much as he thought I could earn at my Business.
What Business is thisof?
He is a Stranger to me.
Do you know who he said he was employed by?
He said he was concerned for the King.
Do you know Mr.?
Yes.
What Business does youngfollow?
I believe he draws Beer now.
How long have you known him?
I have known him 5 or 6 Years.
What Business was he bred to?
Sometimes he would be out at Service, and sometimes he would be with his Father in the Business of a Carpenter.
Where does he draw Beer now?
I think it is at Mr., at the white-Horse in.
Have you had any Conversation with him about this Affair?
I have been at his House insince this Business has been in hand, but never had any talk with him about this Trial.
Was not thisdown before the Justice?
I do not know.
Did you ever see him at?
Yes, about a Week after the Accident happened.
Have you seen the Boy,, there since?
No, never?
What, has he lived withever since?
I can't tell.
I ask you whether you have not seen him atHouse every time you have been there?
Yes, I believe I did.
Mr., you are indicted in a very unhappy Case, what have you to say for yourself?
My Lord, I am very unable to make a proper Defence, having by the Cruelty of those, whoseDuty it was to protect me, been deprived of the Advantages of an Education I was entituled to by my Birth. All I know of the melancholy Accident in Question is, that on the unfortunate Day mention'd in the Indictment, I went out with my Gun, in Company with my innocent Fellow-Prisoner, to shoot Sparrows, as I usually did. As we were going along, Mr., who is Game-keeper to the Lord of the Manor, saw some People a Poaching within the Royalty, upon which he proposed to go and seize their Nets; I follow'd him, the deceas'd threw the Net into the River, and the Boy jump'd in to pull it across, to prevent which, I stoop'd to lay hold of one of the Ropes that trailed upon the Ground, and at the same Instant, the fatal Instrument I had in my other Hand, hanging by my Side, went off without my Knowledge, and to my great Grief as well as Surprize. My Behaviour immediately after the Accident, was, I hope inconsistent with a Temper that could murder a Man I had never seen before, without one Word of Provocation. Whatever may be the Determination of your Lordship and the Jury, great as the Misfortunes of my Life have been, I shall always consider this unfortunate Accident as the greatest of them all.
Mr., what have you to say for yourself?
My Lord, I am Game-keeper to Sir, Lord of the Manor of. On the first oflast, in the Afternoon, Mr.and I went out a walking; we saw a Crow, and Mr.made an Offer to shoot at her, but I called to him not to fire, for that she was too far off: Soon after I sawand his Son a Fishing with a Casting-Net, upon which I said to Mr., I would go and endeavour to take their Net away, as it was my Duty to do; accordingly I went up to the deceas'd and demanded the Net, which he refused to deliver to me, and threw it into the River, one End of the String being about his Arm; I then laid hold of the String, and pulled, whilst the Boy endeavoured to draw it cross the River, and presently I heard the Gun go off (my Back being towards Mr.) and saw the Man fall down. -- I said to Mr., I hoped he had not shot the Man, he said no,but turning up the Flap of his Coat, we saw he was shot! upon which Mr.cried out, what shall I do; and expressed so much Concern, that I am sure it was quite an accidental Thing.
Do you know the Manor of?
Yes: I am Deputy to my Father who is Steward to Sir, as Lord of the Manor, under the Dean and Chapter of.
How do you know this to be a Manor?
I have the Grant of the Manor from the Dean and Chapter in my Pocket.
Are there any Copy-holders?
Yes, I have admitted some Copyholders? I know it to be a Manor, because I have held one Court there for my Father, and have seen him hold several.
Is there any Mansion-House belonging to this Manor?
There is a Mansion-House belonging to it, which I think is the House that Mr.lives in.
What Court was it you held there?
A Court Baron.
Mr., look upon this Deputation. Are you a subscribing Witness to it, if you are, did you see this executed, and by whom.
Yes, Sir, that is my Name, I saw Sirexecute it, this is his Hand and Seal.
Was it executed at the Time it bears Date?
Yes, I believe on the very Day.
Mr., look upon that Endorsement, do you know whose Hand that is?
My Lord, I went to the Clerk of the Peace for the County of, and heard him acknowledge this to be his Hand, and that it was entered according to the Act of Parliament.
Did you see any Entry of it?
He said it was entred, and acknowledged this to be his Hand, and told me that was sufficient.
Do you know the Place where this unhappy Case happened?
Yes.
Give an Account of what you know.
I was in the next Field called. This where the Accident happened, is called the.
Where were you when this happened?
As near as I can guess I was forty Pole off.
What did you observe there?
I saw my Son and Mr.coming up.
How did they behave upon this Occasion?
They were so troubled they could hardly wag or speak; my Son said he was afraid the Man was killed; and he said to Mr., how did you do it? Mr.said, I did not think of the Gun's going off.
How was the Gun carried when it went off?
Just as I may hold this Sword
he had it in one Hand, as I have the Sword now.
Did he express himself concerned?
He was so concerned, that he did not runten Pole, before he fell down and beat himself thus upon the Belly, and said,?
where did you stand when the Accident happened?
In.
Is there not a Hedge betweenand?
Yes, a new Hedge not above a Yard high, and I could see any thing as clear as I can see you.
You were speaking as to this being a Manour; how do you know it to be Manour?
Because there have been Courts kept there.
By whom?
By Sir.
On which Side ofdoes the River lie; is it East, West, North, or South?
It is about South.
Has not Sirgranted the Fishery to any Body?
I Rent the Fishery, the Fishery belongs to me.
Do you depute your Son to look after this?
No, Sirdeputes him.
How came Sirto appoint your Son to be Game-keeper?
Because they robbed me daily.
Have you assign'd that Fishery to any Body?
No, I have not.
Was you standing up when the Gun went off, or sitting?
I was standing up.
Do you know, the Son of?
Yes.
Have you ever had any Conversation with him about this Matter?
Yes: He said that as he and his Father were Fishing, they saw the Prisoner,, coming up; that he desired his Father to give him the Net, and he would run away with it, but his Father would not let him; that thencame up and demanded the Net; that, said he should not have it, and then threw the Net into the River, andin the mean Time, the other Gentleman came up and shot him; thatjump'd into the River, and cut the Line of the Net to pull it out on the other Side; and that when the Gun went off and his Father dropped down, Mr.said to the other Gentleman,! and then they both run Home: Mr., who was present, asked him if he saw Mr.pull the Trigger of the Gun; andanswered, that he could not tell. I asked him if there was any Quarrel or Words that had passed between them, and he said no. -- I said it was very surprizing to me, that this Gentleman should come and shoot his Father and nothing more pass between them; I then asked him in what manner he held the Gun; he had a Stick in his Hand, and shewed in what manner the Gun was held in his Hand, thus, (in his right Hand, the Arm hanging down near the Pocket, some Inches from his Body, and near upon a Level; which was the same manner that oldsaid the Gun was held) I asked if he thought he did it wilfully, he said, he could not tell.
Did you ever see thisbefore, for he says he knows nothing of you?
I have known him these Eight Years, and he has been frequently at my House.
What Character has he?
I cannot say much in his behalf; his Father could not manage him at all.
What Business did he follow?
His Father was a Carpenter, and he worked with him.
When did he leave?
Soon after this Accident happened.
Where has he been ever since?
I have seen him at thein; and I heard at, that he was sent for to.
Who was present at this Conversation besidesand you?
Nobody but Mr..
You say he could not say it was wilfully done, did he say it was accidentally done?
No, he did not say it was.
Do you apprehend he had hold of the Gun by the Barrel near the Lock?
I understood bymanner of holding the Stick, that he meant that Mr.had hold of the Gun about the middle of the Barrel.
What Discourse had you with young?
On the, when the Prisoner at the Bar was carried toto be Examined, I went there:came to the Door, and called me out of the Room where I was, and said he wanted to speak with me. When I came out, he said he wanted to ask my Advice concerning this Accident: I said, I wonder you should ask my Advice, when you have Relations to advise with; he said, I thought fit to ask you, as you are my Master. While we were talking,came out, and said, I was persuading the Boy to sell his Father's Blood; the Boy said, what do you mean you Fool you, my Master is persuading me to no such Thing. I then asked him, whether he thought it was Accidentally done or not; he said, he believed it was Accidental, rather than any other thing.
What Character has the Boy?
He was very irregular, and used to lie out.
What Trade are you?
I am a Butcher.
You say he has a bad Character; do you think he would forswear himself?
I can say nothing to that.
Was there any talk of Money then?
Yes, the Boy said he had been offered Money.
But you say, he said he would not sell his Father's Blood?
No, I saidcame and said I was persuading him to sell his Father's Blood; and the Boy said my Master did not persuade me to any such Thing.
What did you say to him afterwards?
I told him he had lost his Father, and had no Friend to take Care of him, and he knew best what he had to do.
Did not you say it was better to take Money, than Hang the Man?
No, I said, I thought by what he told me, that the Man was in no danger of being Hang'd, and therefore he had better take the Money than endeavour to Hang a Man, that he thought did not do it designedly.
Give us an Account of what you know of this Matter.
I drove the Chaise, to theat; I went up to young, and asked him how this unfortunate Thing happen'd; he said he believed it was accidental, for he did not believe any Gentleman in cool Blood would do any such thing wilfully.
Do you know any thing with respect to the Net?
I think he said Mr.was stooping to in order to take the Net, and the Gun went off.
Did he say any thing how Mr.held the Gun?
I desired him to shew me how Mr.held the Gun; he took my Whip in his Hand and held it so,
I think it was rather nearer the handle than the middle of the Whip that he held it.
Did you see the Wound?
I understood it was somewhere about the Hip.
I ask you whether you think he could have shot him there, if he had held the Gun that way?
I think he could not have shot him there, if he had held it any other way. My Lord, I had forgot to mention one Thing. After this,spoke to Mr.the Prisoner, and shook Hands with him; andsaid he was very sorry for what had happened, but said he did not think he did it designedly, and then drank a Glass of Wine to him.
Did they shake Hands, or drink the Wine first?
Both at the same Time as near as could be.
I ask you whether the Prisoner at the Bar is not married to your Daughter-in-law?
The Prisoner is married to my Daughter-in-law.
They ask this Question in hopes of its being of Service to them in another Affair, for it cannot be of any in this; though I hope he has got a very good Wife.
Mr.. I think you did attend the Coroner's Inquest, upon this Occasion; please to give an Account howbehaved then, and what he said.
My Lord, on the 4th of, I attended the Coroner's Jury at; though, as I had not Time to enquire into the Fact, and prepare for Mr.Defence, I could do him but little more Service, than by Cross examining the Witnesses for the Crown, and making Observations on their Evidence; one of the Witnesses was, who has been examined here. --
As to any Thing in his Behaviour you may give Evidence, but not of any Thing that was reduced into writing.
I can only speak as to what he said before the Coroner, and I admit the Depositions taken at that Time were reduced into writing by the Coroner or his Clerk.
Sir, do you know?
Yes.
Had you any Talk with him aboutbeing killed?
told me thatsaid he did not believe the Gentleman kill'd his Father designedly; but that it was an Accident.
My Lord, this is another Person that is brought to contradict the Evidence of, in what he said with respect to the Position of the Gun.
said the Gun was pointed downward. Now we shall shew you from the Natureof the Wound that it is morally impossible it should be so, for the Wound is slanting upwards.
Sir, You are I think a Surgeon at: did you see the Body of thisthat was kill'd at?
Onafter the Accident, my Lord, I happened to be at, and Sirgave me Leave to come in and hear the Depositions: I was afterwards sent for by Mr.a Surgeon at, to attend the opening of the Body before the Coroner; there were several of the Coroners Jury in the Room. I found the Wound on the left Side, about an Inch and an Half below the Ridge of the Hip bone; the Wound I apprehend to be about an Inch and an Half wide; I found it went into the Cavity of the Belly?
Did the Wound go upward or downwards into the Belly?
When I found it went into the Cavity of the Belly, I remember'd in what Mannerheld the Gun when he was before Sir, to shew how Mr.held it when he fir'd: I remember very well he held it to his Shoulder slanting downward; I attempted to put my Probe into the Wound in the same Direction as he described the Gun, but there was no Passage for it in that Position, it would not go in downwards; then I put it in this Manner cross the Belly, and it went in without any Obstruction, and then upwards, and it went in with the same Ease, in this Manner. I observed several large Blisters, full of black Serum on the Right Side, opposite the Place where the Shot went in, the Blisters which were on the opposite Side, were three or four Inches higher than where the Wound was, -- the Wound was on the left Side, and the Blisters on the Right; when I found this was so plain to me, I desired it might be as plain to the Jury and every one there, as it was to myself, because this was a Matter of Fact and not of Judgment, and I desired the Foreman to come and put the Probe in and try, he did so and found the Wound as I have described it: I was the more careful in this, because Ihad observed the Evidence that the Boy gave on the, and there was some Variation between that and the Nature of the Wound, therefore I desired them to take the more Notice of it.
What do you think those Blisters on the other Side were occasioned by?
I apprehend they were occasioned by the Force of the Powder.
According to your Account, could he, holding the Muzzle of the Gun upwards, have made this Wound?
It could not have made it with the Muzzle downward.
Did you observe how the Wound was upon the Bone, and whether there were any Shot remaining in the Wound?
No Sir, but I found some Shot in the Cavity of the Belly.
Now the Question is, whether the Shot, coming upon this Bone, might not be thrown upwards?
No, for the Shot went through the Bone, so that the Gun must have been held obliquely, pointing upwards; the Shot could not have gone through in that Direction if the Muzzle of the Gun had pointed downwards; this is no Matter of Judgment, but I have given you Demonstration of it.
You say the Wound went from the left Side to the Right, and that if the Muzzle of the Gun was downwards, the Wound would be in the same Manner.
Certainly Sir, if the Muzzle of the Gun is held downward, the Shot cannot go upward.
He makes it appear that the Prisoner could not hold the Gun to his Shoulder, but that it was held horizontally, and that it was impossible for him to wound him in the Manner the Boy described, if the Muzzle of the Gun had been pointed downward.
I beg leave to speak a few Words more to your Lordship. While I was giving in this Evidence before the Coroner and his Jury, if your Lordship remembers, I said I had shewed them how the Wound was, therefore I desired them to consider how consistent it was with the Evidence that Mr.had given:I believe I proved it to the Coroner's Jury, and others that were there, that it was impossible it could be done in that Manner, if the Gun was held as he said, to his Shoulder; upon that he comes up again, and, says he, the Gentleman stooped when he did it.
This shews how he departed from what he had said, for he said first that Mr.stood upright when he fired, and then that he stooped in order to make his Evidence correspond with the Wound.
Did you see the Body of?
I opened the Body on the 4th of, and on Inspection, I found one Wound of about an Inch and an Half Diameter: I put in my Probe 7 or 8 Inches, by which and likewise upon Inspection, I found it run horizontal, a little upon the Ascending: I put my two Fingers into the Cavity of the Bone, and shewed the Jury how it was, and observ'd on the contrary Side, 4 or 5 Blisters, which I think to be occasioned by the Force of the Powder from the other Side; but the Shot did not go through the Skin.
I ask you whether these Blisters were higher or lower than the Wound?
Four or five Inches higher, my Lord.
Do you think these Blisters were occasioned by the Shot?
I apprehend they were.
Was any Application made to you at any Time to send Mr.a Prisoner to.
Yes, I think it was Mr., he came along with another Gentleman, whose Name I think is.
What, Captain?
I believe it was: I said, I think the Gentleman is secure enough: (there was a Lord mentioned. but I cannot remember that he desired it: Mr.wisely kept him from saying who it was) I thought it was too severe to send him to, and said that Sirwas the Justice of Peace who committed him, and he had taken sufficient Care about it.
Do you know any Thing of?
Yes.
Where did you come acquainted with him?
At thein.
What Countryman are you?
I came from, on Board a Merchantman from: I was recommended to the Earl of -- to say what I knew, as a Witness, about the Estate.
How came you to the?
There was onethat came over in the same Ship. When I came to Town, I went and enquired for him at the Earl of --'s, and he sent me to theinto live, and there I came acquainted with.
After your Acquaintance, do you remember any Conversation with him, about what he was to have for swearing in this Cause?
I do, my Lord, remember mighty well; a little Time after he came to the Inn, he and I got acquainted together, and went out a walking to see the Town, and particularly on aMorning; theafter he came to: I believe it was the secondin; as we were walking abroad, I asked him how he came to live there, says he, I am here at the Expence of the Earl of --.
This is not proper: If you can call any Body to contradictyou may, but this is reflecting upon a noble Person's Character.
Did he tell you how he came to be at that Inn?
He told me that Mr., who keeps the, brought him from, and that he should be very well provided for, if he would prosecute this Gentleman, who is now in Custody, for this Murder, and he desired I might contrive some Way that he might get the Money secured, and I wrote two or three Draughts of Notes for 200and he took Copies of them.
How came he to take Copies of them?
Because I did not care my Hand should be known. I have a Copy of one of them in my Pocket.
I Promise to pay to Mr.(that is his elder Brother) or his Order, at or upon the 10thDay ofnext, the Sum ofSterling, for Value received from his deceased Father, and him, in Carpenter's Work,Witness my Hand the 10th Day of1742. This was to be signed either byor my Lord --
Have you ever seen the Earl of -- at the?
He is there often.
What has the Earl of -- any Thing to do there?
His Coach and Horses are kept there.
How long have they stood there?
They stand there constantly.
What was that Note for?
It is only a Copy of what I wrote for,
for as I told the Court before, I did not care that my
Hand should be seen in any such Thing as Bribery and
Corruption.