Do you know the Prisoner at the Bar?
Yes.
Did you know the deceased Mr.?
Yes.
Were you, at any time, employed to arrest the Prisoner for Debt; and what happened in Consequence of it? Speak up, that the Gentlemen of the Jury may hear you.
Yes, I was employed to arrest the Prisoner, for a Debt due to.
By whom were you so employed?
By Mr., an Attorney.
You mean, I suppose, the deceased Mr., -- him that was shot?
Yes.
Go on.
Being so employed, to arrest Mr., I went to his House, and knocked at the Door. Some Body came to the Window, and asked me, what I wanted? I told the Person who came to the Window, that I had a Letter for the Master of the House, which she took through the Window; and I suppose it was delivered to Mr..
Why do you suppose so?
Because, in a little Time after, Mr.opened the Door.
The Prisoner opened the Door, you say?
Yes, and he asked me, whether I lived with the Gentleman who sent the Letter, or from whom the Letter came? I told him I did; and Mr.invited me in.
Well. what happened afterwards?
I went into the House, with Mr., and we then went together, towards the back Door,and at the back Door, Mr.stood still, to call his Servant.
Whereabouts at the back Door did the Prisoner stand still, to call his Servant? Was it within-side of the Door, or at the out-side of the Door?
He stood still upon a Step, at the back Door, the out-side of the Door; and I was within-side of the Door. -- I then took the Warrant I had against Mr., out of my Pocket, and I laid my Hand upon his Shoulder, and sayd, Sir, I hope you will excuse me. --
Was the Prisoner then out of the Door?
Yes. I sayd, Sir, I hope you will excuse me; For the Letter I gave you, was to decoy you. I am a Bailiff; This is a Warrant against you; and you are my Prisoner in the King's Name.
What did the Prisoner say then?
He screek'd out, and sayd, I had used him ill.
What did you do afterwards?
Mr.and I returned into the House, and when we got into the Kitchen, he called to, who, I believe was his House-keeper, and sayd to her, We have done ill, in letting this Man into the House; For, he has arrested me.
He told her, you had arrested him, you say?
Yes.
Well. What happened then?
The Prisoner went then towards the Fire, and turned to the Screen on the right Hand, and stood at the further End of the Screen.
What did he do then?
He turned, all of a sudden, upon me, with a Pistol in his Hand, and sayd, he would blowmy Brains out, if I did not get immediately out of the House?
Did he present the Pistol at you?
He did.
What did you say then?
I told him, that was not the Way to do Business. -- Mr.then snapp'd the Pistol at me, but it miss'd Fire.
Are you sure he snapp'd the Pistol at you?
Yes, very sure.
Well, what did you do then?
I went backwards thro' the Kitchen, and Mr.followed me; and in a narrow Passage leading from the Kitchen towards the Door, he snapp'd the Pistol at me again; and he snapp'd the Pistol at me a third Time, but I was then out of the House.
When you got out of the House, where did you go then?
I went to the next House. I think Mr., where Mr.promised to be. Mr.saw me, and met me, and asked me, if I had arrested: I told Mr., that I had arrested him, and that he had snapp'd a Pistol at me three different Times, which obliged me to come away.
What did Mr.say to that?
Mr.sayd, I had done enough.
How did you proceed afterwards?
I told Mr., if I had a Pistol, I could bring him away; and he say'd, I should not want that. -- Then Mr.sent a Man to the Plaintiff,, and to bring Arms from his Father's.
Where didlive?
At, not very far from.
Did the Messenger return with Arms?
Yes.
What did you then?
After the Arms and Assistance were brought, We went again to Mr.House.
Who went to the Prisoner's House?
I went, and the Plaintiff, and a Servant of his, I think. Four or five Persons I believe, came with me.
Was there another Sheriff's Officer with you?
Yes, a Man tolerated by the Sheriff, one.
Did Mr.go to the Prisoner's House with you?
Yes.
What happened, when you all returned to the Prisoner's House?
As we were all running towards the Prisoner's House, I saw the Prisoner, and another Man out of Doors; I called to Mr., and sayd, you may as well stay, for we are coming for you.
Did the Prisoner hear you say this?
I believe he did.
Did the prisoner stay for you?
No, He, and the other Man with him, ran into the House.
Well, when you came up to the House; pray, what followed?
When we came up to the House, I sayd to Mr., I know the Way to that Door; Go you to the other.
How many Doors were there to the House?
Three.
Did you know all the three Doors?
Yes, I knew them all.
You bid Mr.go to one of the Doors, I think, you say?
I bid Mr., and the others, to take Care of two of the Doors, and I would go to the other.
How far was the Door, that you sayd you would go to, from the Door, you desired Mr.to take Care of?
It was a good Way distant, in going round about.
You sayd, you would go to the third Door, Did you know the Way to it?
Yes, very well.
Did Mr.say any thing to the People in the House, when he came up to the Door?
I cannot tell, whether he did or not, because I was not present, for I ran to the other Side of the House.
Pray was the Door you went to, locked, or made fast?
It was fast.
When you all came up to the Doors, as you have been mentioning, -- pray, what followed?
In a very little Time, almost immediately after I came up to the Door, I heard a Noise. -- I heard a Gun go off.
Which Way did the Noise come? Where did you apprehend, the Gun went off. In what Situation were you from the Noise, or Report of it?
The Noise came, as betwixt me and them; betwixt me and the People who came with me.
How far distant might you be from the Door, where the Gun was fired?
Nine or ten Yards it might be from Mr..
When you heard the Noise, and the Gun go off, what did you do then? it must have alarm'd you?
When I heard them crying out on the other Side, I went backwards to an Hedge, and lookingover it, I saw Mr.held by two Men, sitting on a Block.
You saw Mr.sitting on a Block supported by two Men, How did he look?
Very piteously indeed.
Did you hear him say any thing?
Yes, I heard him say, Oh! I am shot. I am shot.
Was Mr.at a great Distance from the Gun, at the Time he received the Wound, or was he near it.
I cannot tell, whether he was at a great, or a small Distance from it.
What did you do, after you had seen Mr.sitting on the Block?
I returned again to my own Door, to prevent the Prisoner's getting out.
Did you see Mr.afterwards?
In about ten Minutes afterwards, I saw two Men, carrying him down the Lane.
Were you with Mr., at the House he was carried to?
No.
Did you see him afterwards?
No. I did not see him, after the two Men carried him down the Lane.
Have you the Warrant whereby you arrested the Prisoner?
I have.
Pray produce it. -- Is this the very Warrant, Under the Authority whereof you arrested the Prisoner?
It is.
Pray, who delivered to you this Warrant to execute?
Mr.himself.
Were there any Holes in the Door that theBall came thro' which killed Mr., besides the Shot-hole.
Yes, there were two Holes in the Door, besides the Shot-hole.
Was there ever a Slit in the Door?
That I don't know.
Were the two Holes in the Door higher than the Shot-hole, or lower, or how?
The two Holes were higher than the Hole which the Ball had made.
Could you see thro' the two Holes; were they large enough to see, and know a Person through?
Yes, I could see through them; I did look through, and saw into the Kitchen plainly. I, and several others did so.
Pray, what Business did Mr.go about, when he went with you to the Prisoner's House?
To assist me in re-taking Mr..
Do you know the Sheriff's Hand-writing?
Yes, very well.
Is the Warrant whereby you arrested the Prisoner, all of the Sheriff's Hand-writing?
All is of his Hand-writing, except two Names.
Are you positive to the Sheriff's Hand-writing?
Yes, to Mr.Hand-writing, who acted as Sheriff, and made out the Warrant, and delivered it.
Pray, what are the two Names, that were not written by Mr.?
My own Name, and the Name ofanother Bailiff.
Who wrote your Name, and the Name ofin the Warrant?
Mr..
Are you sure of that?
Yes; for I saw him write them.
Are you usually employed as a Bailiff, for the executing of the Sheriff's Warrants?
Yes. I get my Bread by it; and am often sent for, fifteen or twenty Miles round the Country.
Was your Name inserted in the Warrant, as the Sheriff's own Bailiff, or as a special Bailiff?
I was a special Bailiff, for that time, appointed by the Sheriff.
How do you know that?
I have been informed so. I think it is so expressed in the Warrant.
Had you executed any Warrants, from the Sheriff of the County of, the Year before?
Yes many; twenty, or more.
Had you executed any Warrants from the present Sheriff; -- Under his Authority?
Yes. I executed Attachments under that Authority: -- Under Mr.. I had four or five Warrants, upon Process out of the Exchequer, at the time I arrested Mr., and have executed several Warrants, since Mr.became Sheriff.
How long had Mr.been Sheriff, before you arrested the Prisoner?
A Week or a Fortnight, it might be.
-- Read the Warrant, whereon the Prisoner was arrested by the Witness.
Did, the Sheriff's Bailiff named in the Warrant, go with you, when you attempted to re-take the Prisoner?
No; he did not.
When did the Plaintiffcome to you, was he with you before, or at the time you attempted to re-take the Prisoner?
came, when Assistance was sent for, but not before. He came with us, when we went to re-take Mr..
I think you say, you took the Warrant out of your Pocket, and put your Hand upon the Prisoner's Shoulder, and arrested him?
I did.
Pray, where did you first see that Warrant, whereon you arrested the Prisoner?
I saw it first at.
Who shew'd it you?
The deceased, Mr..
When you first saw the Warrant, was your Name in it?
No.
Was the Warrant when you first saw it, under the Seal of the Sheriff?
I believe, it was.
Was the Name, (the other special Bailiff) in the Warrant, when you first saw it?
I believe, it was not.
Was the Name of, the Sheriff's Officer, in the Warrant then?
Yes it was.
Who wroteName in the Warrant?
The Sheriff put it in.
Of whose Hand-writing is the Warrant?
It is all of Mr.Writing, except my Name, and the Name of.
Are you sure of that?
Yes.
Who is Mr.?
Mr.acts for the Under-Sheriff.
Of whose Hand-writing are the Names,, and, now appearing in the Warrant?
My Name, andwere written in the Warrant by Mr..
Are you sure that the Names, and, were written in the Warrant by Mr.?
I am very sure of it; For I saw him write them.
Were they written by Mr., after you first saw the Warrant, at?
Yes.
Is the Warrant in the same Situation, in evry Part of it, as it was, when you first saw it at?
It is, except the Addition of the Names made since.
Where does Mr.live?
In this City.
Do you know Mr.?
Yes.
Who is he?
The Under-Sheriff.
Do the Sheriffs always keep their Office in the City?
They keep their Office in the City, where they please, to appoint; I believe so.
And is that the Place, where the Sheriff's Warrants are always made out?
That is the Place, where they apply for Warrants.
How far does the Under-Sheriff live from this City?
Twenty Miles, I believe.
Was Mr.appointed by the Sheriff, to make out Warrants?
I don't know, that he was.
Had Mr.Authority, to make out Warrants?
I don't know.
You say, the Under-Sheriff always keeps an Office in the City of?
Yes; where the Sheriffs, when they come in, are pleased to fix it.
You say, you went to Mr., after you had arrested the Prisoner?
Mr.met me, as I was going to him.
And you then told Mr., you were forced to retreat?
I told him so, and so it was.
Is it the Practice, for the Names of the Sheriff's own Bailiffs, or those bound to the Sheriff, to be put into Warrants in the Office; and Blanks to be left in the same Warrants, for the Names of other Bailiffs, to be put in by Attorneys, after the Warrants come from the Office?
It is the Practice.
Did you give Security to the Sheriff, for being his Bailiff?
No, not at that Time.
Where did you stay after you had arrested the Prisoner, till Assistance came to you?
I, and Mr.stay'd at a Gentleman's House, the next House to Mr., Mr.House, till Assistance came.
Who went for the Assistance?
, the other Bailiff named with me, I believe.
What Number of People came to your Assistance?
I don't well recollect the Number; but I remember the Plaintiff, and his Servant, (whose Name I know not,),, and myself made five.
Did you desire Mr.to stay where he was, at Mr.House, and not go to the Prisoner's House?
I did not.
Pray had not you an Iron-Crowe with you, when you all went to the Prisoner's House?
Yes.
Where had you that Crowe?
I told Mr.I wanted a Crowe, and he borrowed one from the Woman of the House, Mrs..
You say you went to different Doors, when you came to the House; pray, were these Doors on one Side of the House, -- at the Corners of the House; or how were they situated?
I said, I went to a Door on one Side of the House, and desired Mr.would stay at a Door, on the other Side of the House.
Did you yourself speak to the Prisoner, when you came to the House, and demand Entrance from him?
I did not.
Diddemand Entrance?
I don't know.was not on the same Side of the House with me.
Did you desire Mr., to demand Entrance, as you were going to the House, or before you came to the House?
No. I did not. -- But when we were going to Mr., I saw Mr.out of Doors, and called to him to stay, and told him, we were coming for him.
How far might you be from the Prisoner, at that time?
It might be threescore Yards.
Were Mr.andat one Door of the House?
I don't know.
Did you from the other Side of the House, desire Mr.to demand Entrance?
I cou'd not see Mr., from the other Side of the House.
Is the Warrant you have shewn to the Court, the same Warrant you produced to me?
Yes, the very same.
-- It is not the Warrant.
Leave the Questions to be ask'd by your Counsel; They know best how to act for your Defence. Consider, you stand upon Tryal for your Life. Your Condition is a most melancholy one, and very perilous; therefore refer yourself to the Judgment of our Counsel, in Matters of so great Importance to you.
It is the very Warrant upon which I arrested the Prisoner.
Call.
Do you know the Prisoner at the Bar?
Yes, very well.
Did you know Mr.deceased?
Yes.
When were you last in Company with the deceased?
I was in Company with him, upon the twenty-first Day oflast, at the House ofin.
Did you go with the deceased, to the Prisoner's House, on that Day?
Yes.
What was the Occasion of your going thither with Mr.?
sent for me, to come to assist the Bailiffs.
To do what?
To re-take.
And did you go accordingly for that Purpose?
Yes.
Who went with you?
Mr., andand. We all went to take the Prisoner by Force,having sent for me to assist him, after the Prisoner had snapp'd a Pistol at him. -- We all went, becausehad drove the Bailiff from the House, by snapping a Pistol at him.
Who told you, that the Prisoner had snapp'd a Pistol at the Bailiff?
the Bailiff told me so.
Did you see the Prisoner in the House, when you came there?
I did not.
Did you go with Mr.?
Yes.
How far were you from Mr., when you came to the House?
Within three or four Yards of him.
Then you did not see the Prisoner?
No.
Did you see any People in the House, when you came there?
No, but I imagine People were in the House, when Mr.and I came to it.
Did you hear any People in the House?
Yes, We heard People, but saw no Body.
Were the Doors lock'd, or made fast?
Yes. The Doors were made.
When you came up to the House, didgive Mr.and you any Directions, about the Business you were to do there?
Yes, When we came up to the Door,ordered Mr.and me to attend that Door.
Which Door was it?
It was the back Kitchen Door.
When you came to the Door, did Mr.say any thing to the People in the House?
As soon as we came to the Door, Mr.sayd, open the Door, -- open the Door, or we'll break it down. -- I thought they were making the Door fast.
Was the Door opened?
No.
What was done afterwards, when the People within would not open the Door?
As soon as Mr.said so, he bid me strike an Iron-Crowe under the Door, in order to lift it off the Hinges; and I accordingly put the Crowe under the Door.
Was it Mr., who ordered you to put the Crowe under the Door?
Yes.
When you put the Crowe under the Door, pray, what happened?
As soon as I had put the Crowe, or Ringer under the Door, Mr.sayd to me,, run to the other Door, for feargets out of it; Whereupon, I left the Crowe sticking under the Door upon the Sill, and went away towards the other Door, and had not gone above three or four Yards from the Door, before I heard a Gun go off.
Did you see Mr.when the Gun went off?
Yes.
Did he say any thing then?
Yes -- I heard him say; I am shot, I am shot. And he fell on one Side of his Back down two Steps. --and I took him up; -- Then Mr.took up his Shirt, and shewed us the Wound.
Who was this?
He was an Assistant who came with me, to re-take.
What did you do with Mr., after you andtook him up?
He hung about our Shoulders, and we carried him to a Wooden-Block, where he desired to rest.
You say he pulled up his Shirt, and shew'd you his Wound, pray, on what Part of his Body was he wounded?
He was wounded on the Side of the Belly, above his Groin.
Were there any Holes in the Door where the Ball came thro', besides that which the Ball made? -- Did you see the Hole which the Bullet made?
I saw the Hole, which the Bullet came through; and there was also a Slit in the Door, which seemed big enough for a Person to see through. And there were two Holes besides in the Door?
How large were the two Holes that were in the Door, besides that which the Bullet made?
One of the Holes was an Inch and half Hole; the other bigger. But the Slit was afterwards lath'd on the Inner-Side of the Door.
Could you have seen the Prisoner through those Holes?
No doubt of it, if he had been opposite to me when I looked through; but he was not, and therefore I cou'd not see him.
Were you present when the Prisoner surrendred himself?
I was
Had he any Fire-Arms in the House, when he surrendred?
He had Fire-Arms at that Time. I fired off one of the Pistols, the Day after the Prisoner killed Mr..
What Day of the Month was that?
The twenty second of. Mr.received his mortal Wound upon the twenty-first, about Three o'Clock.
What other Fire-Arms had the Prisoner, when he surrendred, besides the Pistol you fired?
There were two Pistols; -- one besides that, which I fired; and a Gun.
Were they loaden?
Yes.
How do you know they were loaden?
That Pistol which I fired off, was very heavy loaded: The other Pistol was discharged against an Ash-Tree, and I saw the Hole which the bullet had made in the Tree; and the Gun was fired into the Air.
When the Prisoner surrendred himself, did he acknowledge, that he had Fire-Arms in the House?
He sayd, he had but one Pistol. -- But the Woman in the House being asked, whether there were any more Fire-Arms; she told them, there was another Pistol and a Gun.
You say, you discharged one of the Pistols yourself; Did you?
I did, and fired it into the Air.
Did you see the Pistol discharged against the Ash-Tree?
I did; and look'd at the Hole, which the Ball had made. -- The Gun was fired into the Air.
When you came to re-take the Prisoner with Mr., what Orders didgive you?
He ordered Mr.and me to stay at the Door; and he ran to the other.
What Orders hadreceived; Was he to have no Hand in re-taking the Prisoner?
was ordered by, to attend a Woman,House-keeper, I believe, and not let her come near him.
Was neither, nor,with you and Mr.at the Door, where you were stationed, in order to re-take the Prisoner?
Neither of them.
Waswithin Sight of you?
I think he was.
Did you all act as Assistants to the Bailiff?
Yes;
And by his Orders?
Yes.
call.
Do you know the Prisoner at the bar?
Yes, very well.
Do you remember any thing, about the Prisoner's discharging or firing a Gun at any time? pray, speak up, that the Jury may hear you, and acquaint them, with what you know of the Matter.
Yes, Sir, I was in Mr.House at, when Mr.was shot.
What Part of the House were you in, at that Time?
I was in the House-Place, and Mr.was in the back Kitchen.
Was any Body in the House, besides the Prisoner and yourself?
Yes. A Woman was in the House. -- A Servant-Woman.
Did you see the Prisoner fire the Gun?
The Prisoner did fire the Gun, at the back Door, and brought it in afterwards, and took it into the Parlour.
After the Gun was fired, did you hear no Noise out of Doors; Was there no Alarm made about it?
Yes. The People without shouted, Murder.
From what Place did the Prisoner take the Gun, which he fired?
He took it from the Mantle-Piece in the Kitchen.
Was the Prisoner accustomed to keep Fire-Arms in the House with him?
I cannot tell.
How long was it after the Gun was fired, that you heard the People shout, Murder?
In about a Minute, or two, after the Gun was fired.
I suppose, you were curious enough after the Gun was fired, and you heard the Cry of Murder, to know, Whether any Body was hurt, or not; Were not you?
I went to a Window, and look'd out; and saw a Man in blue Cloaths supported, or held up between two Men.
Did you say nothing to the Prisoner, upon this Occasion?
Yes; I told Mr., that I believed there was never a Man killed, but there was one hurt, and they called him Mr..
And pray, when you told the Prisoner, there was never a Man killed, but a Man hurt, and his Name was Mr.; what did he say to you?
He sayd, I don't know what Business a Man of his Coat, had among such Men as those. I am glad of it.
What do you apprehend he meant, by the Words "A Man of his Coat"?
I don't know.
You will please to observe, The Witness told the Prisoner, there was a Man hurt, but no Body killed; and that was immediately before the Prisoner sayd, he was glad of it. Glad, that no Body was killed.
call Mr..
I think you are a Surgeon?
Yes, Sir.
Where do you live?
At.
Did you know the deceased, Mr.?
Yes, very well.
Were you sent for at any time, and when, to attend Mr.upon Account of his having received a Wound, by the firing of a Gun, or otherwise? -- Pray acquaint the Court, and Jury, with what you know of this Matter?
Uponthe twenty-first Day oflast, a Messenger came to me, about Three o'Clock in the Afternoon, desiring me to go to, to Mr., who, the Messenger told me, was shot. -- I went accordingly with the Man, and got toabout Five o'Clock in the Evening. When I came there, I found, that Mr., a Surgeon from, had been sent for likewise, and had been there, for some time before. Mrand I went up Stairs together, to the Room, where Mr.was, and We found him ill in Bed. Almost so soon as hesaw me, he pulled up his Shirt, and shewed me where the Ball was lodged,and seemed impatient to have it taken out: Upon seeing the Wound, I took the Ball, between my Finger and Thumb, and perceived, I cou'd easily dislodge it. I then examin'd the Wound, where the Ball had entred, and found it cut about two Inches from the Hip on the left Side of his Belly: it pass'd thro' his Belly, by his Bowels no doubt, and lodged five or six Inches below his right Hip, almost through the Skin. As soon as I saw this, I took Mr.into another Room, to consult, what was fittest to be done; and I told him, it was my Opinion, that Mr.was a dying Man, and that I did not know, whether it would be of any Use, to take the Ball away, altho' it could be so easily effected -- But, considering, that it wou'd give him some Satisfaction, and perhaps Ease too, by taking the Ball from the Place where it did lie, Mr.and I went into the Room again, and I took out the Ball. -- After I had taken the Ball out, and dressed the Wound, and put a Bandage about it, I asked Mr., how he did? He sayd he was easier. Doctorcame in afterwards, and when I had told him, the Nature of the Wound, he look'd upon the Case to be extremely dangerous. The Doctor stayd with him two or three Hours and then went away; but Mr.desired me and Mrs.to sit with him, which we did, and his Father did so too, till ten Minutes past Three the next Morning, and he then expired.
Do you believe, that the Wound which Mr.received, was the Occasion of his Death?
I firmly believe, that the Wound which he received was the Occasion of his Death.
Did Mr.say any thing to you in his Agonies, upon the melancholy Occasion, and what?
Mr.told me, that he was shot, as he was stooping down, with a Crowe in his Hand, striving to open the Prisoner's Door?
Did he tell you, from what Part of the House he was shot?
He sayd, he received the Wound at the Door of the Prisoner's House?
Pray, how came the Ball to be made so flat: in that uncommon Form?
I believe its going through the Door, was the Occasion of its being in that Form.
call Mr..
Pray, Mr., Are you concern'd in any, and what Manner, for Mr., the present Sheriff of the County of?
Yes, Sir, I am concerned for the Sheriff, and keep his Office.
Do you make out Warrants for the Sheriff?
I do.
Did you receive at any time, and when, a Writ against the Prisoner, at the Suit of?
I received a Writ against him upon the First oflast.
Look upon that Warrant. -- Did you make out that Warrant upon the Writ, in order to arrest the Prisoner?
I did.
And are you sure, that is the same Warrant you did make out?
Yes; I am sure it is.
Is it usual for the Sheriff to appoint a Gentleman in this Town to execute the Office, and to act for him?
It is usual. -- I have been several Times appointed myself.
Do you receive all the Writs that are sued out directed to the Sheriff of this County?
I do.
And do you make out the Warrants upon such Writs?
I do.
And return the Writs?
Yes.
Do you execute all other Acts, that the Sheriff would do, if he resided here himself?
Yes. Except attending the Assizes and Sessions.
And has this been the constant Practice in this County?
Yes, during all my Time.
Has it been usual, when Plaintiffs would have special Bailiffs appointed, to leave Blanks in the Warrants for their Names to be inserted?
Yes, upon the Sheriff being indemnified.
Have you done this yourself?
Yes.
Have you known others to do it?
Yes, several others to my Knowledge.
Did you ever know it to be refused?
No, never, upon the Sheriff being indemnified, and the Attorney is known to be a fair Practicer. -- I have known it refused, where the Practicer was not liked, or where the Sheriff run any Risque or Hazard, and the Indemnity was not approved; But when the Attorney, or Practicer, and the Indemnity are liked, it is usually done.
Pray, what is the Nature of the Indemnity given to the Sheriff upon this Occasion?
It is, that he should not suffer by Escapes or Rescues.
And has this been the constant Practice used by the Persons, who have acted in the Sheriff's Office, in the Capacity you now act?
It has been so, all the time I have known the Office.
How long, pray, is that?
Seven or eight and twenty Years.
To leave Blanks in the Warrants, for the Names of the special Bailiffs to be inserted?
Yes.
Pray, Whether is such Practice convenient to the Plaintiffs and Suitors in the Court, or inconvenient to them?
It is look'd upon to be very convenient for the Plaintiffs.
Do you think so yourself?
I look upon it in that Light.
Had Mr., or Mr., or both of them a Right, to insert the Names of the special Bailiffs, in the Blank left in the Warrant, whereon the Prisoner was arrested?
I apprehend, either Mr., or Mr.had a Right to do so?
Is it usual for Attornies in the Country, to send their Directions to their Agents into take out Writs?
Yes.
And is the Agent's Name generally put to the Writ, or the Name of the Attorney in the Country only?
The Agent's Name is generally added to the Name of the Country Attorney, in the Writ, since the late Act of Parliament for that Purpose; but before that, the Name of the Attorney was only put to the Writ.
And you say that either Mr., or Mr., had a Right to insert the Names of the special Bailiffs?
Yes. I apprehend so.
Do not the Attornies, and other Persons, usually send the Names of the special Bailiffs, to be inserted in the Warrants, by the Sheriff, or by those who act for him?
Sometimes People do send the Names of the special Bailiffs, to be inserted.
Has it not been the most usual Way, in your Time, to do so?
It was when I first knew the Office the most usual Way, in 1732 and 1733. -- But Warrants went out with Blanks then.
Did, the Bailiff named in the Warrant, indemnify the Sheriff?
He has given Security to the Sheriff, I believe. -- But the Indemnity was for the special Bailiffs.
In the year 1732, or 1733, Were blank Warrants sent out, and not the Names of the special Bailiffs inserted?
When I was concerned for Mr., who was Sheriff in 1732 or 1733, several blank Warrants were sent out, and not the special Bailiffs inserted.
How many Warrants were sent out, with Blanks for the Names of the special Bailiffs, in Mr.Time?
I cannot tell.
Were not Warrants oftner delivered, with the Names of the special Bailiffs inserted in the Office, before they were sent out, than Warrants with Blanks, for the Names of the special Bailiffs, to be afterwards inserted by the Attornies?
I believe, Warrants were oftner sent out, with the Names of the special Bailiffs inserted, than with Blanks.
Is that the Warrant, you made out on the Writ the First ofagainst the Prisoner?
It is the same Warrant.
Is it in the same Situation it was, when you delivered it out of your Hands?
No.
How has it been altered? how does it differ?
The Names,, and, have been since inserted.
Pray, was the Seal to the Warrant before you delivered it out of your Hands?
Yes.
Are you sure of that?
Yes, for I put the Seal to it myself.
Do you remember, that any Arrest was ever set aside, or disputed, on Account of a Blank Warrant having been sent out?
No, never.
Through all the Course of your Practice, has it not been most usual, to make out Warrants, after you received the Names of the special Bailiffs, than without them; -- than making out blank Warrants?
Yes, it has been most usual, I think.
When the Names of the special Bailiffs are sent, Do you always insert them in the Warrants?
Yes. I do.
Pray, how is the Under-Sheriff ofappointed?
He is appointed by the Sheriff, by Deed.
Have you any written Authority from the Sheriff?
No further, than by Letters sent me sometimes, about the Business of the Office.
How were you appointed?
The Night before the Sheriff was sworn, I supped with him, and it was agreed, I shou'd act for him.
Who were present, when you were appointed, to act for the Sheriff?
The Sheriff, and the Under-Sheriff, were both present, and appointed me.
Were you appointed by any Instrument in Writing, or not?
I was not.
Is it usual for the Sheriff and Under-Sheriff, both to appoint an Agent, to act for the Sheriff?
I believe, the usual Way is by the Under-Sheriff only.
Is there no other Method of appointing a Person, to act for the Sheriff, but by Parol?
I don't know of any other Way.
Is the Seal to the Writ, the Seal of Office?
It is.
Have the Persons concern'd for the Sheriff of this County, usually that Sort of Seal?
Yes.
Where had you this Seal?
I had this from Mr., having lost my own.
Are you acquainted with the Method of suing out Process, in the Court of Session for this County?
Yes.
Is it usual, to send out Warrants, from the Sheriff's Office, with Blanks for the Names of the special Bailiffs to be inserted?
When special Bailiffs are desired, Warrants frequently issue with Blanks, for their Names to be inserted.
Do you know this to be frequently done?
Yes.
But is it not more usual, for the Names of the special Bailiffs to be put into the Warrants, in the Office, before they are sent out, than, for Warrants to issue with Blanks, for Bailiffs to be inserted afterwards?
Sometimes the Names of the special Bailiffs are inserted in the Office.
I say, is it not oftner done? more frequently?
I don't know but it may.
Don't you think it prudent, sometimes not to send the Names of the special Bailiffs to the Office? -- to conceal the Names till they are inserted by the Attorney?
I do.
Did your Father ever act as Agent for the Sheriff of this County?
He did.
Was it customary for your Father, to send out Warrants with Blanks, for the Names of the special Bailiffs to be inserted afterwards?
He did leave Blanks often in the Warrants.
I suppose you understood, that your Father had Authority so to do?
I always understood, that he had Authority to do it.
But did your Father never refuse, to send out blank Warrants, to your Knowledge?
Yes; he sometimes did, when he suspected the Attorney; but never, when he knew the Attorney to be a fair Practicer.