Gentlemen, I must confess, this is a very heavy and severe Charge; but, I hope, it is not all Fact that is alledged against me. -- I shall not take up much time, but leave it to the Court.
Sir, you may depend upon it the Court will do you Justice. --
I am sure they will.
Was thein the Line, when thebegan to engage?
I can't tell; I did not see her then; when I saw her, she made a small Angle with us.
Where was you quartered?
Upon the lower Gun-Deck.
Was theto Leeward of the three other Ships a-stern?
Yes.
What Time did you see her?
Once before she came down.
Did you ever see theengage?
I saw her fire some Guns; but I think not within the Reach of Point-Blank, she was at too great a Distance.
In the first Part of the Engagement, was there any Ship for theto engage with?
The five sternmost Ships were not come up: they did not come up till two or three Hours after the Beginning.
What Ship could she then engage with?
The 2d or 3d Ship a-stern of theAdmiral.
What Ships were a-stern of theAdmiral?
Six. Five at a great Distance.
What Number were in a Line with theAdmiral?
Only one.
When you saw thefire, what Ship did she fire at?
The 2d or 3d Ship from theAdmiral.
Was it in the latter Part of the Engagement?
Yes, two Hours after we began; she might fire before that; and I believe she did.
Was she in a Line with the Admiral, when you first saw her?
She was a little upon our Weather Quarter.
Was she in a Line with the Admiral, at his first engaging?
I did not see her.
Was theever in a Line with you?
No.
Was you in a Line with the Admiral at first?
When we first brought to, the Admiral was as near in a Line as could be; he was rather upon our Weather-Bow.
When you saw the, was it in her power to engage closely?
She must have gone to Leeward of the other Ships if she had.
Could thehave engaged any Ships closely without going to Leeward of the?
If she had bore down in a Line with us at the first, he might afterwards have engaged properly with the otherShips that were coming up.
When theengaged, was it in her power to have engaged in a Line with you?
I believe she might.
Was you in a proper Line with the Admiral?
Yes, as exactly as could be.
Was it in the Power of theto give theany Assistance?
If she had crouded a-head, she might have lain upon our Quarter, and given us Assistance.
How far was thefrom you, when you first lost your Masts?
I saw her a little after we lost our Masts; and she was then a Mile and half from us.
Could you see what Sail she had set?
I could, but did not observe.
Did you see any Number of Shot from thefall short?
No.
How do you know she was not within Point-Blank?
I judge only by the Distance of the Ships, and she did not appear to be near enough.
At what Distance was thefrom the Ship she might have engaged?
If she had made proper Sail, and shot a-head those Ships between her and us, she might have given us the proper Assistance by engaging the.
At what Distance was thefrom you, when you saw her?
A Mile and half, or two Miles.
Was there any Wind then?
Yes.
Was there enough for a Ship to answer her Helm?
Yes.
Did she never edge down after you first saw her?
I did not see that she did, till after the Admiral wore.
Did she appear to be at Windward or to Leeward of the three Ships between you and her?
I think she appeared to Leeward of the three; she was a Mile and half from us, and a-stern with all.
How much upon your Quarter?
Two Points.
How many Points was the Admiral upon your Bow?
One Point.
Which of the four Ships a-stern then appeared to be most in a Line with the Admiral?
Thewas the Leewardmost of all, she was almost in the Line.
Was thenever nearer you than a Mile and half?
I believe not till they all bore away -- but I cannot be exact as to the Distance.
Did you see thehow she engaged?
I did not see her engaged till after the Wearing.
How long did you see thein the whole?
Two Hours and a half from the first I saw her.
Did you never see her out of your Stern Ports?
Yes, before we lost our Masts.
How near was theto the second a-stern of theAdmiral then.
Half a Mile, or something less.
What Ship did she fire at?
I believe it was at the; but I could not see plainly.
Did not thego to Leeward of you before the Wearing?
Not to my Knowledge, but I can't say she was not.
It is a remarkable thing, because you gave us three Cheers.
I do remember it now Captainmentions it, that he was then to Leeward of us just after our Masts were gone: It was before we wore; but I had forgot it.
Was it before the Wearing?
Yes.
Had thebore away then?
Yes.
Are you positive it was after thebore away?
I think she was bore away.
there is a Gentleman just come to Town, that was a Lieutenant in the; and if Capt.does not remember it, perhaps he may.
Where was you quartered?
Upon the middle Gun-Deck.
I know very little of her at the beginning. Soon after the Admiral ordered us to bear down; I went down to my Quarters, when our Masts were gone I went upon Deck, then I saw theto Leeward of the rest of our Ships a-stern of the.
Was this after your Masts were gone?
Yes.
Is that all you know?
Yes.
What Distance was she from you then?
She was upon our Weather Quarter, about half a Mile from us then.
How near was the Enemies Ships?
Within Point-blank of those Ships a-stern of us, that were coming up.
Which of 'em did she fire at?
The Head most.
Within Point-blank?
Yes.
How long did she engage her?
I cannot tell, they were firing before I came upon Deck.
How long did she engage from the Time you saw her.
Three Quarters of an Hour, after the Time I saw her.
What made her leave off?
She was engaging when I left the Ship, and went on Board of the Admiral, I did not observe what she was doing after that.
When you first observed the, how many Ships were between you and her?
There were Three between us, there were some of 'em further off than the: Thewas further off.
Was theto Leeward of all those Ships?
Yes, she was to Leeward of all the Four Sail.
Then there was hardly Room for the other Ships, if she was within half a Mile of you?
The others were further to Windward.
Was the, when you saw her, as far to Leeward as the Admiral, when she began to engage?
I think she was.
Did you ever observe any Signals, besides that for the Line of Battle, and that to engage, after your Masts were gone?
There was a Signal in the Morning for the Vice-Admiral to make more Sail; and after our Masts were gone, the Signal for Battle was haul'd down, and a white Flag was hoisted at the Fore-Topmast head, and a Gun was fired.
When was this?
It was when I went to seek for the Frigates to assist us.
What Time of the Day was it?
It was about Sun-sett; it was after we wore.
Did you ever see theto Leeward of your Ship?
I cannot say I did.
Do you remember her being cheer'd by you?
No: I was not on Board then.
When you saw her; what Position was the Enemy from her?
Some of 'em were a-stern upon her Quarter, and two Shot abreast of her.
How near was thethen to the Enemy?
Those which she fired at, she was within Gun-shot of: I saw their Shot go over her.
If thehad gone nearer, when you saw her, must not she have broke the Line?
Yes: She must have been to Leeward of us; and to Leeward of the Line.
How was the Admiral from you then?
Upon our Weather-bow.
How much upon your Weather-bow?
Two Points.
At what distance?
Half a Mile.
How long did the, engage within Point-blank, before the Admiral wore?
I was gone before the Admiral wore: she was then engaging.
How long was you cheer'd at first by the, before the Engagement began?
An Hour and half, or Two Hours.
How long did you see theengaging?
I am very sure Three Quarters of an Hour.
Was she near enough to do sufficient Execution?
She was within Point-blank, I saw the Shot from the Enemy go over her.
What distance was she from the Ship she engaged?
I do not remember how many Cables length: I believe Three Quarters of a Mile; I saw the Shot go over her.
Why do you think she was within Point-blank?
Because I saw the Shot go over her.
Did any Shot from the Enemy fall short of her?
No: I never did see any.
Was you engaging then?
Thewas then upon our Bow, and we could not bring our Guns to bear upon her.
Where was thethen?
To Windward of us, engaging the.
What was thedoing then?
The Hercules was firing at us, and we at her: but could not bring our Guns to bear upon the.
Did you receive much Damage from the?
I believe most of the Damage we received, was from the.
Did you ever see theengage the Enemy?
After we had done engaging, I saw a Ship more to Leeward, than any of the others a-stern, and believe it was thehailed us, cheered us, and came to Leeward of us.
Was thethen within Point-Blank?
The Shot fell short of her at first.
Was thewithin Point-Blank before you lost your Masts?
I cannot tell whether she was within Point-Blank.
How near was theat the nearest?
Within half a Mile.
Did you see thefire after you lost your Masts?
Yes.
If thehad bore down, and engaged the four Ships of the Enemy that were coming up closely, would not she have been to Leeward of the Line?
Yes, because those Ships were to Leeward of the.
Was she near enough to do Execution?
Yes, in the latter Part of the Action, after we had done engaging.
Did she make all the Sail she could from her first coming into the Fleet?
She was in the Line.
Could thehave bore down sooner than she did?
Yes, all the ships a-stern of us might.
What Ship could she have engaged then?
The, or the headmost of the four Ships that were coming up.
What Distance was the headmost of theShips from thethen?
I cannot say she was not far from them; if she had bore away she might have attacked them, or the Ship a-stern theAdmiral that plagued us.
What distance was the headmost of the fourShips coming up from you at the beginning?
At a great distance, 2 Miles and half a-stern, and to Leeward upon our Lee-Quarter.
What Distance was thethen?
She was sternmost of the four that were a-stern of us.
Was thewithin Gun-shot of the Enemy then?
No.
Could she have gone within Gun-shot without going to Leeward of the Line?
Yes, if she had bore down with us she might.
What Distance was thefrom you, when she engaged?
I cannot tell exactly.
What Ship was nearest you, when you lost your Masts?
The two middle Ships were.
Did you, when you lost your Masts, look at the Admiral?
Yes.
Where was he then?
Till we lost our Masts, he was to the South-East upon our Weather-Bow.
Did you observe any Signal the Admiral had out then, besides that for the Line of Battle, and to engage?
No.
Could thehave given you any Succour, if she had bore down properly.
Yes.
Could she have bore down?
There was Wind enough for them all to come up.
Was thein her Station at the beginning?
Yes.
If all the four Ships had bore down, would theShips coming up have weathered them?
No, I believe not.
How long were you engaged before you saw the?
I saw her just after we had lost our Masts.
Did she fire before that?
I cannot tell.
Did you see any Ships she could have fired at?
No. After our Masts were gone I could not see any Ships.
How long did theengage?
I don't know.
Did theescape within Point-Blank of the Enemy?
Their Shot could reach one another very well.
Where was you quartered?
Upon the upper Deck.
Was thewithin Point-Blank?
I cannot tell all the Ships a-stern of us were to Windward.
Was it ever in thepower to have engaged the Enemy.
I cannot say.
Where was thewhen you began to engage?
They were all to Windward. I did not mind her particularly.
How many of our Ships were a-stern of you?
The,,, and.
Might any of them have bore down and engaged as well as you?
I cannot say there was Wind enough.
Could not they then have bore down?
I think they might.
Did you ever see theengaged with the Enemy?
No.
Was thefiring when you saw her?
I never saw her fire.
How far was thefrom the?
I cannot say.
Where was you quartered?
At the Braces forwards.
What Ship could thehave engaged, if she had bore down in your Wake?
The second, the headmost of the 5 Sail a-stern of theAdmiral.
Was she within Gun-shot at first?
I think not.
If thehad bore down in your Wake, could she have assisted you against the.
Yes.
Did you receive any Damage from the?
Yes, a good deal.
Therefore, if thehad bore down, she might have assisted?
Yes.
Did you see theengage?
Yes.
At what Distance?
I cannot say.
After your Masts were gone, could she have gone nearer without breaking the Line?
I believe not; the four Ships a-stern would have fetch'd into theWake.
Was she in a Line with you?
No.
Did the Admiral haul off first?
The Admiral said to our Captain, Do you bear down, and I will follow you. -- The Admiral fired a Quarter-Deck Shot, and after half an Hour the Admiral hauled his Wind, and broke the Line.
What Distance was thefrom you at the first beginning?
Two or three Miles.
How far was the headmost of theShips from you then?
Two or three Miles.
Was thethe Leewardmost of the four Ships a-stern of you?
I cannot say.
Did you ever observe any Signal made by the Admiral after theMasts were gone, besides the Signal to engage?
No.
Do you think thewas within Point-Blank when she fired?
I cannot say.
Did you see any Shot fly over her?
No, I saw her Smoke.
Did you observe how long she engaged?
No.
When you saw her Smoke, was she at the proper Distance to engage the Enemy?
No, I cannot say, but I think not.
Whether was theor theat the greatest Distance?
I cannot say.
Did you never see theengaging properly?
No.
Did thego to Leeward of you after your Masts were gone?
I cannot say.
Do you remember any thing of any Cheers from the?
No.
When you lost your Masts, which of the four Ships a-stern was nearest you?
The.
What Time of the Day did you see thefire?
It was after two, and after our masts were gone; when the Masts went away, I saw two Ships a-stern fire at the Ships coming up, and I looked out to see which, and believe it was theand.
What Time did you see thelast?
Never after that Time.
Did you see the,, orfiring at the Time you say I could have come down?
About two I saw the, and believe you were firing.
If I had gone down, should not I have gone through their Fire?
I cannot say.